{1}
THE TESTIMONY OF "THE CHRIST"
{2}
PREFATORY NOTE (to pages 3 - 104)
IT has been thought well to preface these lectures with a few words of explanation. They include two series of lectures, the first delivered at Greenwich at the close of last year; and the second at Park Street, Islington, in the beginning of the present year. The connection between the two will be readily perceived; in a sense the second series precedes the first, though they are printed in order of delivery. The subject of the second series is the testimony of "The Christ", as pervading all the word of God. The first seeks to set forth that which in Christians is appropriate to their part in the testimony, for it must be remembered that the testimony is living, and bound up with the power of the Spirit of God in believers. In view of the coming of the Lord, may God be pleased to awaken in all a deeper interest in the testimony, as being the witness of that which He will shortly display.
F. E. R. <br>July, 1903.
A short separate address on the same subject has been included (page 105).
{3}
THE TESTIMONY AS DETERMINING OUR POSITION HERE
@1 Timothy 2, and @2 Timothy 1
Everybody should be prepared to admit that it is extremely important that we should understand *where* we are, and *why* we are there. These are two serious considerations. It is a poor thing to be in any position religiously and not to know why you are there. Every one ought to be concerned to know where he is, and further, why he is there.
I want to touch a little on these two points; and to give you an idea of the position which I individually occupy, and a great many more also, and to make it plain to you why I am there.
Everything in such matters depends on what is according to God; and the question is whether Christendom all round is, or is not, according to the mind of God. If I look round at the religious bodies in the world, they all maintain that their existence is of God. They might not defend every detail, but they would maintain that, in the main, things in the world are according to what God intended. But things in the world are *not* what God intended. If they were, we might very well be content to be identified with these great bodies; but they are not. Thus, everything depends on whether Christendom, as it exists, answers to the mind of God. There is one thing we must remember, that when the church was set up God had not given the New Testament scriptures; but now He has been pleased to give us these, and the scriptures are the law and testimony. Every one of us is justified in testing things around us by the scriptures; and not only so, but we are under the *obligation* of
{4}
testing all that maintains any kind of profession by the scriptures, and to refuse it if it speaks not according to the law and the testimony.
All that we see around us, the great religious bodies, maintain, as I have said, more or less, that the institutions which exist are according to God's mind.
Popery may be generally condemned, but people imagine that other institutions are right, and that Christianity has had developments which God intended. It is the common idea, and in that point of view, the divisions in Christendom are not abnormal but normal. Such have not in their thoughts any idea that ruin has come in. They do not look upon Christendom as being a ruin, that is, something which God's mind never intended.
Now, when we subject things to the test of scripture, we find that the inspired writers, without exception, contemplate what we may call the ruin of the professing church. The Apostle Paul, in the epistle which we have read, uses the figure of a great house in which were all sorts of vessels, some to honour and some to dishonour, and presses upon Timothy the obligation to purge himself from vessels to dishonour. He foresaw the ruin of the professing body, and that a moment would come of which it could be said, "The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart from iniquity" (@2 Timothy 2: 19). Peter also foresees ruin; he speaks of false teachers coming in, but never contemplates any amendment. All the writers contemplate the ruin which would come in, but never give the idea of any possibility of restoration or amendment. John speaks of the "last times", and of there being already many antichrists. He gives us a striking picture in the Revelation, a kind of account of the church from the beginning to the end, from Ephesus to Laodicea.
{5}
He shows what would come in, with regard to the professing body, but never holds out any idea of amendment.
All this is striking, but it is not accepted in Christendom. If it were, and the real condition of things were acknowledged, the great bodies around us which justify their existence, and consider it to be according to the mind of God, would melt away. Thus, when all that is around is tested by Scripture, we find that the apostles contemplated the ruin of the great professing body, through the working of influences and principles which they saw would come in, and which would bring in confusion on every hand. And we see that in the midst of all this the Spirit of God has been pleased to mark out a path for us; and one can, as an individual, take a place outside of things which falsify Scripture and are not according to God.
Now that is the reason why I am where I am. I stand as an individual, and a great many of us have taken up that position, outside of these great systems which exist. The reason that I stand apart from them is that it is evident to me that they do not answer to what the Spirit of God has been pleased to present to us with regard to the church.
We will come now closer home, and speak of that which is the special bond in the present state of things.
I draw your attention to a passage in @1 Timothy 3: 14, 15, "These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly: but if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how though oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God". Now read @2 Timothy 1: 8 There is a great difference in the language of the two epistles. In the first epistle the point is that a man should know how to behave himself in the house of God, and in the second that he might "not be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord".
{6}
It is extremely important to get an idea of the house of God in order that you may be able to measure the general departure from the truth of it. If you have not the standard you cannot measure the departure.
If you refer to the second chapter of the first epistle (verses 1 - 11), you will find some details of the order of the house. I want to dwell on these details for a moment, for they give us an idea of the character of the house of God. It was not a material building, but a building composed of living stones. We see in verse 1 that it was a place of thanksgiving and prayer, where there was intercession for all men, then for kings and for all in authority. That is a first principle. Then in verse 8 the men prayed everywhere, for the house was composed of people. What marked the house was that the men prayed everywhere, not ministers and clergy, but men universally were marked by prayer; wherever they were, the men were to pray. Then, on the other hand, the women were not to be conspicuous, but were to adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety. But there were other marks; all in the house were cared for in soul and body. There were overseers for looking after their souls, and deacons for looking after bodily wants; and whether soul or body, everything was carried out in the early days in the power of the Holy Ghost. These things were brought under Timothy's notice, that he might know how one ought to behave himself in the house of God.
I believe it to be of great importance to have some definite understanding of the true character of the house of God, in order that we may judge of all that is around us at the present time. I do not see anything around that answers to what is presented to us in this epistle. I do not see men praying everywhere, nor women generally adorned with
{7}
shamefacedness. I do not see overseers looking after people's souls and deacons looking after their bodies. The systems around do not answer to the test, hence I judge myself to be right in standing apart from them. They do not leave room for the application of Scripture injunctions. Men could not pray everywhere, for it would cause disturbance; the systems leave no room for the Spirit of God; every Christian ought to feel under the obligation of bringing these things to the test of the law and the testimony.
Now supposing some of us through grace have separated from these things, are we to form another system? Do you think that would be according to God? I think that is the thing which we have to avoid most strenuously. If the Spirit of God has given us any true perception of the character of what is around, that it does not answer to the test of Scripture, and if we have been enabled in faith to stand apart, we must most carefully maintain the sense of individuality. We may have the privilege of walking together, if we are agreed in mind, but we have diligently to avoid the formation of any system whatever: if we do not, we simply drop back again into the error of all that is around.
Supposing a few are agreed in that way, it is a wonderful thing to stand in obedience to the Lord. We have all known what it is to be dependent on props, but we ought not to want the support of others. We ought to look to the Lord to be supported, and if we are supported by the Lord we shall be a support to one another.
Now is there between such any special bond? I have not a doubt that there is, and I want that bond to be much more real to us, and that we should have a more definite idea of it than we have had. If it please the Lord to give us any intelligence in regard to the bond, we shall see that it is one which
{8}
really holds us together. I believe the testimony to be the bond, and I want to give you an idea of what the testimony is. I think the Spirit of God desired that the mind of Timothy should be imbued with the principles of the house of God, and the same Spirit shows what would be the bond in the time of departure.
The "testimony" is an expression which we very commonly use, but I doubt if many have a very definite idea of it. I will tell you the idea which it conveys to my mind. Testimony is that which God gives of what He is going to establish before He establishes it publicly. God does not give testimony of anything that He is not going to make public. The Spirit of God has come down to testify of Christ, but the point is that God is going to make Christ manifest.
I refer to two passages. Look at @1 Timothy 2: 6 and @1 Timothy 6: 14, 15. The one shows that a time is appointed for the preaching, and the other that a time is appointed for the appearing. I want to make plain that testimony refers to something which is going to appear. Testimony loses its force and character if you do not connect it with that which God is going to display. What God is going to display is comprehended in one word, and that is CHRIST, His purpose in Christ.
The Lord Jesus Christ is going to put down every evil power, that is, to subdue all things that are contrary to God, and to bring to light His grace and His righteousness. God intends to have a universe which will be under the power and influence of His grace. It is His purpose to display Christ, and there will be a universe controlled in every part by the grace of God.
Now before Christ is displayed God gives testimony, so that we may be now in the light of that which is to be displayed. The effect of this upon
{9}
us will be to deliver us from the influence of all that is existing. What is existing is not according to God. Sin reigns by death; but God is going to make evident His purpose and grace in Christ Jesus before the world began. God will fill the universe with blessing.
Now there is another point in. connection with this: we get the annulling of death and the bringing to light of life and incorruptibility. If God is to have a universe according to His purpose, the power of death must be annulled. Death has to be swallowed up in victory, and when the Lord appears life and incorruptibility will be evident. Christ will be the fountain and source of life. As the sun is the fountain and source of light and life to this earth, so Christ will be as the Sun of righteousness. Creation will be delivered from the bondage of corruption, life and incorruptibility will come to pass, and death will be annulled.
Now I want to carry you back for a moment to what came to light in Christ when the Lord came into the presence of death on earth; death lost its hold. The Lord called Lazarus out of the grave; so too in other cases He dispossessed death. Thus we get the beginning of the annulling of death when Christ was here, and at the same time life and incorruptibility came to light in Him; speaking of Himself He says, "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it again". "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption". Instead of being subject to death He dispossessed death, while He went into it, bearing the judgment that lay on man. Life and incorruptibility were found in Him; but it was necessary that death should be annulled, on behalf of us, in Christ. All this will come out in result when Christ is displayed. It will be manifest then that death is annulled. Death could not have
{10}
been annulled unless redemption had been accomplished. It was by entering into death that Christ acquired the right to abolish it.
It is a great thing to be here in the testimony; and for this you must have an understanding by the Spirit of God of that which God is going to display in Christ, His purpose and grace in Christ Jesus. That forms a special bond at the present time.
It is a mercy to have been delivered from the entanglements around, to have had grace to stand apart from them. May God preserve us from other entanglements. If we want to be kept clear from these, I am sure that we must have an interest of surpassing importance to keep us walking together. I believe the interest which will hold us together is the testimony of the Christ. The testimony does not belong to any particular class, not merely to teachers and preachers, it is common property, and a bond which holds us together in the present state of things. If you want any clear or definite idea of the testimony you must apprehend that which God is going to display according to His purpose.
Looking at the world at the present time in its lawlessness and in the corruption which is the effect of lust, I see around moral confusion, and that continually increasing, but God is going to make manifest another order of things in Christ. He will have a scene where lust will not prevail, but grace will reign and Christ will be the centre.
The great witness and expression of Christ will be found in the church, as she will be seen in perfection by-and-by; and every family in the universe, according to God's purpose in Christ Jesus, will be affected by it. Israel will have their light through the church, and the nations will walk in the light of the heavenly city. In that day death will be
{11}
swallowed up in victory, life and incorruptibility will be brought into effect.
Well, it is a great thing to be in the light of Christ, and what we want is to be faithful to Christ. It is the moment when we are being put to the test. The test of the moment is to maintain fidelity to Christ, and not to run in the course of the world, nor to be influenced by the lawless principles here. Now is the moment of testimony. Is it your supreme interest? Depend upon it, if it is, it will tend to bind us together.
May God give us intelligence as to the testimony, that we may see its reference to what is going to be displayed.
*Now* the question is, How far are we at *this moment* in fidelity to the testimony? We are left here in the moment of testimony, and the word for us is "Occupy till I come", and our desire ought to be, to be found faithful till He comes. God grant it may be so.
{12}
HOW ONE CAN BE IN THE TESTIMONY
@1 John 3
We had before us last time the thought of the testimony as being a rallying point in a day like this. The object of the admonitions in the first epistle to Timothy is that a man might know how to behave himself in the house of God, and in the second that he should not be ashamed of the testimony. The second epistle contemplates an evil day, when confusion has come in and Christianity is really in the rule of man. When Christianity began, everything was in the rule of the Spirit of God. It is impossible to read the account in the Acts without seeing this. There was no preaching except in the Spirit. All the detail connected with the saints was carried out in the power of the Spirit. The rule of the Spirit characterised everything. Then the rule of man came in, and brought with it all kinds of confusion. This is contemplated in the second epistle to Timothy. When that state of things came in, the rallying point was the testimony, and so at the present day. The testimony is a simple and a very great thing. Nobody can exaggerate its greatness. It refers to that which is going to be displayed. It is exceedingly important to keep that in view, because it brings in the thought that we have to reckon with it.
What I want to touch upon now is what qualifies us morally to be in the testimony. The expression "being in the testimony" is often in people's minds indefinite. Very few understand what the testimony is; and if you do not understand what the testimony is you cannot very well be in it. But if you understand it, then you see the importance of
{13}
being in it. I mean being in it morally. I want to speak of what I regard as the first principle of being in the testimony: it is found in what we get in this chapter, that is, abiding in Christ. I will give you, if I can, an idea of what is meant by the expression. Just refer to verses 5 and 6, "And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in him is no sin. Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him". That is what I want to dwell upon now. "Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not". Now refer to @John 15: 7, "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you". You get very much the same thought in this chapter in verse 22, "And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight".
The point which I want to make plain is the thought of abiding in Christ. It is not easy to make it clear, but it is extremely important. Two things are certain. "He that abideth in him sinneth not". That is a great point. The other is that "if we abide in him, and his words abide in us, we shall ask what we will" -- that is, there is communication between us and God, and what we ask we receive. That is the confidence that we have in Him.
Now if you look abroad in the world, all is more or less lawless, while men are trying very hard to deal with what one may call the possibilities of good and evil. I have no doubt people think that a great deal may he arrived at by legislation. Then other things come in, education and cultivation. A great many things are entered upon, and I think it is with the idea of realising possibilities that are supposed to exist. But we find, steadily increasing, the disintegration of society. It has greatly increased
{14}
in my recollection, and it is going on. The old bonds which held together different classes of people are being dissolved, and disintegration is steadily going on, which is an evidence to my mind of the increase of lawlessness. The more prevalent lawlessness is, the greater the disintegration. If there were lawlessness in a school, there would be undoubtedly disintegration. So, too, in a family, if the spirit of lawlessness prevails, disintegration will follow. You cannot conceive that people will long hold together if they are lawless in regard to One whom God has appointed to be Head. If we go back to the beginning we find that "By one man sin came into the world", and sin is lawlessness. What came in almost at once was disintegration. Instead of Cain and Abel being together in brotherly love, hatred came in. This confirms what I have been saying. Disintegration is bound to follow upon lawlessness. So long as lawlessness exists there cannot but be moral confusion in the world.
The state of things round us confirms what we find in Scripture. Scripture gives us what nothing else pretends to give us, the origin of things, it acquaints us with the origin of lawlessness.
Now I want to touch for a moment on the way in which God has come in to meet this lawlessness. God has been pleased to reveal Himself in righteousness, and to assert Himself in a centre. Lawlessness came in through man breaking away from God; and lawlessness can only be met by man being brought back to God. The only corrective to lawlessness must be by man being brought back under divine rule and influence. It is that which God has taken in hand to bring about. It appears to me that the way God has taken to bring it about is proof of divine wisdom. As I said, God has come out to reveal Himself in righteousness, but in such a way as to gain man. Righteousness as
{15}
presented to us in the New Testament is not like righteousness in the Old Testament. In the Old Testament we have "Thou shalt" and "Thou shalt not". The righteousness of the New Testament is this -- "When they had nothing to pay he frankly forgave them both". That is, the righteousness of the New Testament exceeds the righteousness of the Old, because it is the assertion of the rights of God in mercy, and those rights are asserted in a Man. Now that is the first step in the course which God has taken to bring man back to Himself. God has been pleased to assert His rights in mercy in a Man, so that a Man may be a centre and point of attraction to men.
The scheme of grace depends entirely upon Christ being divine; apart from that it falls to the ground, because the point is this, that Christ Himself is God come out in the rights of mercy: if God comes out in the rights of mercy He must come out in the Son.
What do you think invited the mercy of God? We learn this in the parable which the Lord spoke in the house of Simon. "A certain creditor had two debtors, the one owed five hundred pence and the other fifty, but *when they had nothing to pay*". It was not simply the debts, but the fact that they had nothing to pay which set the mercy of God in activity. God looked down upon man, not simply as having debts, but in his perfect helplessness, and what lies behind mercy on the part of God is wisdom. (See @Romans 11: 31 - 33.) The coming out of God in mercy really means the recovery of the universe.
Well now, God has come out in that way, and the effect of it is that Christ has become a point of attraction to men. There was no point of attraction presented to men in the Old Testament. That is why the righteousness of the New Testament exceeds the righteousness of the Old Testament.
{16}
Everything that the Lord Jesus did here was a witness of divine mercy -- healing the sick, cleansing the leper, raising the dead. Hence a Man became a point of attraction to men. A great many were not drawn to Him, but at the same time there were those who were drawn to Him by the mercy He expressed.
Now a word or two in regard to Christ. Christ is the righteousness of God, for He is the expression of God's rights in mercy, and the point of attraction to men. He has taken up the liabilities under which men were and from which they could not disentangle themselves. Men had nothing to pay, but Christ took up the debts, and in virtue of having discharged the liabilities, He gives living water to men: hence He is a point of attraction to men. The Lord Jesus said, "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me". It is not simply that He has paid our debts, but having paid our debts He gives us living water. I am sure nobody can measure the value of living water. We can in a way measure the riches of men, although very often that is almost beyond our power, but who can measure the value of living water? That is what Christ gives. He came here, the expression of divine mercy, to bear the liabilities under which men were, in order that He might impart to man the gift of God; so the Lord Jesus says, "Let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely". The greatest gift which even God can give is living water. We know the value of it here, and we shall know it hereafter.
Now I come to our side, for we must be practical. I want to show how each one of us is recovered from lawlessness, so that we may be in the testimony of Christ. You cannot be in the testimony of Christ except as you abide in Christ. It is a very important point to abide in Christ. "Whosoever
{17}
abideth in him sinneth not". Every person not abiding in Christ is really lawless, for there is no way out of lawlessness except in abiding in Christ. This chapter makes that as plain as it can be made. To abide in Christ really means to abide in the light of Christ. Nothing can be more important than that. The earth abides in the sun, that is, it abides in the light and warmth of the sun, nothing permanent comes in between. It is impossible that the earth can be detached from the sun; clouds and fogs may come in, and if there were a perpetual fog the earth would not get fully the benefit of the sun, but we could not say that it did not abide in the sun. Now to apply that to ourselves. If you abide in Christ, the first consideration is that you abide in righteousness; and abiding in righteousness proves that you are righteous. Christ is the declaration of the righteousness of God, the declaration of God's rights in mercy; and we want to be in the light of that as long as we live down here, that is, in the light of divine righteousness as set forth in Christ. Do not let fogs or clouds come in so that you do not get the full benefit of the sunshine. Abiding in Christ in my judgment is abiding in God.
Now in the world, I see people, and Christians too, pretty much taken up with business. They say business so occupies them that they have very little time for anything else, and they need relaxation. But I want to speak for a moment about the relaxation. What is your relaxation? With many people I have no doubt their relaxation is taking up things which appeal either to the imagination or the senses, and if that be the case it will greatly hinder your abiding in Christ. I urge upon everybody here the paramount importance of abiding in Christ. "He that abideth in him sinneth not". If you are abiding in Christ you do not sin. I cannot conceive anything more important than the
{18}
soul abiding in the truth which is set forth in Christ. God has set forth the most wonderful things in Christ, His rights in mercy, when men had nothing to pay. I do not think mercy is a thing once to know and then to lose the sense of.
It is of such immense importance to abide in Christ that I wish all would take it into account and make it a matter of great concern. The attention is very much taken up with other things, and people very often give but the fag end of their time to divine things. I think you want to give the best of your time. It is a great thing to sit at Christ's feet. People take long journeys to winter abroad with the idea of keeping in perpetual sunshine. You will not have to do that. It is only wealthy people who can go those long distances to winter resorts; but you can get yourself morally into sunshine, in the light of divine mercy, without any expense at all. It is as open to the poor as it is to the rich, and the benefit of it is immense. I have little doubt that if people were happier morally they would suffer less physically. It is a great thing to keep ourselves in the love of God. If you do you will be in the sunshine. Christ is the Sun of righteousness, the rights of mercy shine out in Him.
I think you want to take care as to your relaxation. People must get their living, but it is a poor thing if the only relaxation which they can find is that which ministers to their imagination and senses. It will give you momentary gratification, but will not permanently profit you.
I come to another point. I have spoken about the escape from lawlessness -- abiding in Christ. You come into the sunshine, you do not sin. But now you get another thing. You will bear fruit. It is a great thing to bear fruit. I will tell you what will characterise you -- you will be merciful and wise. You will not stir people up; as you pass through the
{19}
world your yieldingness will be known to all. It is remarkable that when James speaks about wisdom from above, he speaks of it as being full of mercy. Mercy is the outcome of wisdom. It is full of mercy and good fruits, and if you go through the world full of mercy and good fruits you do not stir up evil passions, but very much promote quietness, and instead of being injurious you are beneficial. All this no doubt is the effect of abiding in Christ. He is wisdom to you down here -- you see your way. You walk in the virtue of the wisdom from above, and that wisdom is divine.
Just one point more. I said at the beginning that disintegration is bound to follow upon lawlessness. Now I can tell you what is bound to follow upon righteousness. If you are abiding in Christ you are righteous. There is no neutral ground. It is either abiding in Christ, or lawlessness, because the way God has taken to meet lawlessness is in the introduction of Christ, and everything outside of Christ must be lawless. But I said that lawlessness is bound to result in disintegration. It may come out in various ways. Hatred came out in Cain; but when you come to abiding in Christ, that is, righteousness, what then? Unity will be seen. Your course will not tend in the direction of disintegration but of unity. "By this we know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren". Without loving no one really abides in unity. I have not a shadow of doubt that a person abiding in Christ will be zealous and will endeavour, as far as possible, to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. I should be afraid to do anything here which would tend in the direction of disintegration, because I am sure it is not according to God's mind. You may depend upon it that lawlessness and disintegration are hateful to God.
{20}
If you have followed me at all you will be bound to admit the wisdom of the way in which God has appeared in the assertion of Himself in the rights of mercy, that is, in righteousness. People have had a poor idea of righteousness. They have not seen that the righteousness of the New Testament exceeds that of the Old. Christ was the expression of God's mercy "when they had nothing to pay". It is that which has made Christ to be the blessed point of attraction.
Take care, as I said before, that fogs and mists do not come in so that you do not get the benefit of the sunshine. It is a great thing to keep in the sunshine continually. To abide in it will have a mighty effect on you. First, you do not sin; secondly, you bear fruit; thirdly, your pathway is guided by wisdom from above; fourthly, your course will not tend to discord but to unity. You will walk in love towards all, seeking not to be injurious but beneficial.
May God keep you in divine light. There is no divine light outside of Christ.
{21}
FEASTING AND FASTING
@Luke 14: 15 - 35
I have tried in previous lectures to give some idea of the testimony. It is a great point not to be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, but, then, we need to understand what that testimony is. I have no doubt the word "testimony" is an indefinite expression in the ears of a great many. The fact is we need to be intelligent in divine things. Christianity is not dogmatism, though dogmatism has come into Christianity a great deal. One great principle of Christianity is intelligence, what the apostle expresses as "the full assurance of understanding". We get a similar thought in John's first epistle, "He has given us an understanding that we may know him that is true". Therefore it is not the divine thought that we should be unintelligent. Then, again, I do not think that we want other people to understand for us. We want to understand for ourselves. In times gone by people used to be largely content for others to understand for them. No one can understand the things of God by mere natural power nor otherwise than by the Spirit of God; but then the youngest believer, as well as the most advanced, has the Spirit of God, and therefore there is the possibility of the youngest believer understanding. Now I think you get the idea of the testimony in what the apostle Paul calls "the mystery of the gospel". Two or three times he employs that expression. His desire was that he might make manifest the mystery of the gospel; not in a public way, but to the intelligence of believers. The gospel had been committed to him, he himself had been made intelligent in the mystery
{22}
of the gospel, now the point was that he might make it known, for to that end he was an ambassador in bonds.
I think we all have an idea of the glad tidings in their suitability to man's condition, but what I have been referring to goes further, being spoken of as the "mystery of the gospel". I think the mystery of the gospel is "the Christ". If you turn to @Romans 16: 25 - 27, evidently it lies in "the preaching of Jesus Christ according to the revelation of the mystery". The mystery has now come out in the way of testimony, and is apprehended in the simple expression "the Christ". "The Christ" really covers a great deal of ground; it covers the length and depth and breadth and height of what we may call the promised land.
Now in speaking about the testimony I have laid stress on one point, namely, that the testimony is of that which will be displayed in its own time. God has appointed a time for display just as He has appointed the present time for testimony. God displays nothing till He has set it forth in the way of testimony. The time of testimony is very important, and where the testimony is accepted it brings us into the light of God and God's purpose. One is no longer unintelligent or dogmatic, but living in the light of God and in the knowledge of His purpose in Christ; because it is that which is made known in the testimony, and we are prepared for what He is going to display.
I took up another point, and that was, our qualification to be in the testimony, and the first principle is abiding in Christ. In that way we are no longer lawless, for we have come into attachment to Christ by the Spirit of God. We come under divinely ordered rule, and move in the orbit which God has appointed for us. "He that abideth in him does not sin". He is no longer lawless but righteous, and
{23}
so practises righteousness. That is, he does the will of God down here. You could not be in the testimony if you were lawless.
It is a great thing to have escaped lawlessness, and to be here subject to Christ, no longer carried about by your own will and fancy. I do not think man's will is a safe guide, it is impossible to know where it will lead him. The only safe way is to abide in Christ. The disciples were continually abiding in Christ. They were fruitful in good works while they were with Christ. So too after Christ was risen and ascended we see the same thing in them. The Spirit of God had attached them to Christ. They were no longer lawless, but moving in the divinely appointed orbit; and as the Lord Jesus said, "That ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain", their fruit has remained to the present day, because they continued in Christ and His words continued with them.
I come now to another point. I have spoken of our qualification for the testimony, I want to speak of two things which go with the testimony and mark those who are in it, that is, those who are in God's will, in the secret of His purpose. It is a great thing to be in accord morally with that which God is going to display. If you are not in such accord, you may depend upon it you are all wrong. The two marks which will, I think, characterise those who are in the testimony of Christ come out in this chapter. They are two very simple things -- the one is *feasting* and the other *fasting*. Feasting takes place inside, and fasting takes place outside. We have to do with both the inside and the outside, in a sense, by the life of Christ, and in the Spirit we are inside, that is, in the house, and we have feasting in the house; but then as a matter of fact we have still to do with the outside, for we have the outward
{24}
man, and the duties and obligations which are connected with the present life, and have to go through the world, and I look upon that as being the outside. When you come to the outside what is proper to us is fasting.
I just call your attention to verses 15 - 24. The supper gives you the idea of a feast. You get the same thing in the next chapter, verse 22. I want to point out that the feast is inside a certain domain, and the domain is God's domain. It is not a domain of this world, it is God's domain and His supper. So, too, in the next chapter, the feasting takes place in the domain of the Father. Now I would make plain to you where the Christian can live and feast. There is a moral domain, true to faith, which is apprehended in Christ. I believe the thought of the mystery of the Christ brings before us a domain. It is a moral idea which has to be apprehended by the soul, but it is to be apprehended; the Spirit gives us the apprehension of a moral domain in Christ. I do not think it will always be simply a moral domain; we anticipate the time when everything will be put under Christ, and what is now a moral domain will become an actual domain. Christ will fill all things. "All things" is not only a moral domain, but an actual domain; but now it is a moral domain which is apprehended in Christ. It is the "within" which is brought before us in this chapter under the figure of a house. Unquestionably that is a moral idea, but then there is "my supper". I will tell you what I understand by "my supper". It is the celebration of grace. Grace has come to pass in Christ. I understand the kingdom of God to signify the reign of grace. The reign of grace has come to pass, and what goes on in the house is the celebration of grace. There was a very different kind of reign until grace came in -- "sin reigned by death". Everybody was
{25}
under the dominion of sin and death. Nobody celebrated that. But now another reign has come in, the reign of grace. Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. The moment we come into the light of Christ we come under the rule of grace. Then we have "a throne of grace where we can obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need". We have to resort to it continually, it is essential to us down here; and we are told to come boldly to it, I mean in the difficulties to which we are exposed. But further, the point is that grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life, that is, the effect of grace is to bring to pass every condition in which man can live with God; grace reigns to that end. We get the gain of this now, but it will be brought to pass publicly. The conditions necessary to human life are found to a large extent in the rule of the sun; and the conditions which are essential to spiritual life are brought about by the reign of grace, grace reigns through righteousness unto it, through Jesus Christ our Lord. God has been pleased to interfere thus in divine mercy.
It is wonderful to think that the reign of grace is established. It is not appreciated by the natural mind of man. It is true to faith, and it is a very great thing to apprehend it; if you do apprehend it you are at the supper, you have part in the celebration. It will be a wonderful day when all the results of grace come out. Grace reigns now morally, but it will reign publicly and manifestly, as the sun reigns. In the meantime we are in the house and have part in the celebration. I think everybody ought to delight in the thought that grace is on the throne.
Now that is what I call the feasting. You get something of it in the next chapter. The father said, "Bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and
{26}
let us eat, and be merry". What wonderful terms are brought in, that we should be "merry"! I wish that would get hold of us, so that instead of being taken up with the things of this world we should see the wonderful things which have come to pass through our Lord Jesus Christ. We are entitled to feast in that sense, but if you feast it must be in the domain of Christ, it is not feasting in the world. My point is that every believer is in that domain. I do not mean physically, but in faith and by the Spirit of God.
Now I come to the other side. If you refer to verses 28 - 30 you come to the outside; here we get another scene. A great many things are found in it. There are people that mock, and a king with twenty thousand men. This is not inside the house. There was no mocking inside the house, and there was no going to war. Outside you find people ready to rejoice in the breakdown of a Christian, and there is the king with twenty thousand men. It is a great thing to understand the gain of the inside, what takes place there and the rejoicing that is proper to the inside; then you are qualified to come to the outside. I see around that people like building towers. Now I very much doubt if it be at all wise for a Christian to build a tower. What I understand by building a tower is to make a name. I doubt the prudence of this, the probability is that one may not have sufficient to finish. He may have enough to lay a foundation. On the other hand it certainly is not wise with ten thousand men to go to meet a king that comes with twenty thousand. The chances are that one will meet with defeat, and it leads to making terms. My impression from the passage is that it is undesirable for a Christian to go forth in human power to meet the enemy. People get into controversy and argument with infidels and sometimes bring upon themselves defeat
{27}
and shame. You may depend upon it the enemy is far more acute than you are. I do not think infidelity is met by controversy and argument and that kind of thing. The point of the passage is that if a man is to be a disciple of Christ he has to forsake all that he has. The Lord could meet the king that came against Him for the simple reason that He was what He said He was. Therefore when the enemy came against Him with twenty thousand he was defeated. Christ is what He says He is. We could not say that of ourselves.
Now what have you to do? What is the path of wisdom? You have to forsake all that you have. When we come to the outside and our pathway through the world, the safe place for the Christian is the place of self-abnegation. I am sure that, while on the one hand we have celebration and rejoicing, there is the appropriateness of fasting. Fasting, I take it, is self-abnegation. The Lord would not have the disciples fast when He was with them because fasting was not appropriate to that moment. No more will it be appropriate when Christ comes again. A man will not have to forsake all that he has in that day. The Bridegroom is not in the world, and therefore for the moment fasting is appropriate. The first thing in fasting is the refusal of the flesh. "If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live". We have to accept the rule of the Spirit, and the Spirit sets itself against the flesh. You do not the things to which you are prone for the reason that the Spirit is opposed to the flesh, and will not tolerate it. But there is another point and that is self-abnegation. You have to let your yieldingness be known unto all. If you stand upon your rights you do not give up all that you have; and after all man's rights are very shadowy, he brought no rights into the world, and every right that man
{28}
claims is acquired, Scripture makes the path of the Christian plain. "Let your yieldingness be known unto all. The Lord is at hand". I am content to have my rights with the Lord. If I have part in the rights of the Lord, I think that I may be well content, and in the meantime the path of wisdom undoubtedly is to let your yieldingness be known unto all. The apostles all walked on that principle. Peter and John did not assert their rights; Paul rarely asserted his rights, and when he did he was wrong; in the latter part of his course you never see him standing on his rights, and it is he who gives this admonition.
There is another point: in fasting we have to deny ourselves not only in regard to things that might be considered wrong, but in respect of things that are lawful but which are not appropriate. I have no doubt that there are things which in themselves are legitimate but which are not proper for the moment. The poor live from hand to mouth. My sympathies are with such. They can do very little beyond providing for what is necessary; but there are a great many people differently situated in the world. Of course you cannot expect to find very many of the rich among Christians; but supposing riches are within your reach, the question is whether what they can compass is appropriate. You have to take into account that the Bridegroom is not here, and while the Bridegroom is absent fasting is proper. You have to look to it whether this thing and that thing is suitable in His absence. In the midst of a lawless world my impression is that we want to be as simple as we can, avoiding every self-indulgence. If I had much means, people might ask me why I did not maintain a large establishment. I should say, because I think a large establishment and display, and that kind of thing, inappropriate in the absence of the Bridegroom.
{29}
There will be a large house, and plenty of glory and honour, when He comes. I think we want to wait until that day. In the meantime it appears to me that largeness in this world, and everything connected with it, is inappropriate. When we come to the inside, in the domain of Christ, feasting is the order, and you cannot have too much of it. "They began to be merry", and there is no end to the merriment. Let your feasting be on what I might call moral dainties, not natural dainties, or dainties of this world. Then when you come to the outside, as I said before, you are in the world. You may have to meet mockery and opposition, and the king that comes with twenty thousand. Do not attempt to build a tower. Do not try to be conspicuous, and do not make war in your own strength. The true path is to forsake all that you have, to refuse the flesh and its working, to renounce all idea of maintaining your own rights, and to be prepared to exercise self-denial in a world from which the Bridegroom is absent. In that path you will be simple and not hampered. You will be able to take up the discipleship of Christ. You do not want to be better than your Master. We have to tread the path that Christ trod, and we do not wish to be better than our Master; we suffer now, but the reigning time will come; when Christ reigns you will reign with Him. You do not want to anticipate this. Just be prepared to accept the outside and what is suitable. Depend upon it nothing is suitable to the outside but discipleship of Christ. Thus you will be suitable to the testimony. It is a great thing to be prepared for the path of self-denial, to tread in the footsteps of the Lord Jesus here upon earth. It will greatly aid us in fasting outside to be in the feasting inside. As we do so, the path of self-denial will be what we shall desire.
{30}
THE EQUIPMENT FOR THE TESTIMONY
@Ephesians 6: 10, 11; @Isaiah 59: 16, 17; @2 Thessalonians 2: 6 - 12
My thought is to continue on the line of the testimony, and the armour as we have it given in @Ephesians 6 is essential in the maintenance of it. We have had the testimony before us, as a rallying-point for the saints in the ruin of the church. No one can gainsay the ruin of the church. No person with any intelligence in Scripture could maintain that Christianity, as it is in the world, is according to the mind of God. If you could dissect it and find out the elements of which it is composed, they would be very various. No doubt there are certain elements of truth in the creeds, but then we find in practice a large infusion of heathenism and Judaism. As Christianity advanced in the world, and spirituality declined, other elements were admitted.
I pointed out in connection with the first epistle to Timothy that we find nothing that answers to the features of the house of God, as set forth in that epistle, in what is abroad now. My point was, there are two things essential to the individual, and especially so to the servant of the Lord. Still I do not want to talk to servants, but to believers. I do not care to limit what I say to servants. One is to know how to behave himself in the house of God. This is very important. I cannot think that anything absolves us from our responsibility as to that while the Spirit of God is still here, for if the Spirit of God is here, the house of God is here.
Then we ought to learn that fundamental lesson, "Not to he ashamed of the testimony of our Lord". So far as I understand the second epistle to Timothy,
{31}
the point is that in the general confusion the testimony of the Lord is a rallying-point of saints, and I believe this to be of great moment.
I judge that of late years a great many people have run rather into the idea that they might construct some sort of representation of the church. I think it has been in the mind of a good many to construct a sort of ecclesiastical system but it has always broken down, and to my mind it is useless to go on that line. I do not think that is the thought of the Spirit of God; my impression is that in an evil day the Spirit of God has provided a rallying-point, and that rallying-point is the testimony. The second epistle to Timothy is perhaps the last epistle that Paul wrote.
There was another point -- that the testimony is always a witness of what God is going to display. This gives the testimony a very definite character. To testify beforehand of that which is to be displayed is an unvarying principle in the ways of God. In regard to the first coming of the Lord, God gave testimony of that. So too in the Old Testament -- in the recovery of the Jews from Babylon, God first gave testimony. But now testimony goes a great deal farther. Testimony is of all that which God has bound up in Christ, of which Christ is the beginning, centre and head. It is a witness to Christ as in relation to "all things" (or rather the witness of all things in relation to Christ). A great many of us have had limited ideas in regard to Christ, and so too in regard to the return of Christ. We have talked of the coming of Christ in connection with the kingdom. The point is that Christ is not simply King, but He is very much like the sun in our solar universe. He is the head and centre, the beginning of a moral system which is to be displayed in connection with Him. Scripture is full of it. Even when God brought Israel out of Egypt into
{32}
the wilderness, He gave them in the tabernacle a figurative representation of the "all things" -- things in heaven and things on earth. The "all things" are not yet come to pass; but what has come to pass is that Christ, as the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat, has come in, and thus all things are grouped around Him. The Lord Himself spoke very much about "all things". He spoke of all things in connection with the coming of the Comforter -- "All things that the Father hath are mine", and taught that the Spirit would make known to the disciples all things.
I say that much in connection with the principle which I put forward, that is, that God displays nothing until He has previously given witness of it. We are waiting for the blessed hope and appearing of the Lord Jesus, not simply for the appearing, but for the display of all that God has established in Him, and in the meantime I think our rallying-point is the testimony. I do not think anything but that will bind us together according to God. I do not think zeal for ecclesiastical order will do it. If you ask what the testimony of our Lord is, it is comprised in one word, and that is, the Christ. The thought of the Christ covers a great deal, it not only refers to Christ personally, but covers all that of which the Christ is the head and centre, and that is an immense field for consideration.
I was speaking last time of what should characterise those to whom the testimony is dear. I referred to the appropriateness of fasting and feasting. Fasting is not always abstaining from food, but denial of self in legitimate things within your reach, which are inappropriate in the absence of the Bridegroom. Then feasting is in the house, in the power of the Holy Ghost -- all the joys connected with Christ at God's right hand.
Now I go a point farther, that is, as to our equipment.
{33}
It is difficult to stand in the evil day without proper moral equipment. It is no slight matter to withstand in the day of evil. I do not see many people who withstand when prosperity is brought against them. They get engulfed by it; and some people break down under adversity. The devil has plenty of methods to catch people, and, as I said, they often break down. Many would stand under ordinary circumstances; but supposing temptation were to come in some severe and subtle form, in the way of prosperity or in some way which would tend to gratify you naturally: how would you stand then? We want to withstand, in an evil day, every allurement of the enemy. The Lord stood against all. The devil came to Him with every kind of temptation, in natural things, in spiritual and in worldly things, but the Lord withstood in the evil day. And there is another important point which we see in Christ, He not only withstood every temptation, but He dislodged the foe. He went into death that He might destroy him, and He came out victorious. The enemy was not only withstood, but dislodged, and those who had been subject all their lifetime to bondage were delivered. The same thing should be true in regard to us. We have to withstand the power of evil in this world. The great point is not how a person begins, but how he continues. Continuance is the test. Starting is not the real test of strength. Many may go ahead in a race at the start, but the real test is the power of stay or continuance. You want to be able to withstand in the day of evil and to dislodge the enemy. You get the figure of this in the case of the children of Israel when they came into the land of promise; the first thing was to withstand. The enemy sought to prevent their getting into the land; but when they got into the land, they had to dislodge the enemy, and they
{34}
never did it thoroughly. I think that is our part. It is a great thing and I wish I could impress on all the importance of it.
Now I want to give you an idea with regard to the armour, @Ephesians 6: 10 - 18. The idea is that the seat of wickedness is the heavenly places. In @Isaiah 59: 17 - 20 we read, "For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak. According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies; to the islands he will repay recompense. So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord". I refer to this to show that the armour is that which is characteristic of Christ in His coming again, and really characteristic of Him as Jehovah. I want you to notice this, because as it is a principle that the testimony refers to that which God is going to display, so the armour anticipates the coming of Christ in power. The passage that I referred to speaks of the coming in of the Redeemer to Zion; then it is that He puts on righteousness as a breastplate and a helmet of salvation upon His head, so that evidently righteousness and salvation are characteristic of Jehovah. Everlasting righteousness and salvation will characterise Christ when He comes out in blessing. You cannot understand the bearing of the armour if you do not apprehend that. In contrast to this look at @2 Thessalonians 2: 8 - 10, which also refers to the coming of the Lord in connection with the revelation of the wicked one. The state of things which the
{35}
Lord will meet at His coming is seen, which He will destroy. The principles which you get there are falsehood, unrighteousness, confusion and moral destruction. These four principles stand in contrast to the different parts of the armour, which are truth, righteousness, peace and salvation. The Lord Jesus comes in with the breastplate of righteousness and the helmet of salvation. He comes in truth, righteousness, peace and salvation, but while He comes in that way, it means destruction to all that is opposed to Him. He will destroy all that is opposed to God with the "brightness of his coming". He will come on behalf of His people to bring salvation; He comes as Redeemer to Zion. Now the armour is that which is properly characteristic of Christ at His coming, and in contrast to the principles which accompany the revelation of the wicked one. The principles which characterise the lawless one are exactly opposed to the principles which come out in the Redeemer.
Now a word or two with regard to the epistle to the Ephesians. The first thing which you get brought out is a very important point -- the mystery of God's will. God has made known to us His will to head up all things in Christ. We have read that passage often enough, but have we ever realised the greatness of it? It means a universe centred in Christ. The next thing in the epistle is the place of the church in relation to that universe, that is, a place in heaven. The saints are raised up together and made to sit together in the heavenly places in Christ. You cannot understand that except in relation to the universe of which I spoke. The next thing in the epistle is the state which is correspondent to that, because if the church is set in another place, then there must be a state corresponding to it. Supposing such a thing were possible as that a beggar in this world were to be put in the position
{36}
of a king; the beggar must have a state to suit his new position. Saul was a very simple man until God took him up, until then he had not the heart of a king. God gave him the heart of a king. His state was altered to suit his position, and so it must be, as I said before, even in this world. If a man is taken from a very low position and finds himself in a very high position, there is a great alteration in what I might call the state of that man. Now when we look at things in divine light, our position is in heaven. None of us is in heaven actually, we are here upon earth; but it is important to remember that the place of the church, in reference to the great scheme which is centred in Christ, is in heaven, and what is already true in regard to us is that God has wrought in us a state suited to that place. You may say you apprehend it very poorly, and it is quite true that we see very little evidence of it, but none the less the state is there -- it is Christ dwelling by faith in our hearts. As surely as you have Christ dwelling by faith in your heart, you have the state. Now supposing the state be in some measure true of you, that is, that you have been strengthened with might in the inner man, you will have a great increase of intelligence. Put a beggar in the place of a king, he would need more intelligence as a king than as a beggar. How are you and I going to get the increase of intelligence suited to another place The more really Christ is dwelling by faith in your hearts, the more you will be able to apprehend with all saints the breadth and length and depth and height, so that you really get the intelligence suited to the place. Now supposing that you apprehend the new place and have the state suitable to the place, you have to stand your ground against the wiles of the devil, so that you may not lose your place. The next thing is to dislodge the enemy. What do you think is the instrument for that?
{37}
There is nothing but the sword of the Spirit -- the word of God. That is the weapon confided to us. There is nothing by which you can dislodge the enemy except the testimony. It is a great thing to be able to handle the testimony. A great many are not qualified to handle the testimony because they are not equipped with the whole armour of God. You want to be invulnerable. I do not suppose armour, in a worldly sense, is of much use in the present day. The weapons surpass the armour, they penetrate the armour, but in this chapter, the point, in regard to us, is that we should be invulnerable morally, so that we cannot be wounded. When the wicked one is revealed he is defective in every point. He comes with lies and makes himself out to be God; then he comes in unrighteousness, he does not give God His rights. And there is no peace, because where unrighteousness is there is bound to be confusion; and there is no salvation, because the whole system, and all that he comes with, is moral destruction. There is no moral soundness. When Christ comes the first great point is truth, for He is the revelation of God. There is a striking expression, "Whom the Lord will destroy with the brightness of his coming". The brightness of His coming is the revelation of God. Now the brightness of His coming to us is truth. Christ has come in the light of God. He has come in truth, and now we can have our loins girt about with truth, because Christ is light to us, we are in the light of God. We have the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. The only-begotten Son has declared God. It is a very simple thing to understand what truth is. Christ came not only in grace, but in truth. He came in truth not imputing trespasses, He came in truth so that man might be recovered, so that the affections of man might be regulated by truth. Truth orders
{38}
and regulates everything according to God. Where you find the soul of a man in the light of the revelation of God, the affections of that man are not irregular, but directed and regulated in divinely-appointed channels.
But Christ came not only in truth but in righteousness, He came to maintain what is right. Christ came in the assertion of the rights of God, and the rights of God are right, and where the rights of God are not allowed nothing is right. Then He came in peace. He is the Prince of peace. He came in that character with regard to us, for peace is bound to follow upon righteousness. When once the rights of God are asserted and maintained the effect is peace. Then He came in salvation. That is the character in which Christ came, "a light of the Gentiles and God's salvation to the ends of the earth". There is no salvation possible except by Christ. There is no salvation in Adam or Adam's race. Salvation is exclusively and entirely in Christ, I might say that Christ is truth, Christ is righteousness, Christ is peace, Christ is salvation, and Christ is the sword of the Spirit, for the sword of the Spirit is the testimony; and if we want to withstand in this day and to dislodge the enemy we have to be equipped with what is characteristic of Christ.
There are two parts of the armour which do not so distinctly apply to Christ. They are faith and prayer, but every other part of the armour is that which is properly characteristic of Christ Himself. If we anticipate the coming of Christ it will have a twofold power, it will be destruction of the power of evil, and at the same time be salvation and blessing in the world. He comes on the one hand to destroy the wicked one, and on the other hand He will appear to them that look for Him a second time apart from sin unto salvation. He comes in truth to assert the rights of God in mercy and in peace as the
{39}
blessed Prince of peace, and He comes to believers as salvation. The Lord Jesus said, "I came not to judge the world, but to save the world".
We want to see that the armour is that which is properly characteristic of Christ, and to take it up in the order in which it is given here. It is given in suitable moral order. I do not think you will get much understanding of righteousness if you have not the truth; and if you have not righteousness you will not know much of peace; and if you do not know peace you do not know salvation. It is most important that the revelation of God should be effectual in us in ordering and directing our affections, then we can stand here and assert the rights of God in mercy. Peace follows upon that. Peace is the effect of righteousness, and following upon peace we can stand in faith, that is, in the conviction that God is above all evil. Then you can take up the helmet of salvation, that is, Christ, and the sword of the Spirit, which I take to be the testimony of Christ, and the last part of the equipment is prayer. Faith and prayer are important principles in regard to us. The enemy has plenty of strongholds in this world in the hearts and minds of men; if we only are properly equipped, we should find that the power of the enemy would be dislodged. I can understand anybody saying that Christianity at the present day is very feeble. I know it is, and I think I see the reason -- people are not equipped with the armour. They do not know what the sword of the Spirit is. The mass of people have come under the influence of a worldly Christianity. If Christianity had been intended to be a system in this world, what would be the use of the armour? It is because we expect to find a foe here that armour is wanted, and you not only want armour, but the sword of the Spirit -- the testimony
{40}
to dislodge the enemy. I wish I had more confidence in the sword of the Spirit.
God is going to dispose everything according to the mystery of His will. We have to stand here for Christ until He comes to assert His rights.
{41}
THE BOOKS OF MOSES
@Exodus 25: 1
I want to bring before you the thought of the testimony of God in the Scriptures. The ground upon which I go is found in the last chapter of the Gospel of Luke. Christ expounded to the disciples in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself. He was the great testimony of God, so that He could do this. He marks the three great divisions of scripture, that is, Moses and the Psalms and the prophets, with the same object, as containing the things concerning Himself. He gave a comprehensive view of the testimony of God in all the Scriptures. Now it is with that idea that I want to bring the Scriptures under your attention. I take up the books of Moses at this time, and, if I have another opportunity, I will take up the Psalms, then too the prophets.
The object in each is different; but whatever may be prominent in each, the whole is covered by that one word "Christ". That is what we want to see in Scripture. We are told that "the word of God" is "the mystery", and the mystery of the Christ is the testimony. The word of God and the testimony are perhaps equivalent, and the testimony of God refers to that which God is going to display. It seems to be the way with God that He displays nothing without having first given testimony; and for a very long time, now extending over some six thousand years, God has been giving testimony of that which He intends to display. If I do not misunderstand the Scriptures entirely, God's testimony is the one thread running all through, whether it be in Moses, in what we are accustomed to call the
{42}
Pentateuch, or in the Psalms, which are largely celebrations, or in the prophetic part of scripture. The testimony of God, as I have said, is the word of God. In the highest sense Christ is the word of God, that is, in the sense of being the revelation of God. When He comes into the world He comes as the word of God, that is, as the testimony of God. All that God has fore-ordained, all His counsel, is not only established in Christ, but will be displayed in Him.
One word more: that it is Christ personally that gives character to everything under Him we can well understand, but the thought of God's testimony is not simply of Christ personally, but of Christ officially, that is, Christ in relation to "all things". "All things that the Father hath are mine". "All things are delivered to me of my Father". You get that thought continually in the teaching of the Lord, and I want to make plain the idea of Christ in relation to "all things".
In speaking about the testimony of Christ we must bring "all things" in. "All things" is an expression commonly used in the New Testament as denoting all that is put under the Headship of Christ. "And hath put 'all things' under his feet, and gave him to be head over 'all things' to the church". Hence we have Christ in relation to "all things", and "all things" in relation to Christ.
I take up now what may be called the beginning of the testimony. In this chapter God gave details of the testimony which He intended to establish in the midst of Israel. The tabernacle was called the tent of testimony; and the ark of the covenant was the testimony which God gave. God set up, in a figurative way, His testimony in the midst of Israel. Now I do not think I am going too far in saying that if that be so, this chapter is really the most important chapter in the Pentateuch. It is
{43}
a very common thing in the present day for critics to attack Scripture. Scripture has lost its sacred character in the eyes of people to a great extent. Men assail it, but in general the attacks are addressed against the detail. People will tell you that this detail and that are irreconcilable with what men of science have found out, and that kind of thing. But in coming to Scripture, the point is not the detail, but to know what the mind of Scripture is -- what the secret, the spirit of it is. The detail is a secondary consideration, though I have no doubt the detail will be found all right. I venture to say that no person that ever attempts to assail Scripture has any idea whatever of the purpose of Scripture. In regard to that I judge that they are in the dark. They look at the surface, but not being divinely taught, they have no apprehension of what is the spirit and real point of Scripture. The point of Scripture is the testimony of God, and the testimony of God is Christ; but, as I have said, Christ in relation to "all things". I take up a figure often used: the sun in our physical universe stands in relation to all things; there is no planet in the solar system to which the sun does not stand in relation. The sun may be called the centre of the system. The same thought applies in regard of Christ. Christ is the centre of the whole moral system. Every part of the moral universe refers to Christ, and Christ to every part of the moral universe.
All the detail that God gave in the early part of scripture, and afterwards (a great deal comes out in the succeeding books, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy) refers to what is found in this chapter. God here gave directions for His testimony to be set up among the people; therefore I am justified in saying that this chapter is the most important chapter in the books of Moses. If this chapter were rightly understood, no one would attempt to
{44}
assail any of the detail that precedes or that follows it. The detail was all leading up to the fact of God taking up a people, and was a type of redemption coming in; then it was that God set up His testimony in the midst of that people. Once the testimony was established, as we get it here and in the early part of Leviticus, everything had relation to that testimony. The children of Israel had to pitch their tents in reference to the tabernacle; and when they went through the wilderness, the ark of the covenant went before them, and God marked out a way for the people; they had to follow the ark of the covenant through Jordan, and the ark preceded them into the land. So too, the ark of the covenant had to be carried round Jericho; everything centred in the ark. I want to touch now upon what God set forth in the tabernacle, not in detail -- I am no great hand at detail -- but in the general features of it.
I desire to show you how in the tabernacle God set forth a figurative representation of that which was before Him. What is presented to us in the books of Moses is to a large extent figurative. In the Psalms we have not a figurative representation -- for the Psalms are rather prophetic in their character, they are in the nature of celebrations. I would say in passing that in the Psalms we get the thought of a Man capable of going up on high: One who first came down, and was capable of going up, so as to fill all things. In the prophets, again, it is not a question of figurative representation, but of prophetic testimony, all pointing on to the same thing. We see in the prophets the thought of God Himself assuming all the kingdoms of the world. It is no longer safe that they should be entrusted into the hands of man, and God Himself becomes King of the whole earth in the midst of His people at Jerusalem. We read in @Revelation 11, "The kingdoms of
{45}
this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever". If you put these three points together, the figurative representation of that which was before God, the Man who could come down and could go up, so that He should fill "all things", and the assumption of the kingdoms by God, so that Jehovah alone should be King, you get the idea of God's testimony. The great system of the world is to be broken to pieces. God allows it to go on for a moment for wise purposes, but all will be swept away, and it will not take God long to do it. God never interferes until principles are ripened. The present is an accepted time and a day of salvation, and I suppose the character of this moment will continue until men reject all revelation and set up a rival to Christ; then God will interfere and the existing system of the world will come to an end in a moment, but in that moment God will display that to which He has given testimony from the beginning. The system of the world will be put aside by the judgment of God, to make room for Christ and "all things". The Father's counsels are centred in the Son, and when the Son is set forth -- and the Son is the great subject of testimony -- then God will set forth the "all things" centred in the Son.
I will touch now on the things of which God spoke in connection with the tabernacle (verses 10, 16, 17, 23, 31). I refer to the items which formed the furniture of the tabernacle, because they were the things which God set forth before the people. The first and foundation of everything was the ark of the covenant. The covenant was put in the ark, and the ark of the covenant implied the means by which the goodness of God should be available to man in spite of what man was. It was a wonderful thought. In the beginning of God's dealings with
{46}
Israel, God took account of man's condition, which really ruined everything; but what was typified in the ark of the covenant was Christ, and the tables of the covenant were placed there. In Christ you can understand how, in spite of all man is, the goodness of God is available to man. The same sort of thought comes out in the bringing back of the ark to Mount Zion. We are told "Ye are come unto Mount Zion". When man had forfeited everything by the crucifixion of Christ, God gives back Christ in resurrection to man in His sovereign mercy in the virtue of redemption. Christ was taken and by wicked hands crucified and slain, but He was delivered by "the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God". I understand Christ to be now both the ark and the covenant (not the ten commandments). He is the true covenant, and the covenant is, that in spite of man's condition the mercy and goodness of God are available to man. That is the first principle of "all things". I cannot conceive how "all things" could possibly be brought about without the goodness of God being known and realised. In any household what gives character to the household is goodness in the parents. What is the worth of a household if there be not that? and what is the value of the universe, as God's house, if there be not goodness in God, and that goodness displayed and enjoyed? Well, what God has designed and brought to pass is that the goodness of God should be available to man in spite of man's condition. Christ is available to man, and there are two things in Christ -- He has accomplished redemption so that man might be relieved of the liabilities under which he is, and on the ground of redemption Christ is able to impart living water to man, to conform man to Himself. That is what I understand by the ark of the covenant. It is on that the mercy seat is founded.
{47}
The mercy seat could not have been founded on the ten commandments, it could be founded only on the ark of the covenant. Christ magnified the law and made it honourable. He was the righteous One, He hated lawlessness and loved righteousness, but that would not have been available to us had He not accomplished redemption. He had to taste death for everything, and on that ground He imparts to man living water, so that man may be conformed to Him. God has to say to people about their sins, but it is to announce forgiveness. If in preaching you make an effort to bring home responsibility to man, the reason is that God's mind in regard to man is forgiveness. When Christ was here God was not imputing trespasses, indeed occasionally we find the Lord forgiving, but in general the principle was that God was not imputing, He was reconciling. Now God goes further than that, He announces forgiveness, "Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things". The mercy seat is established upon the ark, and hence it is that God's mind in regard to all men is forgiveness of sins, and the point to be reached is that man may be brought into the enjoyment of the goodness of God. Were it not for redemption, and the ark of the covenant, man's condition would have been an impassable barrier to his knowing anything at all about the goodness of God. God has wrought that His goodness may be available, and enjoyed and delighted in by man. The condition of man has been met in redemption, and Christ is the mercy seat, so that in Him God can put Himself in contact with man. In the mercy seat we get the declaration of the rights of God's mercy; and where those rights are recognised man receives forgiveness in the gift of the Spirit. That is the first principle of God's universe. By the ark of the covenant and
{48}
the mercy seat God establishes the universe. You could not talk about God being in moral contact with this present world. I admit there is a testimony of God to man in this world. God puts Himself in contact with man, but by what belongs to another world, by the ark of the covenant and the mercy seat.
In the furniture of the holy place you get two important items -- the table of shewbread and the candlestick. There was also another item in the holy place, the altar of sweet incense. That comes in another connection; you do not get that in this chapter. In the detail of the furniture the altar of sweet incense is brought in last. What we get in this chapter presents in type that by which God intended to establish the universe, and as I have said, the first thing in that is the ark of the covenant. Christ is seen in that light. The table of shewbread and the candlestick present two great principles, what I may speak of as administration and light. They will come out not simply in Christ but through Israel, that is, so far as the world is concerned. All that was in the first tabernacle related in a way to Israel, and the proof of that is that the priests in Israel went always into the first tabernacle accomplishing the service of God. The things with which they dealt in the first tabernacle were the things which related figuratively to Israel; although the table of shewbread and candlestick represent Christ, yet I take it they represent Christ in connection with Israel. Israel will, in the ways of God, be a vessel of administration, and the great light in the midst of the world. In @Isaiah 66: 19 we read, "And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory;
{49}
and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles". One cannot doubt that in the ways of God, Israel, in connection with Christ, will have a remarkable place in the earth both in administration -- that is, in the administration of spiritual food, for the declaration of God's name is really food -- and as a light in the world.
But I will proceed to the court of the tabernacle. In the court of the tabernacle was the altar of burnt offering. The altar of burnt offering is a type of Christ, but in another light, that is, in that it presents a place of acceptance for man on the ground of sacrifice, so that man may find acceptance with God. There is that now set forth in Christ. Man does not come into the favour of God by his own conduct, but is accepted on the ground of sacrifice. That ground of acceptance will subsist in the world to come. The altar of burnt offering will be available for all when the system of the world to come is established. The world to come will be set up on that ground. This is seen in principle in the offering of Abel. There will be another principle true in the world to come: all will be pervaded by the Spirit of God. The tabernacle was anointed with oil. God will pour out of His Spirit upon all flesh. The Spirit will be in that day the subjugating influence in regard to man. That is the testimony which God gave. In the construction of the tabernacle and in the details of the furniture God set forth in figurative representation what was before Him in regard to the world to come. From beginning to end Scripture has in view the testimony of God, that which God has purposed to display. It is not that this came in when everything had failed in the hands of Israel, but God showed in Israel what He had from the beginning before Him. The people did not understand it, very few at any rate; their minds were veiled to a large extent; they did not
{50}
understand the figurative character of these things. They took them all up in a material way. It is we who get the benefit. "Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning". We can understand these things because Christ has been presented in whom all is established; and God has given to us His Spirit that we may have intelligence in regard to all that is before God. My object in taking up these things is that the great design of God in Scripture may be seen, so that none may be terrified by attacks that may be made upon this detail and that detail. You will not think very much of these attacks if you see the great underlying principle and purpose in Scripture. But there is another object before me, and that is that the attention of saints may be diverted from the course of things transpiring in the world and fixed upon that which God presents to us. All is comprehended in the great fact that Christ is before God.
Now I will say another word in regard to man. Some would perhaps observe, Yes, all these things are before God -- the ark of the covenant, the mercy seat, the table of shewbread, the candlestick and the altar, but there is no man. In @Ephesians 3 we read, "Of whom every family in heaven and on earth is named". God has evidently designed to have many families before Him. In the ways of God Christ is the centre of many circles; all the circles have reference to the one centre. When you come to the detail of the holiest of all you do not find any man spoken of save Moses; so in regard to the holy place, there is no mention of any man, it is simply the furniture. The furniture is what God set forth before man. When you bring in man, the point is man before God. But if God is before man, presenting things to man, there must be a response to it, that is, that man
{51}
should have a certain place before God. That came out in the priests of Israel: they went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service. But all that was to pass away. I suppose at the beginning of the system Aaron may have had liberty to enter into the holiest of all. Moses could approach the mercy seat, but Aaron was not allowed to enter at all times; the high priest went in once a year, and under certain conditions, and for a certain purpose. Now I say that, in order to bring in perfection, the priest must touch the ark. The two must be brought together. You must have the covenant of God brought into conjunction with the man that approaches God. The priest is the man who approaches God on behalf of man; and to complete the system, we must have the man who approaches God on the part of man joined with the One in whom God set forth His pleasure in regard to man. That never could be fulfilled save in Christ. You could not have any one really to approach the ark of the covenant until Christ. If we look at Christ on one side, He is the ark of the covenant on the part of God. In @Psalm 40 He comes forth from God with God's law in His heart; but in another point of view Christ was the priest taken from among men, He sprang from man in the ways of God. He was made of a woman, made under law; He was to approach God in that light, and hence we find in Christ the two things brought together -- the ark of the covenant, and the man that could approach God on behalf of man. Christ does not take up priesthood until after resurrection; but still, the moment He was born, the Priest was there, the One who could be joined to the ark of the covenant; the two are brought together. The practical result is that you get many families. They all have to come in by Christ. The great High Priest has entered the holiest in the virtue of
{52}
His own blood, and, as a result of that, many families may come in, really because they are joined to Christ. They do not come in on any title of their own, on any hereditary principle or ground of personal excellence. Every family which approaches (and many will) approaches in connection with the great High Priest. I can understand that when God was giving the detail of that which He saw fit to set forth before man, we do not get any reference to families. Families come in on the other side, in connection with the high priest who could go in and touch the ark of the covenant. In Hebrews you get the idea of the holiest, and the ark of the covenant is there, that is, what God saw fit to set forth in Christ, the apostle; but there is another thought, Christ has entered once into the holiest by His own blood. The priest has touched the ark, the two are bound together, if I may use the expression, and now you get the various families. At the close of Hebrews we have the church of the firstborn and the spirits of just men made perfect; all depends on the priest having entered in once in virtue of his own blood. The inmost of these families is the inmost circle, the companions of Christ. In Hebrews we are told that we have become companions of Christ. "Both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren". The priest is as great as the ark. In Israel the priest was not so great as the apostle. Moses was faithful in all God's house. Aaron was hardly that. For the reality of things you have the priest as perfect as the ark of the covenant. In virtue of the priest having gone in, every family can be named, and every family can in measure approach God. "Through him by one Spirit we both have access (Jew and Gentile), to the Father". We do not go in because we are very advanced Christians, but
{53}
simply as companions of the high priest; very much akin to the sons of Aaron. One word more: in times gone by the holy place was the place of service, but the holy place no longer has that position, the place of service is the holiest of all, the veil has been rent. When the holy place was the place of service there was no other service. But another service has come in: we have liberty to enter the holiest by the blood of Jesus. The holy place never will again, I suppose, be the place of service of God; all the service will take its character from those who enter the holiest of all. In @Revelation 14 there is a company here upon earth who hear the voice of harpers harping with their harps in heaven, and they learn the heavenly song. There will be earthly families as well as heavenly, and the service of God will take its character from that which transpires in heaven.
It is important to see that the scripture is the book of God's testimony, and that God's testimony has reference to that which God intends to display. Christ is not yet displayed in glory. According to God's counsel He is to come out in that light, and when He comes out "all things" will come out. God will bring to light the extent of "all things", the breadth, depth, length and height. My point is, that from the outset, from the moment that God had a people and a type of redemption, God gave testimony, figuratively, of that which was before Him and which He intended in due time to display. We can understand these things because we have before us the reality, Christ having come in. We can understand the Scriptures, the Spirit of God having been given to us, so that we can enter largely into that which the Spirit of God indited. Scripture is a wonderful book. Do not think you have got to the bottom of it. People are often content with the surface of it. Few go much beneath the surface.
{54}
The great point is not the detail, which is given wisely, but the great principles of truth which are found there. I believe they are summed up in the testimony of God, and the testimony of God is comprehended in one single word, that is, Christ, but in relation to "all things". The last word of the Old Testament is, "To you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall".
{55}
THE PSALMS
@Psalm 8; @Psalm 40: 1 - 9
I mention, for the help of any that may not have been present last time, the line I hope to pursue. My thought in all that I have to say is the testimony. To many minds this presents a very indefinite idea; but it is the thing for the moment. When the church has broken down, as it has done, the testimony is the rallying-point for saints -- the thing which will hold them together in a day like the present. None of us looks for the restoration of the church down here, no such thought is presented in Scripture; its failure and decay are shown. Christianity has assumed a form never intended by God, it has been taken captive by the world and has been used in a way for the world's purpose. This is what we see around, and our position is that we stand apart from the great systems into which Christianity has dropped. The church has got down to Babylon, Christ and Christianity are identified with the course of this world, and that must be false. You may be confident from the fact of what Christ is, the Son of God, begotten into the world, that He must be the beginning of another system -- a world that is going to displace the existing world. Christ is the Head of "all things", not as they are now, but as according to God. What I understand by the testimony is Christ in relation to "all things" on the basis of redemption. Christ occupies that position by divine appointment, and that is the testimony for the moment, which is the time appointed for it. If that be the case the testimony ought to be of supreme interest to every one of us. The gospel is the testimony and the testimony is the gospel.
{56}
I have previously made one remark in regard to the testimony, that it is of that which God is going to display. I believe that to be the principle that prevails through Scripture. "Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets". A very important principle too, for it connects itself with the responsibility of man. Man is bound to listen to that which God has to say, and before God interferes in a public way He gives testimony. The responsibility of man at the present time is intimately bound up with the gospel. God makes Christ known in the way of glad tidings, in that which may be believed, and the glad tidings are a very important element indeed in the responsibility of man. The great question at the present time is not of detail. In the day of judgment the detail of people's conduct will come out, but at the present time the question is not of detail, but of what men think of Christ. Christ is the great question in which man's responsibility is involved. God has set Christ in relation to man, and therefore every man is responsible in regard to Christ.
I refer again to the point that testimony invariably refers to that which God purposes to display, and in that connection touch on another point that I brought under your attention, that the testimony of God is comprehended in one name, that is, Christ. Not Christ as Christ first came, but Christ as Christ will be when set forth in glory, that is, as the Head and Centre of "all things". God has made known to us the mystery of His will to head up in one "all things" in Christ; it is that which is to be displayed, that is the testimony of God. It is the burden in all Scripture, not simply in the New Testament, but in the Old, and in every part of the Old. The Lord said, "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they
{57}
which testify of me". But the Scriptures testify of what Christ will be when displayed in the glory of God.
I spoke last time of the three great divisions of scripture, that is, Moses and the Psalms and the prophets. There are subsidiary parts, but the three main divisions of scripture are these. My point in taking up each part (of course, it can only be done rapidly and cursorily) was and is to show how in all the testimony of Christ is evident. We had before us last time that which I ventured to speak of as the most important chapter in the whole of the Pentateuch, @Exodus 25, giving the description in detail of the furniture of the tabernacle, and for the reason that that which the tabernacle contained was a figurative representation of Christ in relation to "all things". It brings before us the great thought that the moment is coming when God intends to fill the universe. But not only does it give that general idea, but the more particular idea of that by which God will fill the universe. Hence I took up some detail, that is, the ark of the covenant, the mercy seat, and then the candlestick, and the golden table and the altar of burnt offering. I touched on these as showing us the means by which God will fill the universe. We are waiting here, "Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ". Christ has been set "far above all principality and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come". There is a universe which God purposes shall be filled not with confusion like the present world, but with order and blessing and light.
Now we come to the Psalms. I want to run rapidly through the Psalms, or rather to touch on some few of them to point out the way in which
{58}
the testimony of Christ is presented. You cannot have anything clearer than what we have already had, that is, the presentation of the testimony of the Christ in the tabernacle, when we understand the typical meaning of it; but we have not in the Psalms figurative representation; we come to what is more precise, and speaks more definitely of Christ. There are many things which I shall pass over, because in the course of an hour it is entirely impossible, even if one had the ability, to go into all that is presented to us in the Psalms. One can only touch on a few points to convey a general idea. Many here are aware that the Psalms consist of five books. This is rather important, for each book has its own distinctive character, and the Psalms are not really understood unless you see the division. But I do not want to try to give you understanding of the Psalms; my point is to attempt to show the very distinct way in which the Psalms give to us the testimony of the Christ. There is a great deal in the Psalms beside that, for many of them furnish detail of experience and exercise on the part of saints; but evidently the main point in the Psalms are the things concerning Christ, in that which Christ will be when He is set forth in glory. That is the subject of the testimony. You see this in @Psalm 2: 7, 8 and @Psalm 118: 25 - 27. The Psalms, properly speaking, close with @Psalm 119, which, in a way, corresponds to @Psalm 1. @Psalm 1 describes and looks for the godly man, and in @Psalm 119 the godly man is found. @Psalm 118 corresponds to @Psalm 2. @Psalm 2 celebrates the coming of the Son of God into the world, "I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee". That clearly refers to the incarnation of Christ, His coming into the world. He was immediately claimed by Jehovah as His Son. That comes out
{59}
in the announcement of the angel to the virgin Mary, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee". He was not born according to nature, but by the power of the Spirit of God, and for that reason He was to be called the Son of God. That is prophetically spoken of in @Psalm 2. He was begotten by the Spirit of God in time. Well now, in @Psalm 118 we get His coming again into the world. When the Lord was in Jerusalem for the last time He said, "Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord" (@Matthew 23: 39). The Lord quoted @Psalm 118, which is evidently to be fulfilled at the coming again of Christ. Thus in the beginning of the Psalms we have the first coming of Christ, His incarnation celebrated, and in the last of the Psalms, with the exception of one, that is, @Psalm 119, His coming again to His people is celebrated. They will say, "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord"; they did not say it when the Lord came into Jerusalem the first time; but the time will come when it will be said. So we get what may be called the testimony, the celebration of Christ prophetically not only in incarnation, but in His coming again into Jerusalem.
I have referred to that in order to show the scope of the Psalms, that is, that they properly embrace a period from the first coming to the second coming of the Lord. Now in @Psalm 8 we find the "all things" which are put under the Son of man. In @John 1: 48 - 51 Nathanael recognised Christ according to @Psalm 2, that is, the Son of God and the King of Israel; but the Lord Jesus speaks of "greater things", that is, the "all things" that are spoken of in @Psalm 8 -- the "all things" that are put under the Son of man.
{60}
The great importance of that psalm to my mind is as showing that the thoughts of God have reference not simply to the earth, but to heaven, that is, to "all things".
I pass on to @Psalm 22: 22. Here we get another great point. @Psalm 2 is the introduction of Christ in incarnation. In @Psalm 8 we have seen "all things" put under the Son of man, the greater things to which the Lord refers in @John 1. Now in @Psalm 22 we get the idea of the revelation of God, the declaration of the Father's name. We find that fulfilled in @John 20. The Lord in resurrection declares His name; and it is a great principle in regard of Christ, that in Him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; that means, so far as I understand it, that in Christ God is brought into contact with man.
I pass on to Psalm @40: 6 - 9. All I have spoken of so far in regard to Christ is what one may call introductory. Now, we have that which corresponds with what was before us last time; we get here the true ark of the covenant. You could not conceive anything more vitally important than the ark of the covenant, that in which everything is secured for God and for man. The covenant is the disposition of God toward men; and until the rights of God are recognised by man nothing can possibly be right. Now God has taken His own means to secure that; everything is secured for God in the ark of the covenant. When the Lord became Man all the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in Him bodily; but there was another point in connection with Him, that is, the law of God was in His heart, as the tables of stone were placed in the ark. The ark typified Christ; when He became Man the law of God was in His heart, that He might make that law to be the law of the universe. The meaning and force of God's covenant is that man may answer
{61}
to God. As regards the law no one but One who is love could command love; the fact of God commanding man to love his neighbour as himself proved that God was love. God is love, and therefore has the right to demand love. His righteousness is that He has the right to demand it. But to demand love is one thing, to secure it another. The mind of God is that He is to be loved, and that man shall love his neighbour as himself, and God intends to have that mind effectuated; He has taken His own means to bring it about, and His means is seen in the ark of the covenant. Christ has come in to meet the transgressions under the first covenant, but also to make the law of God to be the law of the moral universe: that is, that men may love God with all their heart and their neighbour as themselves. This is verified in Christians at the present time. The righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in them "who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit". One word as to how that is carried into effect. I should speak of a covenant as an expression of disposition, very much like a man's will. In a will a man makes known his disposition; if he be a man of property he does this in the disposition of his property. But if a man has property to leave he should have those to whom to leave it; therefore, in a sense, you get two parties to the covenant -- the heirs and the testator. Christ is testator. Another point comes in: suppose a man to be possessed of large property, with many people to come into it, what would be wanted in human things would be a capable lawyer who should have everything in his hands, and possess the confidence of those who should inherit the property; that gives me the idea of the mediator -- one perfectly conversant with the property and the mind of the testator, and at the same time knowing those who are to come into the property so that he
{62}
can properly represent them. That is what we get in Christ. On the one hand Christ is conversant with the mind of God, because of what He is, and with all that into which man is to come according to the thought of God; but He is also Mediator, in the sense that He can represent those who are to come into the property. The covenant in that way is established in Christ. He not only represents God, "In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", but He represents the heirs and has the ability to conform those to Himself. That is what we see in Christ. He is the Ark of the covenant and at the same time the Mediator, and hence it is that God really has everything in His own hands. In that way God is able to carry out His purpose to fill the universe. The Ark of the covenant is the great instrument in the hand of God to effectuate all His will. I cannot conceive anything much more important than to see how God has established and effectuated the covenant in Christ Himself; the law of God is in His heart with capability to make that law to be the law of the universe. That is what we get, I take it, brought before us in @Psalm 40, "I come to do thy will".
We will pass on now to a psalm in the second book, @Psalm 68: 18, 19. Any one with intelligence can see the connection of this psalm with that of which I have already spoken. This psalm brings before us the great subjugating power. Christ first descended into the lower parts of the earth, as in @Psalm 16. Here it is, "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts in man". He has taken captivity out of the hand of the enemy; but not that alone, He has received gifts in order that He might confer gifts on man, and gifts are connected with the subduing power which resides in Christ. I trust we all are subdued to Christ, and if so it is
{63}
through the agency of the gifts. So you get a reference of the gifts here to Israel, for the rebellious also, to what end? That the Lord God may dwell among them. As before said, in @Psalm 8 we have the thought of "all things", the greater things of which the Lord speaks in @John 1, all in the heavens and the earth put under the Son of man according to the divine will; then we have all the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in Christ bodily; then the true Ark of the covenant by whom God will effectuate everything; now we get here the subjugating power, the Spirit, which Christ has received in order that He may confer it on man, so that men may be subdued to Himself. When here on earth Christ subdued by the influence He exercised; now He subdues by the Spirit. So in the world to come, the Lord God will dwell in the universe because all is subdued to Christ, and the Spirit is the power for that.
Now pass on to a psalm in the third book, @Psalm 78: 67 - 72. The importance of this passage may not be seen at first sight, it is in that you get the ark of the covenant identified with Mount Zion. Nothing can be more vitally important than that. We read in @Hebrews 12, "Ye are come unto mount Zion". This refers to what took place in connection with David. One thing which David did was to bring the ark to Mount Zion. God had allowed the ark to be taken by the Philistines, Israel's glory was delivered into the enemy's hands, it was a dark day for Israel. "Their priests fell by the sword; and their widows made no lamentation". The widows died too -- it was a day of death and darkness; the priesthood had entirely failed; Eli died, the ark was taken, and every link with God broken. It pointed on to that which really took place in the crucifixion of Christ; every link with God, so to speak, was broken by the crucifixion of Christ, but
{64}
God was behind all. He gave the enemies no peace. Mount Zion represents a most important principle connected with the ark of the covenant that "His mercy endureth for ever". It is the principle of the sovereignty of mercy. I look upon Mount Zion as representing a risen Christ. Men lost Christ and everything connected with Him when they crucified Him, but God gave Christ back in resurrection in the virtue of redemption. I believe that to be the most important principle in connection with the ark of the covenant, and it is the way by which we come in. Christ is the true Ark, the law of God is within His heart, and He has subjugating power; but a door must be opened for man, and God has opened that door for man by Mount Zion. Hence "the grace of God which bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men", Jew or Gentile.
We pass on now to @Psalm 101: 1 - 8; also @Psalm 102: 23 - 28. In @Psalm 101 I take it we have Christ, as the true David, coming into David's house and David's city. Having established the principle of Mount Zion, Christ comes in to take possession, and, as a principle of God's government, lawlessness will not be tolerated. He takes away the sin of the world. The psalm brings before us the principles of His government. He has loved righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows. When He comes into David's city there is no longer the toleration of wickedness or slander. Then in @Psalm 102 we have, at the close, the recognition of the suffering and humiliated One as being essentially God. He is "the same". This is a remarkable expression employed in Scripture; everything else may pass away. The heavens may be rolled up, and the earth pass away; but He is the same, and His years have no end.
I refer to two psalms in the fifth book; @Psalm 110: 1 - 4,
{65}
and in that connection @Psalm 118: 26. I was alluding last time to a very important point for us, that is, that in Christ the priest has touched the ark of the covenant, a thing that was entirely impossible in the days of Israel. The high priest would not have dared for a moment to touch the ark of the covenant. But Christ is not only the ark of the covenant, He is the priest, after the order of Melchisedec, who has entered in. I want you to apprehend the force of that morally, approach is equal to revelation. In the mercy seat we get the revelation of God's disposition, and approach is equal to that because the priest is as great as the ark. Jehovah has said to David's Lord, "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool" (@Psalm 110: 1). There it is He is saluted as priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Believers are, by the Spirit, kindred to the High Priest. "Through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father".
All closes in the great climax, which is the coming of Christ, and His being received with acclamation in the very place where He was rejected. In that place they will say, "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord", and the meaning of that is, to carry out the purpose of God to dwell in all. That is the reason for which Christ comes out, to accomplish and display the universe of bliss, in which God is to dwell, and where all will be blessed according to God. That is the testimony in the Psalms. It was foreshadowed in the tabernacle of the testimony, it is not difficult to see the thought, like a golden thread, running through these books of psalms. What I have said is imperfect enough, but it will give you the idea, and I trust it will tend to establish you in the faith. It is wonderful to see a book written by a great number of persons, in different countries and times, intended for every
{66}
class of people, for every time, and every part of the world; such a compilation as it is, yet the testimony of God pervading it, and when you know what the testimony of God means, then you have the key to every part of the Scriptures. You can understand the Pentateuch, the Psalms, and the Prophets, "they are they which testify of me". It is a very poor sketch I have given you, but do not let it pass by, let these things occupy your attention. You have the Bible in your hands, fill up the thought for yourself. But above all, the one thing which I would like to leave on every mind here is, that Christianity is vitality, and access now to God is as perfect as revelation. I have very often said there are two principles which constitute us worshippers: one is purgation, but the fuller qualification for worship is the appreciation of Christ; if it says "through him" it involves the appreciation of Christ. We are kindred to the High Priest and can approach. May God impress all our hearts with the testimony of the Christ.
{67}
THE PROPHETS
@Isaiah 24: 20 - 23, 25
I feel that I need to make an apology for what I am now about to bring before you, because it will be on prophetic ground, and that is in itself hardly a part of Christian ministry; but the point with me is not to open up prophecy, but to take it up as one great part of the testimony of the Lord. That must be my justification. I shall have to pass over the ground very rapidly because prophecy is a large subject. I only seek to give a general idea. My point is to show what is stated in @Revelation 19: 10 that "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy". You will never understand prophecy if you do not take that into account. It is a saying of the Spirit of God, not of man. All that I have taken up hitherto has been in connection with the testimony of our Lord. I have sought to show that the testimony of the Christ is that which prevails through the entire Scriptures: not simply of Christ personally, or of what He is in relation to us, but in relation to "all things". "He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things". I have taken up this thought in connection with the books of Moses, and with the Psalms, now I want to show the same thing in the prophets. I hang all on the expression, "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy". I would offer a remark in regard to the meaning and power of the name Jesus. The angel, in announcing His birth, told Joseph "his name shall be called Jesus"; and the reason given for it was "for he shall save his people from their sins". The meaning of the name
{68}
is "Jehovah, saving". You have to bear in mind that the name carries that import.
There are three great principles which appear in the Old Testament. The first definite thought on the part of God is that of blessing. It came out at the beginning, and much more definitely with Abraham. The character of the promises to Abraham was blessing. The way by which God would accomplish the blessing came out only dimly, but God made known His purpose. Then in connection with Israel we get two great thoughts, first that God would dwell; we have had that before us previously, in connection with the tabernacle of the testimony and the ark of the covenant. There must be some mediatorial means by which God could dwell, and the tabernacle set forth what that would be. Then the third great thought, in connection with David, is the throne of God. You will see that these three thoughts are taken up pretty much in the prophets. It is curious that in the prophets there is as much or more about God dwelling than about God reigning. The general idea in the prophets is that God is going to assume the kingdoms for Himself, but in view of God dwelling. The way in which God comes in to bless is really by dwelling. If God dwells, it cannot be otherwise than that there should be blessing. So, at the present time, if we know anything about the house of God, it is a place of blessing, and a man ought to know how to behave himself in it. God does not dwell really in the universe until the curse is removed. When the curse and death are removed then God takes up His abode to bless. At the present time Jew and Gentile are built together for a habitation of God by the Spirit. If we realised the true character of the house of God in the present time, if there were a full recognition of the presence of the Spirit, we should be very conscious of the
{69}
blessing of God. God dwells in order that He may make us conscious of the reality of His favour. Blessing means God bringing Himself near to man that His favour may be known. There will be what is spoken of in the Psalms -- a night in God's anger, but a lifetime in His favour.
I just refer for a moment to what has already come before us, that is, that the great central point in the books of Moses is @Exodus 25, where God gave directions in regard to the construction of the tabernacle, that God might dwell among Israel. I think it is the first time that you really get a complete idea of the testimony. You get many things leading up to that. It has been said that Genesis is a book of roots, of which you get the full-blown fruits in the Revelation, Scripture begins with the roots, but it brings before us the fruits. We get detail in Genesis, parts of God's purpose, but no complete setting forth of the testimony of God until the ark of the covenant, then we have an idea of the testimony of God in its completeness, and a very wonderful thing it is. That there should be a universe in which God will dwell, and which God will fill with blessing, is a wonderful conception. The means by which God will do it are seen in the ark of the covenant and the mercy seat.
In the Psalms I touched on two main points: the one, Christ coming down, and the other Christ going up; each has its own particular significance. In @Psalm 40 we have the thought of Christ coming down: "I come to do thy will". "A body hast thou prepared me". "Thy law is within my heart". The law which Israel broke was in the heart of Christ that He might make that law, on the ground of mercy, to be the law of the universe. The covenant is made good in Christ. The ark of the covenant really becomes the new covenant. Then in @Psalm 68 we get another thought, and that
{70}
is, "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts in man". It is not Christ coming down or out, but going up on high. So too in @Psalm 110, "Sit thou at my right hand". The two things are brought together in Christ, the Ark of the Covenant and the Priest. Hence we have the pledge of blessing, not only revelation but approach, and the approach is equal to the revelation. Christ has come out to reveal God to us in the purpose of His love, and now through Jesus "by one Spirit we have access to the Father". All that is foreshadowed in the Psalms. It is on the lines of the tabernacle of the testimony. I come now to the prophets, and I am obliged to take up so much detail that I feel in a sense ashamed. I want to give you two or three main thoughts in connection with the prophets. The first I speak of is the destruction of the Babylonish world system. That is one thought which prevails through the prophets, "The Lord shall punish the host of the high ones on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth". This takes in not only the world system in its ramifications, but that by which it is governed. There cannot be a doubt that the present world system is maintained by the power of evil which exists in heaven. We are told who is the god and prince of the world, but God intends to break to pieces the whole system from top to bottom; that is one thing in prophecy. But I speak of another point: God intends to reconstitute the world according to Himself. He intends to make Jerusalem the centre and joy of the earth. He intends to establish Mount Zion, and to make Judah and Israel the vessel of blessing in the midst of the earth; that is another great point. Jehovah is coming in to reign Himself, to assume the kingdom, not only the kingdom in regard to Israel, but as King of the whole earth. In connection
{71}
with that there is another important point, and that is, that God will dwell; and as I said before, that is a thought almost more prevalent in the prophets than even that of God reigning. If God did not reign you can understand that He could not dwell. Everything on earth must be subject to divine rule if God is to dwell, that is evident; but if God dwells then He commands blessing. His dwelling will command universal blessing. It says in @Psalm 133, "There the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore". I call your attention to these three main points in the prophets.
I touch for a moment on the three great prophets -- Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel. The great thought in Isaiah is that God in His faithfulness reverts, after her warfare, to Jerusalem. Then in Jeremiah the thought is that God establishes the new covenant. That brings in Christ, as the expression of His mercy. Israel will come in, as we are told in @Romans 11, on the ground of mercy, through redemption. Ezekiel shows the quickening power of God. This must come in in regard of Israel, as it has come in in regard to us. Where would we have been except for the quickening power of God. And the same will be true in regard of Israel. They must live by the quickening power of God. These three points I take up, and refer to a scripture or two in the three prophets. In @Isaiah 24: 21 - 23, we read, "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited. Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before
{72}
his ancients gloriously". Then there is the answer to it in the next chapter. "Thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth". God exhibits His faithfulness, and reverts to Zion and Jerusalem. This involves the blessing of the nations. God is not content with blessing Israel, but provides for the blessing of the nations in connection with Israel. I dare say the song of Simeon will occur to you, that Christ was to be a light for the revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of God's people Israel. So we get here, "And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all nations. He will swallow up death in victory". That takes place after the resurrection from the dead, as we see from @1 Corinthians 15. So we get the punishment of the high ones on high, the breaking up of the whole Babylonish world system and God reverting to Zion and Jerusalem, and in connection with that the nations coming into the view of God for blessing, and death swallowed up in victory. You could hardly get anywhere a better idea of that which God will effect in the world to come.
I refer now to @Jeremiah 33: 14 - 21. "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will perform that good thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to the house of Judah. In those days, and at that time, will I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land. In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord our righteousness. For thus saith the Lord; David shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;
{73}
neither shall the priests the Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice continually. And the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord; If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season; then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites the priests, my ministers". You must remember that this was written a great many years after David was dead, so that it cannot refer to him personally. It must refer to the true David. If you study these chapters (31 to 33) you will see that the ground on which God is acting is that of the new covenant. He cannot revert to the old covenant because Israel has no footing under it, but God makes a new covenant. You cannot understand the ways of God if you do not apprehend that the new covenant is Christ. That is the pledge and expression of divine mercy. We stand on the ground of divine mercy now. So too will Israel in the future. But Israel was part of a great system -- of a world. Israel was bound up with a system of nations, and these nations were bound up with Israel.
It is a mistake to limit the dealings of God of old to Israel. It has a most important place as a centre, but it was a centre. There were nations around Israel which formed the world that God governed. Moab was one of them. When God brought judgment upon Israel He would not leave the nations unpunished. Judah came under judgment by Nebuchadnezzar. Then God allowed all the nations to come under Nebuchadnezzar, and that world was broken to pieces by the judgment of God. It was swallowed up by Nebuchadnezzar, and in Babylon there was the beginning of the great
{74}
world system which exists at the present time. But in regard to the future it says, "Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter days, saith the Lord". Then you get the same thing in regard of Ammon in chapter 49, and in verse 39 as to Elam. If you read these chapters you will find that while they speak of the destruction of all these nations, they speak of their restoration in the latter days, that is, when Israel is reconstituted and the throne of Jehovah is established.
In the prophecy of Ezekiel one point of interest is, that the prophet is shown a valley full of dry bones. Then the Lord puts the question to him as to whether the bones could live. Well, he could not tell, but what came to pass was that the bones came together; sinews and flesh and skin came up upon them, and breath came into them. It was a vision of the moral or spiritual state of Israel which seemed to make it impossible for them to live. If you look abroad at the Jew in the present day it seems almost impossible that he should be made to live spiritually, but it is not impossible with God. The great point in Ezekiel is the quickening power of God. He will revive the dead bones of Israel, and they will be made to live nationally upon earth. But you get another point, that is, "I will set my glory among the heathen". "The heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity". If Jehovah sets His glory among the heathen, God has not lost sight of the nations. You get in Isaiah the removal of the veil that covers the nations; in Jeremiah the captivity of certain nations is to be reversed in the latter day, and here God sets His glory among the nations; God has a world in view, of which Israel will be the light and the centre. The twelve tribes of Israel will dwell in unity according to @Psalm 133. There will be the candlestick, the light of the earth;
{75}
they will be qualified for that by their knowledge of God.
I have just touched on the three great prophets, now we may turn to @Daniel 7: 27, "And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him". I refer also to verses 13 and 14; "I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed". Verse 27 would seem to indicate that Israel will have a dominion in connection with Christ. Israel are probably the people of the saints of the most High. The kingdom *under the whole heaven* is in view, not the kingdom of Israel. There is a passage in @Revelation 11: 15 which refers to the same thing. It says, "The kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ is come". It is a peculiar expression. There is a world of our Lord and the kingdom of it, and the dominion under the heaven is given to the people of the saints of the most High. The saints in heaven will reign with Christ above. We get the idea of that in the heavenly city. But there is the people of the saints of the most High who will take their dominion from Christ, but previous to that there is the smashing from top to bottom of the whole Babylonish system. In the vision that God gave to Nebuchadnezzar the whole image from top to bottom was in the end broken to powder. God is going to punish the host of high ones on high, and the kings of the earth upon the
{76}
earth. I refer to @Hosea 2: 19 - 23 to show you the connection of the heavens and the earth. Jehovah says, "I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they shall hear Jezreel". This evidently indicates connection between heaven and earth. Jezreel is a symbolic name given to Israel.
I pass on to Joel. The heathen are judged, and, according to what we get in Matthew, the goats are separated from the sheep. But there is the idea that Jehovah will dwell. "I am Jehovah your God dwelling in Zion". The practical result is that living waters go out from Jerusalem. You get the same thought in the prophet Ezekiel. Now if you look at @Amos 9: 11: "In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old". I refer to Amos because it brings in again the thought of the heathen -- there are the heathen who are called by Jehovah's name, they are to be possessed by Israel. Israel is to have the kingdom, as we read in Daniel. The passage is quoted by James, @Acts 15. In Micah the nations, instead of being marked by self-assertion, are brought into their true place in relation to Jehovah. Then in regard to Israel, "He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea. Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old". Then in Zephaniah prominence is given to the thought of Jehovah dwelling. "Jehovah thy God in the midst of thee is mighty".
I pass on for one moment to what are called the post-captivity prophets. In @Haggai 2: 9 we read,
{77}
"The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former". The verse should read, "The latter glory of this house". I might have read verses 3, 6, 7, 8: not only the earth but the heavens shall be shaken; not only the desire of Israel but the desire of all nations shall come. It presents this to us in connection with the rebuilding of the temple in that day -- the people had been slack -- the admonition comes to build, to go on with the work. The prophet presents the idea of the latter glory of the house, and that Jehovah would dwell there, and His presence would insure peace. Now in Zechariah you get a different point; the presence of Jehovah will be the great test of the nations (@Zechariah 14: 16, 17). If they do not go up to the feast of tabernacles they get no rain. Rain is looked upon in Scripture as a mark of God's favour, and the nations get no mark of God's favour unless they acknowledge Jehovah reigning in Zion. Haggai brings in the thought of God's dwelling, and the latter glory of the house, but His presence is the test of the nations in Zechariah. One more thought in @Malachi 4: 2, "But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall". This is the crown. There is one thought to which I should have referred in the prophet @Micah 4: 1 - 4. It is a very important passage showing what Jerusalem will be to the nations: they will go up to Jerusalem to learn the law of Jehovah, and the result will be peace and blessing and security upon earth. But in the last three prophets it is interesting to see that in two the great point is the dwelling of Jehovah, and in the last one, Malachi, it is the Sun of righteousness. Christ will come in as the true Ark of the Covenant. Now *we* anticipate all that I have spoken of, the fact of God dwelling and reigning; and the blessing
{78}
in connection with the dwelling of God is made good to us by the Spirit of God in the midst of a very contrary world, where everything is confusion and perverseness. The Spirit brings in all the good of what is to come that we may become acquainted with God and with His ways and purposes, for the righteous are to shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father; that is the place of the church; it is going to exercise the greatest influence in regard to all that is here upon earth; the heavens will hear the earth, they are to be brought into conjunction, the heavenly city is to be the light of the whole earth, the nations will walk in the light of it, and the kings of the earth will bring their glory and honour unto it. We want understanding in the testimony of our Lord; to get a comprehensive view of Scripture, we need the gracious service of the Lord to open our understanding that we may see that the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. It is a wonderful thing to think of there being a time when God will take in hand the whole universe, when it will be illuminated by the light and glory of God; and by the very fact of His dwelling God will command blessing, then all evil will be subjugated -- death will be swallowed up in victory. But I should be sorry to occupy the attention of Christians with prophetic truth. Prophecy is a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn and the day-star arise in your hearts. What we want is that which will enable us to understand anything and everything, that is, Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith. Then we shall have our feet firmly planted in the testimony of our Lord. May God grant that we may be according to Christ here. If the righteous are to shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father, we ought to be shining morally now; the only way in which that can be attained is by Christ dwelling in our hearts.
{79}
THE GOSPELS
@1 Timothy 3: 14, 15
I have read this passage as introductory to what I want to speak of now. My object is to continue the thought of the testimony, taking it up in connection with the New Testament. Hitherto we have been occupied with the Old Testament, that is, with the aspects in which the testimony of God comes out there. It is very important that we should apprehend what comes out in the New Testament, for this reason, that while in times gone by the testimony was figurative or prophetic, the foundation of everything has now been laid. Christ has come, and has accomplished redemption; He has been exalted to the right hand of God to fill all things, and now the Holy Ghost has come. Well, that is an immense advance on the Old Testament, so that things are not spoken of figuratively or prophetically now, but as established. They are not yet displayed, though the moment is appointed for the appearing; but they are established. There is a remarkable passage in @Hebrews 12: 22 - 24. It says, "But ye are come unto mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel". This presents the contrast between what is true now in believers and what was true in Israel. Israel came to Mount Sinai, the mount that might be touched; we are said to have come to Mount Zion and to a great
{80}
many other things too. We could not be said to have come to them if they were not there. The Spirit of God does not of course speak of material but of moral things. They are what we have to do with now that everything is established in Christ. The moment is appointed for the appearing, but the present is a time of testimony. The testimony instead of being figurative or prophetic is of that which God has established in Christ.
I refer briefly to what we have already dwelt upon: that testimony through Scripture invariably has reference to that which is to be displayed. The time of testimony and of the appearing are both spoken of in the New Testament. I want to show you the things spoken of typically and prophetically in the Old Testament, now established in Christ. The New Testament does not speak of different things from the Old Testament, but it shows you all established in Christ. Hence the testimony of the present time is not only of Christ, but of all that which God has been pleased to establish in Him. Until Christ came nothing could be established, there was not a suitable vessel or head. Now everything is established in Christ, and that is the testimony. The Holy Ghost has come down to report the glory and place of Christ at the right hand of God, and the fact of everything being established in Him; and that is the testimony at the present time. The church is really the depositary and vessel of the testimony; hence it has a very important place. I think we get the thought of this in the passage I read in the Epistle to Timothy, "which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth". The testimony is the truth, and the church the pillar and ground of the truth.
I will touch in a few words on the points which have come before us previously. I spoke of three
{81}
divisions in the Old Testament sanctioned by God Himself. It has been truly said that the great witness to the Old Testament is the Lord Himself. If you discredit the Old Testament you invalidate and falsify the words of the Lord -- a very insidious mode of attack on Christ. Men do not quite care to do this openly through the New Testament, so they attack Christ through the Old Testament, to which Christ is the witness. If Christ is witness, as He is to every part of the Old Testament, then if you invalidate the testimony you invalidate Christ. We have to be on the alert, we are not, as the apostle said, ignorant of the enemy's devices. The three divisions to which I referred in the Old Testament are well known, that is, the law of Moses, and the Psalms and the prophets. The Lord took up these three divisions, and expounded to the disciples in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself. Therefore I was justified in asserting that you must find the testimony of Christ in each of these divisions. I pointed out in regard to the first division that the central point is the tabernacle and its furniture; the tabernacle was the tabernacle of testimony. The testimony of God was figuratively in the tabernacle. Then in regard to the Psalms. They occupy us much more with the history of Christ. We get Christ come out from God to reveal God. Then the service of Christ; so long as He was here upon earth He was the preacher of righteousness and faithfulness. Then we have the accomplishment of redemption, "I come to do thy will". He does the will of God, and is seen in that way as the Ark of the Covenant. Then He is raised and exalted, and being exalted He receives gifts and sheds them forth, and in result He comes again into this world. That is the history of Christ as found in the Psalms. Now as to the prophets, I refer again to an expression in the Revelation,
{82}
that is, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. The significance of the name Jesus is Jehovah saving. To sum up what we get in the prophets: we have God coming in to break up the existing system of the moral universe both in heaven and on earth; He is going to punish the host of the high ones on high and the kings of the earth upon the earth. But that is only one side, that is, what is going to be brought to nought; we get the other side, that is, God is going to save His people, that is, Israel, and to re-establish Zion. We have come to Mount Zion; He is going to make Zion His dwelling-place, to take up the kingdoms of the earth and to dwell, in order that He may accomplish the blessings which have been promised; so we have the assumption of the kingdoms and the re-establishment of Zion.
I pass on to the gospels. I maintain that everything that comes out in the gospels is in perfect accord with what went before. I want to present to you in the gospels the confirmation and establishment of all that was previously spoken of. There is just one other point, a very important one, namely, that the Lord passed everything on to the disciples. The great salvation began to be spoken of by the Lord, then it was confirmed unto us by them that heard. At the close of each gospel we see that what Christ had been doing Himself He passed on to the disciples. At the present time the church has come in, and has its place as the pillar and ground of the truth. I take up first in that connection the Gospel of John; the arrangement of the gospels as we have them in Scripture is, of course, only arbitrary, there is no particular purpose; morally I think you have to begin with John. We see there the ark of the covenant and the mercy seat; that is the basis of all God's ways. I want to make the point plain if I can. What I understand the ark
{83}
of the covenant to point to is God glorified in man. The tables of the first covenant were put in the ark, and it is in the true Ark of the Covenant that the will of God has been done. Now that is essentially what appears in the Gospel of John. Christ glorified God on the earth; but there was in Him a greater thing, He was the Word, the perfect expression of all that was in the mind of God in regard of man. The love of God had its perfect expression in Christ as a Man down here. He is the true Ark of the Covenant and the Mercy Seat -- the point where God has put Himself in communication with man. The Gospel of John is the foundation, so to speak, of all. Other things, equally important, come out in the other gospels; but the Gospel of John is the foundation. Have you ever noticed how prominent in the Gospel of John is the thought of the Son of man; and it is in the Son of man that God has put Himself in communication with man. You get remarkable statements connected with the Son of man; to begin with, "Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man". Then "the Son of man which is in heaven". Then "What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" The question is raised by the people, "Who is this Son of man?" The Son of man was an enigma to them; the Son of man is really everything, but you cannot understand anything about the Son of man if you do not apprehend that the Son of man is the Son of God. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the *Son of man* be lifted up: that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God so loved the world, that he gave his *only begotten Son*, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". The Son of man is the only begotten Son of God, the last Adam,
{84}
the true Ark of the Covenant, the One in whom God has been glorified. "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him (that is, in the Son of man), God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him". We see Christ as the Ark of the Covenant. He is the perfect expression of God's disposition toward man. At the same time He is the Mercy Seat, because in Him God has put Himself in communication with man. His body was the temple, and the temple means that the oracles of God are there. "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily".
I pass on to Matthew. Undoubtedly the thought in Matthew is very much more of the kingdom, that is, administration and light. You can hardly get any true idea of the kingdom that does not take in these two thoughts. In Matthew we get the thought of the righteous shining forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father (@Matthew 13: 43). Now almost the last prophetic word in the Old Testament is, "But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings", and the Gospel of Matthew connects itself with that word. In Matthew we have the Sun of righteousness, and the two principles of administration and light are brought in. They are two great points connected with the kingdom. We certainly get in the sun both light and warmth, but then also by the sun everything in the universe is held in its place; that gives an idea of the administration that resides in Christ. The kingdom of heaven is seen in Christ exalted; we come under the sway of that which God has established in heaven. Christ having accomplished redemption as the foundation, everything is established in heaven in the Sun of righteousness; we have in Christ that power of administration that can hold everything
{85}
in its own appointed place, while at the same time He can afford light and warmth to the whole moral system.
Now I touch on the other two gospels, which present things more on man's side. In the Gospel of Luke we see Christ much more on the priestly side, on the part of man. What I mean by that is this: We have Him from the beginning, humanly; the circumstances connected with His birth are given. Great pains are taken, so to speak, to bring out the reality of His birth. We get the same thing in connection with His resurrection. The Lord assures the disciples by various means that He is still a real Man. The end of all is that He goes up as Priest in the act of blessing; blessing really belongs to the priest; and from above He was to send the promise of the Father, fulfilling what we get in @Psalm 68, "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts in man". Having received gifts in man, He would shed forth those gifts. In Luke we get Christ as the vessel of reconciliation. The prodigal was reconciled to his father; he was presented to the father in the best robe. It has been said that all those things which were put on the prodigal formed no part of the prodigal's first inheritance; when he came back to his father he was invested in them. I take it that the object was that the complacency of the father in the prodigal might be complete. Christ has become Man to that end. At the birth of the Lord Jesus the song of the angels was "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men"; it could only be by Christ; He was the vessel of good pleasure, His birth was the pledge and sign of good pleasure in men. You may carry that thought all through the gospel; Christ is the point of complacency, and in the end He is received up; God is complacent in
{86}
man; reconciliation has come to pass in Christ, for there is a Man in whom God is infinitely complacent. He was received up in the act of blessing others. He had drawn them to Himself; He blesses them and so is parted from them; they are to wait in Jerusalem until they should receive the promise of the Father. He goes up on high as the accepted Man, the blessed vessel of reconciliation. When the work of offering was done, the offering Priest goes to the right hand of God to be saluted as High Priest, and to receive gifts that He may shed forth these gifts on men. That is what we have in the Gospel of Luke.
In Mark we have the brief period of Christ's sojourn on earth as the servant. Very many things had apparently lapsed in the ways of God. For instance, there had been four or five hundred years without any prophetic testimony. Israel had largely passed out of sight; man generally was hid in the darkness and degradation of idolatry. The temple of God had become a den of thieves. Now in the gospels we see all these taken up afresh; they are revived, but in a different way; they are revived in Christ. In Matthew we get the true Israel; in Mark the prophetic word; in Luke man is brought into view, and in the Gospel of John we get the true temple. There is the revival of all that had been in connection with Israel, and it goes beyond Israel to man. In Mark Christ is seen as the servant ministering the glad tidings. And what were the glad tidings? The glad tidings could only be Christ Himself; but at the same time He was the servant-prophet preaching the word and casting out demons, and at the close of the gospel He goes up to the right hand of God, and the disciples are sent forth to preach the glad tidings to every creature, and the Lord works with them and confirms the word by signs following.
{87}
That is the light in which Christ is presented in the gospels, fulfilling all that we get in the Old Testament. You have the account of Christ, that had been set forth prophetically, fulfilled in the gospels. We have "Immanuel, God with us". At the same time we have what was set forth in the ark of the covenant established in Christ. Now I want to give an idea of the greatness of the system which is contemplated in the gospels. That system takes in not only earth but heaven. In the Gospel of John Jesus speaks of the heavens being opened and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man. It is evident that the heavens and earth are brought morally into conjunction. Then we have the thought of the Son of man ascending up where he was before; and, in the Gospel of Luke, there is another point in connection with heaven, referred to in the prophets: the Lord Jesus said, "I saw Satan as lightning fall from heaven". The power of evil is to be cast down from heaven, and all things delivered to Christ; this last is seen in Matthew. The point in Matthew is the kingdom of heaven, the universal moral sway of that which God has established in heaven: at the close of the gospel the Lord says, "All authority is given to me in heaven and upon earth". What I have said will convey to you the truth that the gospels not only contemplate the blessing of man upon earth, but of all things being taken up, so to speak, for the abode of God, all things brought under the Son of man, the power of evil cast out of heaven, and the angels attendant on the Son of man; everything brought under the moral sway and administration, and into the light, of that which God has been pleased to establish in heaven. You can hardly understand the kingdom of heaven if you do not take it into account in that way. Administration is committed to the church and to Israel, and light is conveyed
{88}
through both. Now I will refer to the way in which the Lord passes all things on to the disciples. They had a remarkable place. In Matthew's gospel the disciples are to be teachers; in the Gospel of Mark they are to be preachers, in the Gospel of Luke they are to be witnesses, and in John they have a mission, and a remarkable mission too. The Lord Jesus breathed on them and said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost". Then He said, "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you". I have no doubt the Father sent the Son to be the beginning of something entirely new. It is remarkable in the writings of John how we get "What was from the beginning". Christ is indeed the beginning. The fathers knew Him that was from the beginning. Christ came here, not simply as the witness of the righteousness and faithfulness of God, but as the beginning of the creation of God. This was inaugurated morally by the coming of Christ Himself, but then the Lord Jesus said, "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you"; He was about to ascend, and they were to be instruments to establish that which was connected with Him ascended to the right hand of God. In Luke they were witnesses of His death and resurrection, and are to preach the import of these. It is of great importance that they were witnesses of the facts. The Lord says you are witnesses of these things. Then in the Gospel of Mark the Lord Himself had first been the servant and the preacher, and they were now to preach the glad tidings to every creature. That was their commission in the Gospel of Mark, and to baptise. In Matthew they are looked upon as a remnant of Israel, and were to teach the nations to observe all that which Christ had commanded them. I think you will admit that we get in the gospels the establishment, confirmation and setting forth of all that which had been spoken of in the Old Testament.
{89}
There is a point where everything is established. Redemption is accomplished, and everything established in Christ. It is that which marks this moment. Another time I hope to take up the gift of the Spirit, as bringing in the witness of Christ at the right hand of God, and what we get in that connection. The gospels bring before us that which Christ was here upon earth; but if you contemplate Christ in any light, He is necessarily the point where everything for God is established and confirmed. My object is to show you the unity of the testimony of Scripture. Scripture contains its own evidence. People do not argue whether the sun shines or not, they know very well it shines: and if men want evidence of the authenticity of Scripture the great point is to find that evidence in Scripture itself. There is nothing more important to apprehend than the unity and perfectness of Scripture testimony. The Old Testament does not speak of one thing and the New of another. The Old Testament speaks of all that which was before God, and which God intended to establish, and will establish; it speaks of it figuratively and prophetically, and in the New Testament every thought in the Old Testament is established and confirmed in Christ, every type fulfilled. Christ is gone up on high for the moment and is at the right hand of God, and the Spirit is given. You may say, What do we want to know all these things for? Well, how are we to grow as Christians; what is to be the principle of growth? I know of no principle except that of which the apostle speaks. "Till we all come to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". I have endeavoured to point out the unity
{90}
of the faith. There are not different faiths presented in Scripture, we are to come to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God. I pray God to give understanding and enlargement so that you may be able to take in the extent of that which is presented to us in the Scriptures in regard to Christ, and all that hangs on it; the universe in which God will dwell, and which of necessity will be filled with life and blessing. The world at the present time is filled with lust and pride. God has before Him a universe which He intends to make His dwelling-place; and everything in it will take its character more or less from the One who dwells in it. I think we ought to have it before our minds. We are left here in the moment of testimony that we should bear witness, and are morally apart from the present course of things because we are in the light of that which God has established in Christ.
{91}
THE EPISTLES
@1 John 5: 9 - 13; @Ephesians 3: 14 - 21; @Revelation 21: 9 - 11, 22
What we have seen hitherto has been the testimony of God set forth figuratively, or spoken of prophetically, then secured in the Person of Christ Himself. We have now to look at the testimony as secured in the vessel of testimony. Everything for God has begun now. Nothing had really begun in the Old Testament times; Christ came in as the crown of promises, and the Jews were put to the test by Him and failed to answer to it, and all that order of things after the flesh was broken up; but Christ was the beginning. It is said in @Colossians 1, "Who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the pre-eminence". We have come to the beginning, and in that sense to the church, and the church has a very important place as connected with the beginning. It is the vessel of testimony, for every part of the testimony is in some sense deposited in the church. It is our privilege, properly speaking, to know Christ effectively by the Spirit in every light. It is in that point of view that I read the passages before us. The witness to God's Son is that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son. The saints, or the church, are looked upon as an efficient witness. The witness is there. It is the witness which God has witnessed concerning His Son. That is the value of it; it is not concerning us -- God gives no witness concerning us -- but concerning His Son. So in the passage I read in @Ephesians 3. The prayer has reference to what is very vast, that is, every family in heaven and upon earth. It presents a vast scene; but the point of the prayer is that the Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, that the
{92}
church may be competent as a witness, "That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God". This is connected with the glory of God, and every family in heaven and on earth; and if you know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, it is evident you are filled unto all the fulness of God; you are competent as a witness. We have the idea of the church being the vessel of witness down here, and competent to that end. Then I read the passage in Revelation, for there we get not simply the witness in a moral sense, which is the character of the witness at the present time, but another thing, that is, the display. The bride is shown by the angel to John, and he records the vision, and we see what comes out in the bride, the Lamb's wife. The city comes out in heavenly light. It has no temple, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. God does not need to be screened in a temple and they have no need of the light of the sun or of the moon, because "the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof". "And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it"; we see there the connection between the heavens and the earth. The universe of God which God purposes to display comprehends not only earth but heaven. As we read in the prayer in Ephesians, "Every family in heaven and upon earth". I say that much before I come to what is more immediately before me. I take up the light in which Christ is known in the church, because the epistles present to us the way in which Christ is so known. Last time I was dwelling on the gospels, where we have Christ personally on earth, and see everything secured in Him. Now in
{93}
the epistles we are on the ground of the Spirit; it is no longer Christ upon earth, but at the right hand of God, "He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things". And in connection with the Spirit there is the competent vessel of testimony here upon earth, so that it should be true that "this is the witness which God has given concerning his Son". I hope that every one will apprehend the difference of the ground on which we are from that on which we have been before. Evidently the presence and continuance of the Spirit must make a vast difference. In connection with the presence of the Spirit is the equally important fact, that is, Christ at the right hand of God. The apostle says to the Colossians, "Set your mind on things above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God". I think we ought to be as diligent to pay regard to the right hand of God as ever Daniel was to regard Jerusalem. He prayed and gave thanks three times a day, his windows being open in his chamber towards Jerusalem. Well, evidently, we ought to regard the right hand of God; the right hand of God is really where our Jerusalem is.
Now I touch shortly on what has been before us. In regard to the tabernacle of testimony, I pointed out that before the detail of the tabernacle is given we get the detail of the furniture. Where the furniture was to be deposited, that is, the tent of testimony, was important; but what was of primary importance was the furniture of the tabernacle. The habitation of that furniture might be changed and was changed, for eventually the ark of the covenant and the mercy seat found their place in the temple that Solomon built; they found a different location, but for the moment they were placed in the tabernacle. That is what I look upon as being the central point in the communications
{94}
to Moses; it indicated what was before God, that is, that God had before Him a way by which He would dwell in the universe, in order that He might fill it with light and life and blessing. The central point in the historical books is the history of David. He was God's anointed, God's king, and in a sense God's testimony; I only just touch on that in order to complete the review. David was imperfect, like a man after the flesh, and he came into a great position, where he was almost -- except for the word of God -- an absolute king. The consequence is that very often, in David, we find the testimony obscured; but still, the testimony shone out in David, and there is no moment more important than that when David brought the ark to the city of David. God's testimony is the spirit of the historical books. In speaking of the Psalms, which are largely by the sweet Psalmist of Israel, David, I sought to make plain that we get a complete testimony of Christ as having in the first instance come out from God to reveal God, and to accomplish the will of God, then going to the right hand of God, and eventually returning to be received here upon earth; that is found in the Psalms. Then one word in regard to the prophets, that is, the statement in the Revelation, that the testimony of Jesus (that is, "Jehovah saving") is the Spirit of prophecy. The prophets look on to Jehovah coming in for the salvation of His people, and not only that, but that the dwelling of God may be established in Zion. "Jehovah in the midst of thee is mighty".
Last time I touched on the gospels. We looked at the Gospel of John as the presentation, so to speak, of Christ as the true ark of the covenant and the mercy seat. In Matthew we have the King in a sense, according to the prophet Isaiah, "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given:
{95}
and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace". At the same time He is Immanuel, God with us. What comes to pass is not the establishment of the King in Zion, but the establishment of the kingdom of heaven, and the first to come into the kingdom was a remnant of the Jews; God did not disregard His people. In a certain sense the Jews had Christ within their power for a moment; they said, "This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours"; but then God raised Him from the dead. It became the crucial moment to Israel; but God took care of a remnant, and that remnant was the first to be brought into the kingdom of heaven. The keys of the kingdom were entrusted to Peter; and in the Acts we find a remnant brought in before ever the word went out to the Gentiles.
Now as to the epistles. I do not need to dwell very much on the Acts of the Apostles, because it is a book of transition beginning with the receiving up of Christ and closing with the testimony of God at Rome. It gives us what one may call the movement of the testimony, as the ark of the covenant was carried about from place to place. We get some account of what was preached; the testimony began at Jerusalem, then it went down to Antioch, then it was carried out to the Gentiles, and eventually reached Rome.
I trust I may be helped now in giving you an idea of what comes out in the epistles. I go back for a moment to the thought of the tabernacle. A tabernacle is not an abiding thing. A tabernacle can be taken down. Whenever the children of Israel had to journey, the tabernacle of the testimony had to be taken down and carefully carried; but a change was to come; the tabernacle was
{96}
brought into the land. It first went to Shiloh, but God rejected Shiloh. Ephraim, the leading tribe, broke down; this is a very important point in connection with the ways of God. But God chose Judah and David and Mount Zion, and the point with David was to bring the ark of the covenant to Mount Zion; then David desired to build a permanent habitation for the ark of Jehovah. We find the expression of that in @Psalm 132. David was not allowed to build a habitation because he had been a man of war; but David's son was to build a house for Jehovah. No longer a tabernacle, which can be taken down, but a temple of costly stones, a permanent abode for Jehovah, God of Israel. It was built, there was the change from a tabernacle to a temple. When the Lord Jesus was here He tabernacled with men; but the tabernacle might be taken down, and it was, and gave place, even in Christ Himself, to the thought of the temple. When Christ was here we get for the first time the true temple; what had been previously had been figurative. It had been owned as the temple in a way, but was not the real temple. There was nothing moral in the temple which Solomon built, and a temple in which there is nothing moral cannot really contain God. A church or cathedral may be a very imposing structure in the eyes of man, but it can be nothing whatever to God. What God looked for, I have no doubt, even in connection with the temple, was that there should be the moral element. When the Lord came here in @John 2, He cleansed the temple, for He owned it; but He said, "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up". He spoke of the temple of His body. We have not a tabernacle but a temple. Now there is another point in connection with this -- Christ was the true Son of David. Solomon was the Son of David after the flesh, but the true Son
{97}
of David who was to build God's house was Christ, and what Christ built was not a temple of stones such as Solomon built; He built a temple of living stones. The material was prepared while Christ was here, and when the day of Pentecost arrived, the Spirit descended and there was the formation of the temple of God. The temple in that sense was constructed by Christ, it was really the temple of God; and if so, you can understand that the furniture which was found in the tabernacle has its anti-type in the temple which Christ has built. It is the depository of the testimony of God, but very different from anything which went before. The tabernacle had been the depository of God's testimony. When Christ was here everything was in Him. There could not possibly be anything outside Him. What could have been the value of the material temple when Christ was here? Now He has built the temple, and God is dwelling here by the Spirit. "In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit". Now we have the testimony of God established in a living temple, and that is what marks this present moment off from any which went before it. Of course the moment when the Lord Jesus was here upon earth was a very peculiar moment; but the present is a continuous time, not a brief moment as the presence of Christ upon earth, and what marks it is that the temple of God is here, and the temple is the depository of the testimony of God. Every stone of the temple ought to be instinct with intelligence, because all are living stones. "To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". I am justified in saying that every stone
{98}
ought to be instinct with life. I do not understand life apart from intelligence. The idea of life is not exactly as in a babe; there is life in a babe, but the idea of life is properly connected with a man, where all the faculties are developed. That is what I understand by the apostle's prayer in @Ephesians 3. "That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to apprehend". Evidently the idea in that is intelligence, and then, that you may know "the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God".
Now I touch for a moment very shortly on the light in which Christ is presented to us in the epistles. The Holy Ghost has come down to report the glory of Christ, and the apostles present to us what Christ is now as at the right hand of God. But the light in which Christ is presented in every epistle has reference to things which are to be displayed, and not simply reference to the present time. Thus we know Christ in every light, and are affected by every light in which Christ is presented. There is no light in which Christ is presented in any epistle which is not intended to have its moral effect on us. It is part of our education, so that we may be growing in the testimony, that the testimony may not be obscured. I do not doubt that in a sense David was God's testimony, but in him the testimony was often obscured.
I take up the epistles a little in detail. They may be divided into two parts. There are those which present Christ in regard to existing things, and there are others which present Christ in relation to all that is coming. It is an important division. The epistles which I touch on first are those to the Thessalonians; they present Christ in relation to existing things. They are elementary. They were written to Christians who had recently been converted. On the one hand Christ appears as Saviour,
{99}
and on the other in glory, executing judgment. As we find in other parts of scripture He will appear a second time to those who look for Him without sin unto salvation, He gathers up the harvest in the first epistle. In the second He appears in order to execute judgment, to tread the winepress. That has hardly to do with the ark of the covenant and the mercy seat, with the system of things which God intends to establish; you can easily see the difference that exists between Christ viewed in relation to the existing state of things upon earth, and to the "all things" that are in the purpose of God. Christ will come in power and glory to deal with everything here, God will not entrust that to anybody else: but to view Christ in that light is one thing, to view Him in relation to the "all things" which God is going to display is another thing. But in regard to what I have said, the truth has its bearing as to us. We are waiting for God's Son from heaven to deliver us from the coming wrath. The coming of the Lord means heaven to those who are now waiting for Him. So too in regard to His appearing in glory, we have our part in that too, He is going to be glorified in His saints and to be admired in all those that believe. But Christ is presented in these epistles either as Saviour to reap the harvest, or, on the other hand, to tread "the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God".
Now I touch for a moment on the Epistles of Corinthians. There we get an advance. In the first epistle Christ is seen as the wisdom and the power of God, on the one hand to bring to naught every spiritual influence by which man was dominated, and on the other to establish that which is of God. Therefore the first Epistle to the Corinthians is an immensely important epistle, for in it we see the establishment of the temple of God,
{100}
where the oracles are, and the body of Christ as that by which, through gift, the light is diffused; that is what Christ establishes. I quote two statements in the epistle. The apostle says, "Ye are the temple of God". Then in chapter 12 he says, "Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular". We have thus Christ presented in connection with all things, with what is going to be displayed, and hence the epistle goes on to the resurrection and the last Adam, and tells us how death is to be swallowed up in victory. In the second epistle Christ is seen as the Yea and Amen of the promises of God. Evidently the promises of God refer to what God is going to display. God is to be glorified in regard to His promises. This has its bearing on us, the promises are for glory to God by us. We can enter into the promises in a different way from Abraham, because we are in the light of the new covenant. We know what the disposition of God is toward man in Christ.
I pass on to Galatians; there again Christ is presented in regard to what God is going to display. He is the true Isaac, the seed of Abraham, for the blessing of the Gentiles. "In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed". The promise which was made to Abraham and confirmed to his seed will be fulfilled in the coming day; but what has come to pass now is that the blessing of Abraham has come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus, *that we might receive the promise of the Spirit by faith*. If we have received the Spirit, it is a proof that the blessing of Abraham has come to the Gentiles already. But then it has strictly to be fulfilled, "in thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed". These epistles have to do with Christ as establishing the promises of God.
Now I pass on to another class of epistles which present to us much more what God has ever purposed
{101}
to establish. In that connection I take up Romans. Romans is extremely important, and in connection with Romans I touch on Hebrews; in both I have no doubt we get the true ark of the covenant and the mercy seat. We see the One in whom God vindicates Himself in regard to His righteousness and faithfulness -- that is the great subject of the Epistle to the Romans, God declares in Christ His righteousness and faithfulness, so that on the one hand He may be glorified in regard of all His dealings with man, and on the other hand His faithfulness be vindicated in the fulfilment of the promises. We get another point in Romans too, that Christ is at the right hand of God. He came out as Apostle in order that the righteousness and faithfulness of God might be declared. He is the mercy seat in whom God addresses Himself to man, but He is also the Priest who has accomplished redemption and is at the right hand of God to make intercession for us. The same comes out in a marked way in the Epistle to the Hebrews. He has come out as Apostle that God might approach man, and He has gone in as Priest. He has sat down, when His work of offering was finished, for ever at the right hand of God. I take up the first Epistle of John, as I think it is on the same line; there we have Christ as the true God and eternal life. All these thoughts refer strictly to the day of display; the Priest at the right hand of God refers to the future; He is seated there until His foes are made His footstool. So too in John the true God and eternal life must have reference to the coming age. When Jesus spoke of eternal life He spoke of it as connected with the coming age. His being the true God and eternal life must refer to the time of display. The point before God, which God has made known from the beginning, is His purpose to dwell in the universe in order that man may be
{102}
blessed and brought into the enjoyment of life. John presents Christ as the true God and eternal life, and that has its bearing *now* in regard of us. "He that hath the Son hath life". We anticipate that which is to come.
I take up three other epistles for a moment, Colossians, Ephesians and Philippians. I was saying on one occasion that in connection with the tent of testimony there were two great thoughts. In the ark of the covenant and the mercy seat we get the idea of God's approach to man. Until redemption was accomplished God could not fully approach man, but the idea of approaching man was hid in the ark of the covenant and the mercy seat. But in connection with the tabernacle was another important point, there was the idea of man approaching God. The way into the holiest was not yet manifest, but at all events there was the idea of man approaching God. Once a year the high priest went into the holiest of all, and the sons of Aaron had their part in the ministry of the tabernacle. That presents the idea of man going in.
In Colossians Christ has gone in as Head, is seated at the right hand of God. We are risen with Him and are to set our minds on things above. Romans carries Him to the right hand of God, but Colossians sees Him sitting at the right hand of God. The great High Priest has gone in, and we are associated with Him as Aaron's sons were with Aaron.
In Philippians we get a kindred thought, Christ descended to the shame and reproach of the cross here, but He is highly exalted. The thought of the apostle was to reach Christ where He was. "I press toward the mark for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus".
In Ephesians we have a further thought, that is, Christ has ascended up far above all heavens, that He might fill all things. He is the great Priest who
{103}
descended into the lower parts of the earth in order to complete redemption, and redemption being completed, He has ascended far above all heavens, that He might fill all things; I take it in a priestly way, as Melchisedec blessed Abraham, so Christ will come out as Priest in the ministration of blessing; we are quickened together with Him, raised up and made to sit in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus. I only just touch on the other epistles.
In Peter we have Christ as the Living Stone. Then we get the present bearing of that. So it will have its bearing in regard to the future: "Behold, I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded". Everything will turn on Christ, who is the Living Stone. In the meantime we come to Him and as living stones are built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood. No one can gainsay that the fact of Christ having been planted as chief corner stone in Zion, although a stone of stumbling to the Jews for the time being, involves the establishment of everything in the time to come. In the second epistle of Peter He is the day star in the heart. That means the confirmation of all the word of prophecy. The day star is the harbinger of the Sun of righteousness, who will rise with healing in His wings. What the apostle presses in that epistle is that the vision that they had seen on the mount of transfiguration was the confirmation to them of the truth of the kingdom. "We have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ". All refers to the time of display, but has its bearing on us, for the day has dawned, and the day star has arisen in our hearts. We get another thought in the epistle of James, which is the only other epistle I touch on. We have Christ presented to us there as the Lord of glory;
{104}
the Lord of glory evidently refers to the day of display, and if you have the faith of the Lord of glory you must have done with respect of persons. There will not be very much respect of persons when the Lord of glory is displayed. Men will be reckoned up not according to their fleshly position, but according to what they are morally. God does not look at the outward appearance but at the heart.
There is no light in which Christ is presented to us in any epistle which has not its present bearing upon us. Although the church is the temple of God one cannot say that the temple is yet perfect, the "whole building fitly framed together groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord"; then you get perfection. Then it will be that every stone will be instinct with intelligence. That brings us to the close of Revelation, to the character of the heavenly city; there is no temple there, the Lord God is the temple and the Lamb is the light thereof. It is the dwelling-place of God and the seat of His throne. Every part of the city is radiant with light and intelligence. The testimony of Scripture begins morally with the ark of the covenant, the foreshadowing of God dwelling in the universe in order that He might bring in life and blessing. Scripture ends with the holy city coming down from God out of heaven having the glory of God and her light like unto a stone most precious.
The testimony of Christ is that which binds all Scripture together, and is the most unanswerable witness against every possible attack on it. How could you have the testimony of the Christ pervading every part of a book written by divers people, at divers times, and under diverse circumstances, except as the work of God!
May God be pleased to strengthen us with might in the inner man that we may have the Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith.
{105}
THE TESTIMONY AS OUR BOND
It appears to me a matter of importance that we should understand where we are in relation to all that is around us in Christendom, and why we are there. Many and different causes have operated to bring us where we are, some in the providence of God; but it is only poor work to be there without being able to give a reason for our continuing there. I hope to be able to throw a little light on this matter. The two epistles of Paul to Timothy have been often referred to as justification for our having taken a position outside of the great churches and systems which go to make up Christendom as a whole. And indeed it is a great mercy that these epistles have been given to us. Before touching on them I would refer to the position in which many of us are found, and to the reasons that have tended to bring us there. These may be summed up in one consideration, that is that the form which things have assumed on every hand is a practical falsification of all that the words of the Lord and of the apostles lead us to expect. I am of course aware that I am assuming the right of every Christian to judge all that he finds by Scripture. I might have said the responsibility. If the Spirit of God said "to the law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word it is because there is no light in them", surely we are entitled to bring all things to the same test, and, if need be, to arrive at the same conclusion. I admit the gravity of this, and it ought not to be undertaken in any light spirit, for it may result in the disallowance of many things that are in a sense venerable, and that have held a great place in the minds of many children of God.
What I observe in all around is that the forms into which Christianity has been moulded are not at all
{106}
according to the mind of God as far as that mind has been made known to us; and more, that Scripture gives us a very different estimate from that entertained by men of what Christianity would eventuate in. That which in the eyes of men may appear fair and suitable, may in the eye of God be confusion. The main justification for the forms around is that they are suited to the world as it is now. It can hardly be contended that these forms existed at the outset, but things in the world have greatly changed, and hence the order that existed at the beginning is said to be hardly suited to the changed world. It will be seen that this line of argument assumes that Christianity was intended as a religion for the world, and hence has to be adapted to the changes that take place in the constitution of the world. Now all the scripture writers give us the idea that what was established by apostolic care at the beginning would in the hands of men be corrupted, and they hold out no hope of reparation. The apostle Paul gives us the figure of a great house with vessels in it of every kind, and puts on a man the obligation to purge himself from vessels to dishonour if he would be a vessel meet for the Master's use. So too in the second epistle to the Thessalonians, he shows what had already come in within the limits of professing Christianity, and in what it would eventuate. The apostasy is brought into view. John speaks of its being the last time, and that already there were many antichrists. In the beginning of the Revelation, under the addresses to the seven churches in Asia, he pictures the defection of the church, and so far from there being any hope of amendment, all is succeeded by the judgments that precede the kingdom. Peter in his second epistle pictures the unrighteousness that would be brought in by heretical teachers, and how false principles would work; he too holds out no hope of amendment; there
{107}
remains nothing but the certainty of the kingdom. Jude shows us the working of apostasy, and sees nothing in view but the coming of the Lord with ten thousands of His saints. The testimony of all the writers is concurrent. It will be evident that this view is diametrically opposed to that entertained by the apologists and ministers of the great systems around. They see not ruin or decay, but would rejoice in the place which Christianity has gained in the estimation of men. And yet this is very unreal. Disguised underneath a respect for what has had a great place in the world, and is still useful in a worldly sense, is a profound scepticism as to all that is propounded in Scripture. And this is intelligible, for the mind of man cannot compass the manner of the intervention of God to overthrow all that held in bondage the conscience and mind of man. But the point at which I arrive is this, that if there is this divergence of view, I am entitled to accept the view presented in Scripture, and to come to the conclusion that things around do not answer to the mind of God, and therefore have no claim upon me. Hence I am justified in standing apart from them. At the same time I would do this in all humility, aware that many Christians are still to be found in these associations.
I come now to the epistles to Timothy, to see the light which they afford as to the course which the Christian should take. The point in the two epistles is evidently different. In the first the object of the apostle in writing is that the servant may know how a man should behave himself in the house of God. In the second the point is that the servant should not be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord. I gather from this the great importance of our being in the first place imbued with a true view of the house of God, so that we may have a standard by which to judge of all around; and having and applying this,
{108}
and feeling our obligation to a place of separation, that we should find the special bond that can hold us together under such circumstances. I believe that this is to be found in the testimony of our Lord. If we take our idea of the house of God from the first epistle we shall be bound to confess our inability to find anything that answers to it around. We see in it the saints in their priestly place making prayer and supplication with thanksgiving for all men, for kings and all that are in authority. To do this they must be in a place of moral superiority to all for which they supplicate, whatever this may take in. Then we see men and women relatively in their proper place, the men marked by praying, lifting up holy hands, and the women unnoticeable in modest adornment. It all speaks of moral comeliness. Then there is the care by elders and deacons for the souls and bodies of the believers; and amid such a state of things the voice of the Spirit is heard. Where can this be found in the din and confusion of Christendom. We are compelled to acknowledge that all is ruin. Hence it is that we are confirmed in the place of separation that we have taken. But nothing can be more important than that in that place we should have our minds permeated with true thoughts of what God intended to be the character of His house. And it is to be remembered that the Spirit of God abides here.
But having taken the place of separation, it is important to see that in the darkest and most difficult time there is a bond of surpassing interest that will hold us together, not leading us to form a sect, but holding us in agreement of mind so that we can walk together. For certainly two cannot walk together except they be agreed. I believe that this agreement is to be found in the testimony; we have been accustomed to use this word *testimony* with more or less of vagueness. I would desire to give
{109}
more definiteness to it in our minds. I believe that testimony is always of that which God intends to display. I think it is a principle in the ways of God, that He displays nothing until He has given testimony of it. This is seen in the prophets. Now what God is going to display is comprehended in one word, and that is Christ. Hence Christ is the testimony. In riding into Jerusalem on an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass, the Lord gave testimony to Himself as Zion's King, and He will be displayed in that way. He has now ascended far above all heavens that He may fill all things, and He is to be displayed in that way. The Spirit has brought tidings of Him as there, and this is the testimony. Probably every epistle presents Christ in some light in which He is going to be displayed, and the sum of all gives us the completeness of Christ. The point for us now is that we should be strengthened with all might in the inner man that we may have the Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, so that we may be morally in the testimony. This word covers the gospel and everything. The testimony is not the interest simply of preachers, it is the bond of all saints, and especially in a day when Christianity has assumed the form of a vast pretentious system in the world. We need to be rigidly apart from all that is around, and to be intelligent in every light in which Christ will be displayed. Then it is that there will be real power in the setting forth of the glad tidings of the Christ. The gospel is the interest of all, though all may not be qualified to publish it; and it is the glad tidings of that which is to be displayed.
In making known to us our calling, God has brought to light the extent of His purpose in Christ Jesus, and what marks the One in whom all that purpose is effectuated is that He has annulled death, and brought life and incorruptibility to light. In
{110}
the light and power of this, Christ will be manifested. "By man came death, by man also came the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, so in Christ will all be made alive". The last Adam is a quickening Spirit. He has acquired this place in regard to men by redemption, and will be manifested according to the glory of it. Meanwhile it is the moment of testimony, and therefore of the grace of God, and as we have seen, the testimony is Christ. May God grant that we may be led into greater appreciation of Him, and so into moral accord with Him. "As is the heavenly, such are the heavenly".
{111}
{112}
GRACE -- AS SET FORTH IN CHRIST
@Luke 4: 14 - 22
The subject that I have before me to say a little upon at this time is grace. You will think that it is a very simple subject, and it is so; but at the same time it is a very vast subject. The climax of grace appears to me to be found in what we read in @Ephesians 2: 7 "That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness towards us in Christ Jesus": there is found there what I should call the full display of grace, in the church. But I do not attempt to go so far as that now; my immediate point is grace in its first principles, and the Vessel of grace; and my object will be completely served if in the goodness of God what I say should have the effect of establishing your hearts in grace. To be established in grace is a good thing; saints are very liable to be swayed and turned aside from the right path, and the reason of it is, to a large extent, that they are not established in grace.
There are two great principles of God's dealings presented to us in Scripture, law and grace; they are the two principles on which God has been pleased to deal specially with men. But it is well to remember that man never was purely under law. Connected with the law there was a certain admixture of grace; for God made provision for failure. If man had been strictly and purely under law, there would have been no provision for failure, as law in itself would not admit of it. But it would have been totally impossible for Israel, even for a moment, to remain in relation with God strictly on the ground of law; and therefore there was provision for failure, and that is grace. I have no
{113}
doubt at all that, as to its application, this did not go beyond what was connected with this world. If a man failed under the law, he could bring a trespass offering, and his trespass was forgiven; but I do not think forgiveness went beyond the question of government and what was connected with this life. It was not at all a question of what one might call eternal forgiveness; that was not the idea under the law. Israel was under law as the people of God upon earth; and if a man unwittingly failed (for there was no forgiveness for high-handed sin, in such a case a man was stoned), there was provision, and a man was forgiven; that was the character of God's dealings with man under law.
Now the principle of law evidently is exaction; but the common idea we have of exaction is the exaction of something beyond what may be justly due. A man, if he have the power, will often exact more than is justly due. But the principle of law was that it exacted from man what was man's duty to God. The law did not go beyond what was proper and right in man down here, but it did exact and enforce man's duty to God and to his neighbour. Who can say then but that the law was right? Surely man had duty to God. We recognize readily enough man's obligation to his neighbour; it would be very difficult to go on in the world if there were not such a recognition of responsibility. But surely man has a first obligation to God; he must be a madman who does not allow that if a man has obligation to his neighbour he must have obligation to God, because God is greater than a man's neighbour. The first sin that man committed was in reference to God, the next was in reference to his neighbour. Eating of the fruit of the forbidden tree was no offence to Adam's neighbour, he had no neighbour to offend against; but it was sin against God, that is, transgression of His commandment,
{114}
which came in first. Then came in sin against a man's neighbour, Cain slew Abel. Of course it was sin against God; but there is such a thing as sin against one's neighbour, or there may be direct sin against God, like Adam's. Law came in to express in definite form what man's duty was toward God and toward his neighbour. I only refer to law for a moment in order to set off grace, for we learn things to a very large extent by contrast; and I doubt if people will have any very clear idea of grace if they do not understand the principle of law.
Now the first principle of grace is relief. For instance, if a man were rightly my debtor, it makes all the difference whether I stand on my rights and exact my debt, or whether in grace I relieve my debtor; that is the difference in the main between law and grace. It has been said that there is no pleasure so great as the relief from pain or pressure and any one can understand the pleasure which must be derived from grace, from the fact of grace being relief. But there is another great pleasure allied to it, and that is to know the one who has been pleased to relieve you. Those are the two great pleasures connected with grace. Just let me give one example in the case of the woman who touched the hem of the Lord's garment, and immediately her issue of blood was staunched. The first thing was the relief she received, she knew in herself that she was healed of that plague; her plague was the pressure upon her, and she was relieved of the pressure. But she was also led to know the One who had ministered to her the relief.
Now if you bear in mind what I have observed, that the first principle of grace is relief, I think it will help you to understand what I have to say to you. I want now to trace the character of grace as it is presented to us in Christ in the Gospel of Luke. I shall take up passages in the seventh and
{115}
tenth and last chapters, merely as giving to us the character of grace as presented in the One who is the blessed vessel of grace. I must first say a word on this point lest some should not understand what I mean by vessel. What suggests the idea to me is the anointing of the Lord; there must be a vessel to be anointed. It was not possible for the Son of God to come here in grace among men except as man; but in becoming man He was the vessel of grace, that is, the blessed vessel in which the grace of God was set forth to man here upon earth. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, not imputing their trespasses; that is, the Son of God had become man in order that in Him as a vessel God might be set forth to men. It has often been said that the spirit or character of Luke's gospel is grace to men in a man. The Spirit of God was there in order that grace might be set forth to men but it was to be set forth in a man, and to that end the Son of God had become man. If I speak of Him simply and purely as a divine Person, you could not have such a thought as being anointed; it was only in becoming man that He could be anointed; He must be a vessel in order to be anointed. It is a beautiful thought that God could be pleased to take account of the pressure under which man was, in consequence of sin and Satan's power, and to relieve man from that pressure. You have a type of it in the case of the children of Israel. God saw the people oppressed under the burden of the Egyptians; and it was the pleasure of God to come down and relieve them from the pressure under which they laboured. We see the same thought in a very much wider sense in the Gospel of Luke, that is, it was the pleasure of God to draw near to man in order to relieve him from the pressure under which he lay, and to that end the Son of God became man.
{116}
One word more about the vessel. The vessel is the seed of the woman; the seed of the woman was to bruise the head of the serpent. And how? By Himself bearing sin's judgment that He might administer God's grace to men. What do you think delivers a man from the power of Satan? One thing and one thing only -- the grace of God. Until the grace of God is known in the soul a man does not get deliverance from the kingdom of Satan. The Father has delivered us out of the authority of darkness and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His love; but the way by which it is done is by making known the grace of God to the soul, and when that is known, then there is deliverance from the power of the enemy. The vessel of grace is the seed of the woman. Remember that, because I can also speak of the vessel of grace in another light according to the glory of His Person, for He is the Son of God. But I speak of Him as the seed of the woman, the appointed vessel of God's grace towards man down here.
One point on which I would lay stress is this, that if man was to be relieved of the pressure, it must be in the scene of the pressure; many people fail to apprehend this. The same principle comes out in the resurrection; the resurrection has to come to pass in the scene of death; it is not simply that saints are raised to go to heaven, but resurrection refers to the earth, where the death took place.
The Lord was raised again here upon earth, and He was forty days upon the earth before He went to heaven; God brings about the triumph of His glory in the scene of the ruin. And that is always the principle on which God acts. And therefore the relief takes place in the very scene of man's pressure; and that is where grace has come in.
And now you have the vessel here, the seed of the woman, the babe that was born into the world; and
{117}
when the babe was born, the angels celebrated the event and sang: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in man" -- that is, there was to be a man here under the eye of God for God's good pleasure. That is what the birth of the babe signified, He was the vessel of grace.
Next we come to the fact that He is anointed, and for this reason, that in the vessel God might be set forth in grace. It was not only a question of what Christ was personally, but that He was the vessel in which God was to be set forth in grace to man, and to that end the Spirit of God came upon Him. In the Gospel of John oneness with the Father is very much more prominently stated; for instance, "The Father which dwelleth in me, he doeth the works". But in the Gospel of Luke it is, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me", because in that gospel prominence is not given to the person, as such, but to what He had become, in order that in Him God might be set forth to man. Hence you will find in Luke's gospel that, when the Lord performed miracles, He spoke of what great things God had done. When the devils were cast out of the man that had the legion, he was to go and tell his friends what great things God had done for him; for, to use an expression we get elsewhere, it was "God manifest in flesh", it was "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses". I could not conceive anything more blessed than the presence of a vessel here in whom God had drawn close to men, for Christ was the anointed vessel to preach the gospel to the poor. That is how the Lord enters upon His ministry.
I pass on now to speak of the character of grace as we have it in these passages in Luke. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach
{118}
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord". One thing is evident, if man were to be relieved of the pressure he must first he sensible of the pressure. Many a man of the world would not care for the relief, because he is not sensible of the pressure. In a certain sense the pressure is upon all men; but if a man does not feel it, it is of little use to talk to him about relief from it, for grace is not simply a question of taking people to heaven, but of relieving man of the pressure in the place where he is under the pressure; and in order that he may be relieved of it he must be made to feel it. If the children of Israel had been perfectly at home and comfortable in Egypt, it would have been useless to talk to them of deliverance from the Egyptians. They were allowed to come under the pressure of the Egyptians, under the hard bondage of Pharaoh, and to feel the pressure, so that they might be consciously relieved of the pressure. And so it is when God begins to work in grace in a soul, He first makes that soul conscious of the pressure that it is under, and then it is that grace is experienced; but grace can never be experienced until a soul is made conscious of the pressure under which it is. When I realize that I am sinful with death upon me, and with eternity before me, then I realize the pressure. You may depend upon it, people would be not very easy in the easiest circumstances in this world if they were conscious that death was upon them as the judgment of God; but when the sense of that is brought home to a soul by the Spirit of God, then it is that relief can be appreciated from the pressure. And the relief is this, that I get forgiveness of sins, so as never to come into judgment, and that death, instead of being to me a terror, is that by which I go to be with the Lord; I am relieved of the pressure
{119}
under which I was. And thus the Lord speaks here of having been "anointed to preach the gospel to the poor"; that was the beginning of it, God was there presenting to men good tidings. The angels brought to the shepherds good tidings of great joy, a Saviour was born; and here we have "the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor", and so on. It was grace come in to give man relief from the pressure under which man was, in the very scene in which he was under pressure. In this chapter 4, in the presence of the blessed vessel of grace, what a contrast we have to every previous dealing of God. The law came in to enforce the rights of God; and prophets were sent to call the people back to their allegiance to God. I quite admit that the prophets spoke of what was to come; but the object and point of prophecy was, in the first instance, to recall the people to their allegiance to God. Grace does not come in on that ground at all; but it recognizes the terrible pressure under which man is by reason of sin, and gives him relief in the very place where he was under the pressure.
And there is the other point of which I also spoke; grace comes in, not simply that man may gain relief, but that he may have the pleasure of knowing the One who has been pleased to minister to him the relief, he is to know God. I have said very often, in speaking of the gospel, that the great end of the gospel is that God may be known in the heart of man; and I think the work of the gospel is not done till God is known in man's heart as He has been pleased to reveal Himself. I do not think you will ever get free from the bondage of sin and of the world till you know God; when you can rest in the love of God, then you are free from the power of all else. Nothing is so great and blessed as to know God; there is nothing in the universe that can
{120}
equal the joy of knowing that God is love, and that He loves me. It is a great thing in this world to know that I am an object of love, but how much greater to know that I am an object of the love of God! "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us". I say the love of God is the greatest thing I can ever know, and when once that is known in the heart, I am freed from the bondage under which I lay by the power of the new wine which has come in.
The first point is, that grace in its application to man must be in the way of relief. But now I want to enlarge a little on the character of grace. Just turn to @Luke 7: 41 - 50. "There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when they had nothing to pay he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman since I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little. And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace".
Here we get another principle of grace, and that
{121}
is its freeness and sovereignty. A difference between people is recognised in the parable in regard to their obligation; one person may owe five hundred pence and another fifty. In regard to any one now present, you have your particular obligation to God and I have mine; your responsibility to God is not mine and mine is not yours. For instance, I may have been a much greater sinner than you, and I may have sinned with much more light; we are all different in respect of our obligation. Therefore, when it is a question of judgment, every man is judged according to his works. But grace is sovereign and free. It is sovereign in the sense that it makes no difference between the obligations of people. What marked the two debtors was that, while their debts were different, neither had anything to pay. Then it was that the creditor frankly -- that is, freely -- forgave them both. I call that the sovereignty of grace. The principle of grace is this, it does what it will with its own. "Is thine eye evil because I am good?" Grace is good, and grace will do what it will with its own; and therefore it says, "When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both". The creditor says, One owes me five hundred pence and the other fifty, but in both cases I will remit the debt; I am sovereign, I will make no demand whatever; "he frankly forgave them both". What a picture that was of the grace of the Lord in this world! He who came here to be the vessel of divine grace, was born into a world where everybody was a sinner and a debtor to God; He came into a world of trespasses, but God was not imputing trespasses, and therefore Jesus says to the woman, "Thy sins are forgiven". But remember, Simon might have had the same word; it was as near to him as to the woman; the Lord announces it to the woman because she was prepared
{122}
for it, but it was just as free to Simon as it was to her. The Lord was as near to Simon as He was to the woman, for He had come into Simon's house; the woman had no business there, but she came in and drew near to the Lord; and Simon might have had all that the woman got, for divine grace was present there in Christ when neither had anything to pay. Simon had no more to pay than the woman when it was a question of God; the position was that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, not imputing trespasses. And so you see those two great principles in grace, sovereignty and freeness. And mark one thing which came out as the fruit of it: "Which of them will love him most?" Relief is one great pleasure, but there is a second great pleasure, to know the One who has relieved me; and that is what comes out here, the one who is relieved of most will love most.
But I pass on to chapter 10: 30 - 37. "And Jesus answering said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee. Which now of
{123}
these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves? And be said, He that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise". Now, no one can doubt for a moment but that, under the figure of the Samaritan, we have a beautiful picture of the Lord Himself in His ministry here upon earth. Hence I believe the parable represents the transition from law to grace. The priest and Levite passed by on the other side, they could not help the man who had fallen among thieves; grace is represented in the Samaritan, he came where the man was; and the parable presents not simply the relief accorded, but the care which was to be exercised towards the man until he should no longer be in want of care. Now we can get further light as to the character of grace, the man is not simply relieved, but carried and cared for. The wilderness is where the Christian needs care. He needs to be watched over and cared for so long as he is down here in a scene where everything is adverse, where he is exposed to temptation and to all evil. There will be a time when care will not be needed; when we get to heaven, that scene of divine serenity where evil cannot intrude, we shall not need succour and sympathy as we need them down here, where we need to be saved to the uttermost! And this is what you get here; the beautiful point in the parable is that you get man's true neighbour. The law demanded that man should love his neighbour as himself, but the law never told him who was his neighbour; no one ever understood who was man's neighbour until Christ became man; but when divine grace came in Him close to man, then man learnt who was his neighbour. And as a true neighbour He never leaves you, but undertakes to care for you all the time you stand in need of care. See what a wonderful thing grace is! It ministers relief, it is sovereign and free, and
{124}
it cares for its object so long as its object stands in need of care.
I wish you to connect all these thoughts with the seed of the woman; God brought it to pass that the seed of the woman should be the vessel of grace (Christ was a great deal more than the seed of the woman -- He was the Son of God, but He was the seed of the woman); and the seed of the woman was to be the vessel in which grace was to be set forth for man. That was the divine thought from the outset, to bring relief to man in the place where the pressure was upon him, and to give him to know the One who relieved him.
I take you now to the last chapter of Luke: "Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these things". Mark that expression, "in his name". Now that indicates that the Lord is no longer personally here, for Scripture would scarcely speak about His name in that way if He were here. What was set forth was to be preached "in his name", so that it was no longer a question of the personal service of Christ down here. In the other passages I referred to, the subject was mainly of the personal service of Christ. He became man's neighbour, for He came close to man that the grace of God might be set forth to man. But when I come to this chapter, it is the value of His name, as dead and risen. I believe "name" in Scripture to indicate that which God is pleased to set forth in any person. If God gave a name to David or to Abraham, or whoever it might be, the name indicated what God was pleased to set forth in that person. I believe the same to be true in regard of Christ, His name prophetically indicated what was
{125}
to be set forth in Him. For instance, His name was to be called Immanuel. Why? Because in Him was set forth the great truth of God with His people. So too here, we have what is to be set forth in Him, namely, a door of repentance and forgiveness of sins. And why set forth in His name? Because the righteousness of God is witnessed in Him. If I want to understand anything about the righteousness of God or how it is that grace reigns through righteousness, it is learnt in Christ dead and risen; that is, that in the setting forth of divine grace God has made no sacrifice of His righteousness, but "grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life". Hence the Lord says here, "Thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day", so that repentance and forgiveness of sins might be set forth in Him suitably to the righteousness of God; that there should be no compromise of the righteousness of God, but that it might be maintained in the setting forth of grace in Christ: that is why it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day. The thought of name is in that sense wonderful to me, for if a name is given God intends that the recipient shall be characterized by the name He gives him, so that the name should indicate what God wills to set forth in that man. That is true in the highest possible sense of Christ.
Another point here which you could not have got in connection with the Lord's personal ministry is, that grace is without limit. You get it, I think, in the expression "that repentance and forgiveness of sins should be preached in His name *among all nations*, beginning at Jerusalem". When every natural link was broken with Israel down here, then the great thought of grace comes out, repentance and forgiveness of sins for all nations; Jerusalem is owned -- and it is a remarkable fact -- but as
{126}
the starting point of the activity of grace, and it is to go out thence to all nations.
One word about grace in regard to the Jew. The Jew had no more claim on the grace of God than the Gentile. In a sense the Jew had a claim upon God for the fulfilment of promises, because promises had been made to Abraham and to his seed; but in crucifying Christ they lost the promises, and a Jew had no exclusive claim on the grace of God. Therefore when grace comes out in the fullest sense after the death and resurrection of Christ, it is without limit; it begins at Jerusalem, but it goes out to all nations. It is the great setting forth and the climax of grace as to the way in which God is to be known by man upon earth.
It is to be noted that Matthew and Luke bring before you the way in which Christ is to be known here upon earth; those gospels do not unfold, as John does, the glory of His Person, or the way in which He is to be known in the Father's house. In Matthew and Luke you get the way in which He is to be known by the Jew and by man. Luke unfolds to you the way in which Christ is to be known by man down here, repentance and forgiveness of sins are preached in His name. Repentance and forgiveness refer to earth, not to heaven. It is a point of the greatest moment, that the grace of God ministers relief to man from the pressure in the scene of that pressure; and the end is that man may know the One who has relieved him. If you do not get behind grace to know the One from whom grace has come, the grace of God has not done its proper work in your heart; but if the grace of God has touched your heart, you will not be content until you know the One who has ministered the grace of God to you. The gospel is the glad tidings of the grace of God set forth to men in a man. Christ became man that He might be the vessel of
{127}
divine grace to man; and He takes His place in the midst of God's people as the One anointed of the Lord to preach the gospel to the poor. And then the subject expands, and you see the sovereignty and freeness of grace; you learn who is man's neighbour, who ministers to the man that had no claim on him, and that in pure grace; and the ministry is perfect, for He cares for him all the way along. And in the close of the gospel the grace of God is based on "it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem". Then there is another point, which I cannot touch upon tonight; He goes to heaven in order that He may send the promise of the Father.
It is a wonderful subject, one has not exhausted the whole field of grace by any manner of means, and I may have more to say about it another time. But my object was to give you an idea of what grace is, which I have no doubt is familiar to almost everybody present; and the way in which it is presented to us in this gospel.
{128}
GRACE -- IN ITS TEACHING
@Titus 2: 9 - 15
My subject on this occasion is the teaching of grace. The expression is peculiar to the epistle to Titus "the grace of God ... teaching us". The idea is that there is a teaching which is proper to and inherent in the grace of God, and that is what I hope to bring before you. Last time I dwelt upon the setting forth of grace, and the vessel of it; I drew attention to certain passages in the Gospel of Luke which exemplified it. I think all will allow, that if we want to be helped to set forth grace we almost invariably turn to the Gospel of Luke; we have an instinctive sense that the Gospel of Luke is the peculiar setting forth of the grace of God to man. I believe this sense to be just; and the more I become acquainted with the gospels the more I feel with regard to Luke that the Lord is presented to us in it as the vessel of grace; it is the setting forth in a remarkable way of the grace of God to man in the One who, in becoming man, became the vessel of that grace.
There are two things I may speak of in connection with grace; there may be, and doubtless is, a great deal more in it with which I am not acquainted, but I can only bring before you what I know. I think there are two aspects of grace, one in the way of relief, and the other in that of display. The latter may be spoken of as the glory of God's grace; what God will display forms the glorious witness of His grace. As we read in @Ephesians 2, "That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus". The other aspect of grace, namely, relief,
{129}
is that on which I dwelt last time; grace relieves. I contrasted grace with law. Law recognised certain obligations which existed before the law was given, and exacted the fulfilment of those obligations. But the first principle of grace is that it relieves man of the consequences of failure in his obligations; the mission on which Christ came to this world was to relieve man of the pressure which man's failure had brought upon him. There was no doubt about the failure, or the sin that had brought the ruin; but in the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ grace came in to relieve man so as to recover him for God.
So far as I understand the passage we have now before us, I do not think that grace is presented to us in it further than in the sense of relief; it is the grace of God which brings salvation, it has that character. The display in which grace culminates is scarcely touched here. The passage does not go beyond what Christians are to be in their responsibility down here; there is no statement of what I should call proper Christian privilege in the passage. My impression is that when Christian privilege is referred to, it is spoken of not so much in connection with grace as with love; the place of privilege which Christians have in the knowledge of the Father is the gift of God's love. One passage will substantiate this "Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should he called the children of God". The idea connected with grace is rather, what God will display in us; but *our place* is the fruit of God's love; the love of God will have us in God's own habitation, in heavenly places. And when we are in heavenly places as the fruit of God's love, then it is that He will display in us the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. If you bear in mind this simple distinction between grace coming to us in the way of relief, and grace as the display
{130}
of God in the church, I think it will help you to understand the subject.
But I now come to the teaching of grace, that is, to the moral effect which grace properly produces in the souls of those who know it. Evidently it is a very important point, and this passage in Titus is a remarkable one in that sense. "The grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men hath appeared, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and piously in this present world [or age]; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ". That is one part of the passage; then there is another: "Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works". Evidently there are two thoughts, the first is the teaching of grace, while the second presents the peculiar claim that our Saviour Jesus Christ has upon His people; and those are the two points that will come before us at this time.
Now the grace of God is referred to here, as I said, on the relief side; the relief which God would be pleased to accord to all men. All men may not get the benefit of it, for all men do not believe, and if they do not believe they evidently cannot get the benefit; it can only be had by faith. If a man does not believe the truth of God he cannot get any benefit from God, for there is no other way in which a link can now be formed between the heart of man and God; there is no other way possible in the present time by which man can be brought back to God. God makes Himself known to man in saving grace, but man can only get the benefit of it by believing God; if he does not, in the very nature of things he stands outside, and is unconscious of grace; therefore it must be by faith. But still that
{131}
does not affect the great truth that the grace of God that brings salvation to all men hath appeared; and by salvation, as I understand, is meant the effectual relief which God would accord to man from the pressure under which man is as the fruit of sin.
But before I refer to the salvation, I want to touch on this point, that, if the grace of God reaches me, the purpose of it is that it may make God known to me in grace. It is a very important truth connected with the gospel, that its purpose is to make God known in the heart of man; and if I am affected and touched by the grace of God, it is that I may know the God of grace: there is nothing that can so affect a man down here as the knowledge of God. It comes out in the way in which a believer orders his conduct in the world, "Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts", he has to "live soberly, righteously, and piously". Why? Because he has the knowledge of the God of grace in his heart, that is the secret of the change. It is not simply that he knows the grace of God, but he knows the God of grace; the consequence of the grace of God having been brought home to him must be that he is made acquainted with the God of grace.
Now with reference to the salvation; I think there are two things in it -- a man is relieved by grace in regard of his responsibility to God, and also in regard of the power of the enemy; that is, on the one hand he has forgiveness of sins, and on the other hand he finds an outlet from the fear of death, from what I may call the pressure of death. It is a wonderful thing that a man should be able to say in this world, I have forgiveness of sins; I shall never come into judgment, for the question of my responsibility to God has been met, and I am relieved of the pressure of death that lay upon me, so that I no longer fear to look it in the face. The
{132}
position of a believer is illustrated by the children of Israel when they had passed through the Red Sea; they had been sheltered by the blood from the judgment which had fallen upon the Egyptians, and they were clear of the power of the enemy by the Red Sea: they stood clear in the presence of God. That is what I understand by the grace of God that brings salvation. I do not go further than that, though I might add that it is made effectual by the Holy Ghost that is given to the believer. How do you get it? Well, the one simple way is by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, "who was delivered for our offences, and raised again for our justification"; I am free of offences because He was delivered for them, and of death because He has been raised again. And what takes the place of my former experience? I have peace with God, and enter by faith into this grace in which we stand. All is cleared; I stand now in the grace of God. When the Lord came into the midst of His disciples after He was risen again from the dead His words to them were, "Peace be unto you". It is all peace; and we stand, as believers, in the grace of God. Another very important consequence flows out of it, although I do not dwell on that now, and that is, deliverance; I can take the place of death to everything down here, which is marked by distance from God; I can accept death now, which I never could before, and death becomes to me the way of deliverance. I do not want any longer to live in that which is marked by distance from God, in sin and the world; in the light of the cross I accept the judgment of death which lay upon me, and it becomes my deliverance.
Another point I want to dwell upon is the intimate connection between grace and glory; if you turn to @Romans 5: 2, you will see it there: "By whom also" -- that is, by the Lord Jesus Christ -- "we
{133}
have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God". In the passage I read tonight it says, "For the grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men hath appeared, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and piously in this present age; looking for that blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ". The teaching of grace leads us to look for the appearing of the glory. The connection is this, that grace fits you for glory; you are thus fitted for glory at the very outset, but the more you become acquainted with the grace of God, the more perfectly you are at home, as it were, in the thought of the glory of God. I could not understand what it is to have part in the glory of God if I did not see that I stand in grace, and apprehend the connection of grace with the glory of God. The glory of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ is, as I understand it, the full display in their result of the purposes of God's grace; God's purposes of grace are His glory. The glory of a man is that which he cherishes in his inmost heart; and the glory of God is that in which the heart of God delights and will display itself -- in the purposes of His grace; and everything looks forward to the full display of this. These purposes dawned very early in Scripture; the first real expression of the purposes of God's grace was in the promises that He made to Abraham: He engaged Himself in blessing to Abraham, and said, "In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed"; it was the beginning of the revelation of God's purposes of grace. No doubt you get a hint of grace in the judgment on the serpent, that the seed of the woman should bruise the head of the serpent. The seed of the woman was the Son of God, and the Son of God was the vessel of grace,
{134}
and was to bruise the head of the serpent; but the first distinct intimation of God's purposes of grace came out, as I said, in the promise to Abraham. Now, when all is displayed in its full result, when all these purposes are accomplished in Christ (for all are centred and will be accomplished in Him), the great display of them will be the glory of God, and that is what I understand we rejoice in hope of, and so we can look for it. And the more I come under the influence of divine grace, the more ready I am for the display of the glory: I look for the glory, for after all the glory is akin to the grace that I know. It is of immense importance to connect together grace and glory. Do you remember an expression in the Psalms, "to see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary"? If we know God in the sanctuary, that is, in the blessed secret of His grace, nothing will content us except the hope of God's glory. The thought is a positive delight to me that the more I am acquainted with the grace of God, the closer I am really brought to the glory. The same holds good, too, in regard of Christ, that the more I become acquainted with grace the more I am in the light of the glory of the Lord. That is the connection in which the two things stand here, that where the heart is established in grace, the natural outlook is, "Looking for that blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the great God and our Saviour, Jesus Christ". When all comes to light, when the blessed display of grace comes to pass, then will be the glory of God's grace, and we shall find ourselves perfectly at home in it; the glory comes in to the delight of the soul, because, as I said before, God's glory is the accomplishment and display of all the purposes of His grace, and so of Himself. In the beginning of Stephen's address before the council in @Acts 7 he says, "The God of glory appeared to
{135}
our father Abraham". The God of glory refers to His appearing to him in the way of promise ("He gave him none inheritance"); that is, He gave him a blessed revelation of His own purpose, which the promise was. It was the God of glory; and then at the close of the address Stephen looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; everything was accomplished and pledged in the One who was in the glory of God. He apprehended the greatness of divine grace, he was deeply conscious of standing in the grace of God, that there was nothing between him and God, that he was free of every bit of pressure in the presence of God, and he "looked up steadfastly into heaven".
The impression which I would like to leave is of the intimate connection between grace and glory, and that the better your acquaintance with grace the more you are prepared for the display of glory.
Now I want to say a word about what comes in between. I remark that the apostle does not in the passage take us out of our responsible position down here, he does not carry us in thought and spirit into the purpose of God about us in its full extent: the passage is not an unfolding of what I should call Christian privilege. I quite admit that salvation is Christian privilege, but not Christian privilege in the full height of it; the passage looks upon Christians in their position here upon earth as those who are responsible to adorn in all things the doctrine of their Saviour God. The proof of what I have said is that the apostle takes the saints up in classes; he had brought before Titus what Titus was to press upon various classes: in regard to slaves, they are exhorted to adorn in all things the doctrine of God their Saviour. He looks upon the saints in their life here in flesh, as the apostle Paul says of himself in @Galatians 2,
{136}
"In that I live in flesh" -- that was in his responsible position as here upon earth -- "I live by the faith of the Son of God". To fail to apprehend our responsible position as Christians here on earth is a great defect. Do not misunderstand me; I do not mean that you are responsible to keep the law, or that you are going to get to heaven by your responsibility, but I say that responsibility belongs to you so long as you are actually here on earth, and God gives you grace to carry out your responsibility. You are not left to yourself and to your own resources like a man under law; but power has come in to enable you to carry out your responsibility here upon earth, and to do so is the proper effect of grace upon the heart of man, and will have its answer in the kingdom.
I have spoken about the connection of grace and glory, and now dwell for a moment on the natural outcome of grace known in power. The first thing is "Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts". If my heart is affected by grace, what comes to me is this, I cannot go on in ungodliness and worldly lusts. Time was when I lived in them; I suppose the time has been when most of us lived in them; but I see that will not do now. Why? Because I know the God of grace. The knowledge of God produces the greatest moral effect upon a person; I do not think that anything can be compared with it; and from the time that I have got the knowledge of God in grace, I cannot continue in ungodliness and worldly lusts, in what is totally contrary and opposed to God.
But we get on the more positive side, that we should live soberly, righteously, and piously in this present age. The first thing is to live "soberly". A drunken man has for the moment utterly inflated ideas, for he is outside of his sober senses, by the effect of intoxication. It is a great thing to be
{137}
sober, and that is the first thought expressed here. I come down from all high and exaggerated thoughts of myself, and learn to estimate myself at my true measure in the sight of God. And my true measure in regard to my life down here is my faith; a man is to think soberly of himself as God has given to every man the measure of faith. My measure is not my cleverness, nor my ability, nor my cultivation, nor my acquirements, but my faith. And I will tell you why; because my true measure is the light I have got from God -- that is what faith means, and in that sense there may be degrees of faith, one man may have more light from God than another -- but what light he has from God is the true measure of the man. Some people seem to imagine that they are going to bring into Christianity what distinguished them as natural men, that because they have been shrewd and clever as men, they are to be the same in Christianity. I do not think so: in Christianity a man has to begin as a babe; and then his measure is not his cleverness, nor his acquired knowledge in this world, but the light which he has got from God: "As God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith". Thus I come down from high and inflated thoughts, to have a sober estimate of myself as in the presence of God. My faith is my true measure; I know it, and I think many others do too. I do not care to be accounted of in any other measure. The apostle was a man of great natural parts and much acquired knowledge; but he cared not for any one to think of him except according to the measure of his faith, that is, the light he had from God. It is a great thing to come down from high thoughts, for they often hang about us. The apostle says, "The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds; casting down imaginations, and every high thing
{138}
that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God" -- everything that stands in the way of the knowledge of God -- "and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ". If I say faith is your measure, you may reply that you have in the Scriptures all that faith can apprehend; but how much of the scriptures is really light in your soul? Faith is light; but if the effect of the word of God upon me has not been to reveal God in me, so that God is the light of my heart, the Scriptures have not done their work. I assure you that I study Scripture to gain the knowledge of God; I am interested in prophecy, but I would not give attention to it except by it to get the knowledge of God. Scripture instructs in order that "the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work"; it instructs us in the ways of God. I want to know God, and it is God and the grace of God which is now the light of my heart, and this is my true measure; I am "sober" -- that is the first thing.
Now we come to "righteously". Righteously is that I give to all their rights. It is not that I am to insist on *my* rights, but that God should have His rights, and my neighbour is to have his rights. Under law a man might insist on his own rights; when grace comes in and teaches, I am careful to give everybody else his rights -- "Honour to whom honour is due", and so on. Whatever rights there may be in this world in the providence of God, I render to all their due, because I recognize the rights of God, and of all others to whom God has given them. It is a great thing to give up your own rights; "Let your yieldingness be known unto all men". I walk righteously; that is the second point.
Then comes "piously"; which I understand to mean the spirit of reverence and confidence in my
{139}
recognition of God. I do not resort to human means and expedients as to my life here; but I have learnt to trust in God; as the apostle says, "Therefore we both labour and suffer reproach, because we trust in a living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of those that believe". I think that in the sermon on the mount you get, in a certain sense, these three great principles; in Matthew 5 righteousness, in chapter 6 piety, and in chapter 7 sobriety. For instance, one way in which piety comes out is that you do not want to have a religious character among men, you do not carry out your devotions in public, or so as to attract the notice of men. That is not piety; piety is this, that you go into your closet, and shut your door, and pray to your Father which is in secret. So also if it is a question of almsgiving, you do not let your left hand know what your right hand doeth. So, too, in regard to fasting, you do not want to get a reputation for being ascetic or self-denying; you anoint your head and wash your face, because it is all done to God; it is done piously, not for display. That which I am religiously has reference to our Father which is in secret, it is reverence which recognizes Him, and does not care to obtain religious character among men. Sanctimonious people, or people who wear a religious garb, must have in view to obtain a character among men. The great principle of piety is that it has reference to our Father which is in heaven, and our Father which seeth in secret will reward us openly. The three things are linked together; first, sobriety in regard to myself, then righteousness in regard to others, both God and man, and then piety which has reference properly to our Father which seeth in secret. That is what marks the one who is acquainted with the God of grace. The grace of God has been made known that you may be acquainted with the God of
{140}
grace; and acquaintance with the God of grace is bound to work out in that way down here, that having done with ungodliness and worldly lusts, you live soberly, righteously, and piously in this present age.
Then we come to the point on which I have already touched; "Looking for that blessed hope and appearing of the glory" -- which is the great climax of grace -- "of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ". And that brings me to the other part of the passage; "Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works". Now, this verse does not lead us on to the ground of the assembly. On the contrary, it is perhaps almost the only passage in the writings of Paul which speaks about Christians as being "a people". Peter speaks of them as a people; they were not a people, but they are a people now. Here the expression "a peculiar people" is connected with the great fact of our Saviour Jesus Christ having given Himself for us. The same thought is brought out in two other passages. One is a verse to which I have already referred, "In that I live in flesh", that is, in his responsible life here on earth, I live by faith, "the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me". Another verse is in @2 Corinthians 5, in which the apostle says, "We thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: and he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose again". I recognize in all these passages the claim which our Saviour Jesus Christ has on those for whom He gave Himself. The grace of God has its bearing on us, but its aspect is towards all; but as to our Saviour Jesus Christ, He gave Himself for *us*. I could not say in the same sense that He gave Himself for all:
{141}
He died for all; but when it speaks about His giving Himself, the thought seems more limited in its application; and He gave Himself for us that He might establish upon us an incontestable claim, the claim of love, to which we are bound to respond. There is no Christian that has the shadow of a title to be in this world to please himself, or to live to himself; Christ died "that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose again". I pity the person who does not recognize the claim which the Lord Jesus Christ has upon him; though I am conscious how poorly I have myself responded to it. If you think you are entitled to pursue your own ends and to go your own way in this world, you make a fatal mistake. And you do yourself a grievous wrong if you fail to respond to the claim which the Lord Jesus Christ has upon you in having given Himself for you. Who has such a claim as that upon you? Who in this world, the nearest and dearest, ever gave himself for you? And that is what our Saviour Jesus Christ did, that He might have the supreme claim upon your affections. But the first point is, "that he might redeem us from all lawlessness". What marks the world is lawlessness, and He gave Himself to free us from all lawlessness. And not only that, but "to purify to himself a peculiar people"; not a people taking up the position of a nation upon earth, as Israel could, but a people for Himself. Christians should recognize that they are not a people who have any position upon earth, but a people engaged in affection to the One who is not here, our Saviour Jesus Christ. A people peculiar to the One who has been rejected from the earth, and who has died to all that is here. Christians, properly speaking, are a people not only affected by the grace of God, and living, in the light of that grace, soberly,
{142}
righteously, and piously, but a people devoted in heart to the One who gave Himself for them. There are two great truths I see in Scripture as to Christians, the one is that they are in the light of God, and the other is that they are in the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; He is to them as the sun in the heaven. The light of the sun is everything to us in natural things; we walk in the light of the sun. I pity a blind man that has never seen the sun nor known what it is to live in its light. As a Christian I walk in the light of my sun, and my sun is the Lord Jesus Christ in heaven; He is my light, He "loved me, and gave himself for me", and I get my path from Him; I have no light except as He guides and directs me, but I am light *in the Lord*. He is my light in heaven, and it is a great thing to have a light in heaven; I could not explain to you exactly how it is we get direction from Him, yet we do get it, and He guides and directs us in the path of God's will down here.
There is another point in connection with this peculiar people, "they are zealous of good works". I have seen many a man in the world who was zealous of bad works; but Christians are zealous of good works. It does not simply say that they carry out good works, but they are zealous of good works. I cannot tell you what the good works may be; but whether it be to be obedient to magistrates, or to obey principalities, or whatever it may be, their works have that character, good works. I wish I could impress you with a due sense of the grace of God, so that your hearts might be fully in the light of that grace; and the God of grace being thus known in your hearts, that you might look up to heaven with the greatest possible delight and joy, knowing that you have a sun in heaven. The Sun of Righteousness will rise with healing in His wings, He will shine out publicly as the sun; but
{143}
He is the sun to us, we walk in His light, and get His direction; it is His pleasure to direct His people into the blessed will of God.
May God give us to understand something of the greatness of grace, and that the climax of grace is glory. It is what I might call the natural fruition of grace; because, as I have already said, the glory of God is His satisfaction in the accomplishment and display of the purposes of His grace. If we stand now in the grace of God, we can look forward with the greatest joy and delight to the thought of His glory; the glory will be familiar to us in a way when it comes, because it will only bring us more distinctly into the full light of the grace of God, and we shall have our place then in the great display of grace, we shall be to the praise of the glory of His grace.
{144}
GRACE -- ITS SUPREMACY
@Romans 5: 20, 21; @Romans 6: 14; @Hebrews 4: 16; @2 Corinthians 12: 9; @2 Timothy 2: 1
When the subject of grace opens out to one it appears so vast that it is difficult to know at what point to take it up. To begin with, I have been struck by the great difficulty of attempting any definition of grace. You would hardly arrive at a right idea of grace by looking the word out in the dictionary, or by going to the original; neither will supply you with a satisfactory definition of it. I think the fact is that no one can get a right idea of it except as he knows God. It is the case in regard to many terms used in Scripture that you can only rightly construe them from Scripture itself And further, it appears to me that you have to gather the idea of grace not simply from Scripture, but from acquaintance with God.
Now I need hardly say that grace connects itself most intimately with God Himself; and apart from the knowledge of God I do not think you can understand it. The first principle of grace is, I think, God's adaptation of Himself to man in man's state of sin and weakness; and that is to me the most wonderful thing in it. It is not exactly the same thought as love; love will act for its own satisfaction. And so it is with God; God is infinite and perfect, and labours for the satisfaction of His love, so that all may be happy as blessed in it. It is not simply that all things are *of* God, but all things are *for* God; that is the result of the working out of God's purposes, everything is to be for the satisfaction of His love. But that entirely depends on the great truth of God being divinely perfect.
{145}
No one but God could work to such an end. But that is not quite the idea of grace. God has seen fit to come out of His own place, if I may use the expression, to reach man in the state of sin and weakness and degradation in which man was sunk, as departed from God, and in which man was very well content to remain. If God had been pleased to leave man in the degradation of heathenism, man would have been content to remain there. There might have been philosophers, but the great mass of men would have been unaffected by philosophy. It is a well known fact that philosophy never reached the masses; philosophers were a limited class who did not affect the mass of men. I dwelt on a former occasion on grace as relief accorded by God to man, and spoke of the vessel of it, taking up certain passages in the Gospel of Luke which, I thought, brought it out. Subsequently, I took up the teaching of grace, a very important point in regard to our walk down here. My point now is somewhat different, though one may call it another development of the same subject; it is the supremacy of grace, or rather, it is grace in its supremacy. As we had grace in its teaching. So we have grace in its supremacy, the reign of grace. I will tell you what helps to explain it to me. There will come a time when the throne of iniquity will be set up in this world; and also when the throne of righteousness will be established in the coming of the Lord, "a king will reign in righteousness". But what marks the present moment is the reign or supremacy of grace, for there is no principle in the world which is so mighty as grace. And there is another thought connected with grace, and that is support, which is the application of grace to us all as believers, and the application of grace specially to the servant of the Lord. Those are the points I desire to bring out now by the help of God.
{146}
The different scriptures that I have read will, I think, enable me to present the subject. In the two passages from the Epistle to the Romans we get the supremacy of grace in its application to us all. Look at the last two or three verses of chapter 5: "Therefore as by the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Moreover the law entered, that the offence might abound. But where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: that as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord". Then in chapter 6: "Sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the law but under grace". Now, the importance of those two passages is, that they reveal to us what is in the mind of God. It is not in them a question of what is realized in the soul of the Christian, but of what is in the mind of God. Sin has reigned by death; but that state of things has received a death blow, and now grace is to reign through righteousness unto eternal life; that is the divine thought, and that is what led me to the expression, "the supremacy of grace". For where sin was the greatest, grace abounded; the apostle in the chapter takes up specially the case of the Jew, those who were under law, for they were the worst of all. "The law entered that the offence might abound". There was plenty of offence in the Gentile, but it was in the Jew that the offence abounded. Here it says that, where sin abounded, grace super-abounded, because grace rose above sin wherever sin was, and hence it rose above the sin of the Jew just as much as above the sin of the Gentile. In the commission in the last chapter of the
{147}
Gospel of Luke, it is said that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in Christ's name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. What was to be made evident was the supremacy of grace, that where sin abounded grace super-abounded; the divine thought was that the moment should be marked by the reign of grace.
There is one thing in particular that I would notice in the passage, namely, that grace was not to be at the expense of righteousness, nor to reach man in such a way as to give man the impression that God was indifferent to sin. How God brought to pass the reign of grace was by the complete judgment and putting away of sin from before Him, and this was effected by the Lord Jesus Christ; He appeared once in the end of the world to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself, that grace might reign through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. The great end in view is eternal life, not simply that man may know the grace of God in the forgiveness of his sins, but that grace may reign unto eternal life. No doubt in its full scope and application the passage refers to the future; but it has, I judge, an application to the present. I think it is a mistake to use all the passages of Paul which refer to eternal life in a too exclusively future sense, for Paul commonly presents a thing in its moral aspect, and thus apart from any question of time; this particular passage is abstract, and shews us what was in the mind and thought of God. I want everybody here to accept this, that the thought and purpose of God for a Christian is eternal life. You may say that according to Paul I cannot get it until Christ comes. I do not think that is really the idea of Paul. The apostle says, "He that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal life". There
{148}
is such a thing as reaping eternal life; but you will not reap eternal life of the Spirit if you do not first accept the truth that eternal life is the thought of God about you: God has provided for righteousness, and grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life. In this world, where I once was the slave of sin and under the sentence of death, it is possible that I can reap eternal life! I can hardly conceive anything more amazing. The Spirit is a well of water in the believer springing up unto eternal life; and this is connected intimately with the deliverance of the soul from the law of sin and death. "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus", the apostle says in @Romans 8, "hath set me free from the law of sin and of death".
Now I come to another point of very great comfort, namely, that sin is not to have dominion over you, because you are not under law but under grace. Do you accept this, that sin is not to have dominion over you? You may dread sin; every believer dreads sin and fears lest it should have dominion over him, but sin is not to have dominion over you. We have not yet come to what I would speak of as the application of grace to the soul; it has so far been the divine thought, that "sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under law, but under grace". That could not have been the case in times gone by, in which sin did have dominion. But now the revelation of this thought of God is a great comfort to me. Knowing what I am, how sin besets me, my liability to be brought under the power of evil, and the temptation of the world, it is a very great comfort to know that sin shall not have dominion over me. If I were under law, sin might have dominion over me; but I am under grace, and sin does not have dominion over me, God takes care that it shall not.
I want to come now to another thought in connection
{149}
with grace, and I turn to the passage in Hebrews. "Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need". Now we advance a little further here, for in this passage we do not get simply the divine thought, as in the passages in Romans, but, as it were, the application of it; that is to say, we "come boldly", we act in a certain sense. The first thing is to get hold of the divine thought; then to avail ourselves of that which has been placed within our reach, and that is the throne of grace. The throne of grace is accessible to us so that we may "obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need". It is not here exactly a question of sin, for the provision connects itself with our infirmities; we are conscious of infirmities (I suppose every Christian is); there is the possibility of falling, but in regard to it the throne of grace is available, God is accessible, and we come boldly to the throne of grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need. I think the truth of it hangs on the fact that we have a great high Priest, a representative, who has passed through the heavens, right through to the throne of God. If I were seeking to get on in the world, I would like to be well represented at court if I could not go to court myself, to have a representative there. So in regard to Christians, we are not in heaven, but we have a representative in heaven, One who has passed through the heavens and sympathizes with our infirmities. The practical result is this, we "come boldly to the throne of grace". Grace is
{150}
enthroned, it is again the thought of the supremacy of grace, as seen in the expression "throne". Do not confound the idea of the mercy-seat and the throne of grace; I judge they are not at all the same thought. The mercy-seat is where God addresses Himself to men, puts Himself in communication with men to declare His righteousness. What I understand by the throne of grace is the sense in the soul that grace is enthroned; and if you have not that sense, I do not think that you will come boldly to seek grace. Whatever we may have to meet -- and we may have to meet many difficulties in passing through this world, many things that will try and test us -- it is a great thing to have the sense in the soul that grace is enthroned, that there is no emergency, no difficulty in which it is possible for us to be placed down here in which grace is not available to us. If I wanted the ear of some great person in the country, it would be a great thing for me to know that he was accessible. That is the idea to me of the throne of grace, God is accessible, attentive to the supplications of His people, so that you can come boldly to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need. It is not mercy and grace because you have failed; but in order that you may not fail, you receive consideration in the circumstances in which you are placed, and you find grace for seasonable help. Now it is a blessed thing to have all this in passing through this world. I pity the man who is without it. Of all men, I think, the infidel is most in need of pity, for he has no resources outside of himself; while for the Christian what greater comfort can there be than to know that he has resources in God? God is the refuge of the Christian however much he may be tested. And God does allow His people to be tested; and the more light you get the more you will be tested. An accession of light in divine things is
{151}
sure to bring testing; but it is then a comfort to know that I have a resource in God, that the throne of grace is open to me, that I am represented in heaven; I might be in danger of failing, but the Lord can say, "I have prayed for thee". Peter was in great danger of failing in faith, after he had failed in conduct, but the Lord had said to him, "I have prayed for thee". And so the Lord can say to us, for "He ever liveth to make intercession for us". I think the effect of these things upon the soul is to give us great encouragement. The more I study Scripture the more confident I am that one great purpose of ministry is to encourage the saints. I see the anxiety of the apostle so to bring the word of God to bear upon the saints as to be for their comfort and encouragement; he was continually bent upon their encouragement. And God would encourage the hearts of His people; and the way by which He does it is by showing them how accessible He is to them; it is not simply grace, but the throne of grace, grace is enthroned. And we find this here in the application to us of grace in the infirmity with which we are compassed. I think all are conscious of infirmity, I know that I am; but as I said, there is no greater comfort than the consciousness that we are not left to our own resources, but have ever a resource in God.
Now I come to the passage in @2 Corinthians 12: "And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me". Here,
{152}
we have the application of grace to the servant more particularly, though I think the principle applies generally. If you have followed what I have said, I think you will observe that this passage verifies the remark I made that if one gets an accession of light he is bound to be tested. I doubt if any one ever had experience of getting light from God but what he found that something came along to test him, and if possible to baffle him in his course. We find in the case of the apostle, that he got a great gain of light spiritually, he was caught up into the third heaven and heard words unspeakable which it was not lawful to utter down here; that is to say, he was taken by the power of God into the great reality of the scene of which he testified. When he comes down here again there is a danger of his being puffed up by the abundance of the revelations; and he gets a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him and apparently to baffle him, because it tended to hinder him in the service of the testimony. I daresay you have noticed that the apostle urges the saints to pray that he may have utterance: there was something come in which, I judge, tended to hinder him naturally in the utterance of the great things which God had entrusted to him. He beseeches the Lord three times (he was in earnest about it) that the thorn in the flesh might depart from him; it does not depart from him, but what he learns is this, "My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness", I do not think anything can be greater gain to a servant of the Lord than to have experience of the strength of the Lord, for it is a great thing to carry out any little service in the strength of Christ. The apostle says, "Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me". The Lord gives the apostle a most
{153}
reassuring word, to assure him that whatever service he had to carry out he should not be hindered by the messenger of Satan, but that in every circumstance, the grace of Christ was sufficient for him. The strength of Christ is something that you could not describe; it is as different from natural strength or natural ability as anything can be. I will tell you how it works; the grace of Christ brings the heart of the servant so blessedly into the reality of things that a man finds ability to speak of them. If you attempt to speak of such things mentally you will be entirely at fault: you can only speak of divine things with any measure of power in so far as they are really enjoyed in the heart. That is how Christ works, how He makes His grace effective, in so directing the heart of the servant into the things, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and one can find utterance, even though there be an infirmity of the flesh tending to obstruct. So it was with the apostle, he had remarkable experience of the grace of Christ with him in all his service, even though, I suppose, he never lost the thorn in the flesh. And the thorn in the flesh was a messenger of Satan, not a messenger of God; God allowed it to come to the apostle, but it was the messenger of Satan to obstruct him in his pathway of service down here. But then he had the support of the Lord. It is a great experience to be supported by grace in the difficulties of the pathway here. And in the case of the servant, it is grace that is his support. That is one element of grace, it not only relieves but it supports; and I suppose that there is not a Christian but has some experience of what the support of grace is in the difficulties of the pathway, and in the details of service down here.
But now we will pass on to the passage in 2 Timothy: "Thou therefore, my son, be strong
{154}
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also". Now, it is evident that the apostle had a great sense of the very arduous path which was before Timothy. The service which Timothy had to carry out was a different service from that of Paul. The gospel was committed to the apostle, and his work was to introduce the testimony; he was the first among the Gentiles. But Timothy was not an apostle, his service was not to inaugurate the testimony, but to be faithful and not to be ashamed of the testimony when it was there; that was the peculiar service to which Timothy was called. And in this way Timothy is the type of the servant who continues to the coming of the Lord; and if I were asked what is the peculiar work of the servant in the present day, I should say it is to stand for the truth in its integrity. God has recovered to us in very great measure the outlines of the truth which was first made known by the apostle, both as to the gospel and as to the church; and the work of the servant in the present day is to hold to the truth which God has recovered to us. Paul knew what a very arduous path that would be, he was conscious that the current would be greatly against Timothy; the mass of professed Christians would be going in another direction, and Timothy was not likely to have an easy time of it. The apostle knew this, and urges on Timothy to "be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus". I find it difficult to attempt to make plain what I judge to be the force of this phrase. It is not to my mind the same idea as that found in @2 Corinthians 12, namely, Christ saying, "My grace is sufficient for thee"; but the passage refers to a quality realized in the soul. If you study this epistle attentively, you will find that
{155}
every proper characteristic quality of the Christian is said to be "in Christ Jesus". But when I speak of what is in this way in Christ Jesus, I understand by it that which is to be realized in the soul of the Christian. There is nothing for God in Adam or in the flesh: every quality which God can own, faith and love and whatever it may be, in fact, every proper Christian quality is in Christ Jesus. The apostle had not, nor intended that Timothy should have, the faintest confidence in the flesh, but should realize what was in Christ Jesus. It is a point which comes out all through the epistle, the Scriptures were able to make him "wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus"; I do not think it means through faith of which Christ Jesus was the object, but a character of faith which was realized in the soul. Now the apostle urges him in that way, he was to "be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus"; there was a wonderful resource there; and if Christ Jesus be the One that dwells in the heart of the Christian, the glory and delight of the Christian, then everything that is in Christ Jesus is realized. When I look at the Lord in His pathway upon earth, I see the perfect adaptation of what was properly divine to the circumstances in which He was placed as man down here. Every moral quality of the Lord was of Himself, He derived nothing in this sense from man, He did not even get learning from man; the Jews said, "How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" Whatever moral quality we see in Christ as a man down here upon earth, the perfection of faith or confidence, or allegiance or devotedness, nothing was derived, all was of Himself. He became man, and in becoming man He beautified and adorned the humanity that He took. Every real trait of beauty in humanity in His case was of Himself: He took that state and form that He might glorify God in it
{156}
completely. He was manna come down from heaven; and everything was carried out down here in heavenly grace, in that which was of Himself. We have now in a way to fill that place; and everything in a Christian which is grateful to God is in Christ Jesus, and it will only be true as Christ Jesus is really appreciated in the heart. If the flesh is distrusted, and Christ Jesus is our glory, and the delight of our hearts, every quality of Christ Jesus will be exemplified in us. And that is what is to come to pass. Supposing faith and love mark me; where is the source of them? where do they lie? Not in me, but in Christ Jesus; and they come out in me just as Christ Jesus is appreciated in my heart. And that is what is seen all through the epistle; and so you get grace made good subjectively in the servant. It is a different thought from the supremacy or reign of grace in Romans: there, as we saw, you enter into the divine thought in regard of us, that you are not under law but under grace; and then you come boldly to the throne of grace. That is one side; but then there is another side, and that is, "Be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus".
Now, I want to say another word. The moment is critical and dangerous; it is the last moment here; the coming of the Lord is imminent, and I have questioned with myself very much as to how far saints are practically prepared for the coming of the Lord. I can hardly think it is so unless I hear the cry of the Spirit and the bride. The wonderful way in which the Lord presents Himself at the close of the Revelation has struck me. He says, "I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star"; that is what He should be to the heart of the Christian, the soul delighting in the sense that He is the root and offspring of David, and the bright and morning star. But what is the
{157}
answer to it? "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". You must have the Spirit and the bride saying, "Come", in view of the coming of the Lord. Do you think that cry has been raised? It may be I am not very quick to perceive it, but I do not hear very much of the cry of the Spirit and the bride; I see the Lord's coming held as a doctrine, but it is another thing to get the cry of the Spirit and the bride, that is what one would desire to hear. The cry of the Spirit and the bride is the cry of affection, affection that will not be content without the bridegroom. And I do not think you will get the cry of the bride except there be in some measure the sense of union, else it would not be the cry of the bride, for the thought of the bride brings in union. It is normal to the Spirit and the bride to say, Come. But what do you think will prepare you for it? It is to be answering to the word; "That which ye have hold fast till I come"; that is what we have to do. God has been very gracious to us in these last days in recovering to us the truth. How are you going to hold it? Simply as doctrine or in terms? If you attempt it in that way you will never hold it at all, it will slip away from you without your knowing it; you will hold the terms when the value of the thing spoken of is completely gone. You can only retain the truth by the soul being in the reality of it, and I speak of this in connection with this passage, "be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus", Christ Jesus being the object and joy of the heart; you delight to see that in infinite grace God has been pleased to displace the first man, with all his pretensions, in order that He may introduce the second. I see four points in Christ; I see manhood beautified and adorned here upon earth, so that God should be glorified in man; I see God glorified in man in the putting away of sin; I see, in the resurrection, man accepted; and in the
{158}
exaltation of Christ, man glorified; Christ is in heaven, the glorified Man, and that Man is to be the glory and delight of the Christian. If that is the case, then I am strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus, and in some little degree I learn how to maintain the truth which God has been pleased to give to us. Do not mistake your work. We are not called to go forth as apostles to introduce some new system of truth; our work is the work to which God called Timothy, to maintain the truth which it has pleased God to give to us; and the only possible way to do it is by your own soul being in the blessed reality of it, and the very essence of it is that Christ should be the glory of your heart, the man in whom you delight, your glory. Then the result will be that every blessed quality which came out in Him as man will be reproduced in the Christian down here, because Christ is the Man of the Christian's heart.
{159}
GRACE -- ITS CLIMAX AND DISPLAY
@Ephesians 1: 1 - 9; @Ephesians 2: 1 - 10
My thought is to continue the subject which I have tried on previous occasions to bring before you, namely, grace, passing on today to what I may call its climax. We have had before us grace from the outset, in its application to us, as set forth in the One who is the vessel of it; we have had, too, the teaching of grace, and the supremacy of grace. Now my point is to look at the subject on another side, and that is of display. We have our part in grace; but God will have His part too; and God's part in grace is in its display to His praise. And you will find that almost every allusion to grace in the Epistle to the Ephesians is in contrast to the way in which it is presented in the Epistle to the Romans. In the latter you get grace pretty much on the side of our need, but in the Epistle to the Ephesians it is looked at more on God's side, as a display of Himself; and you get an expression which I do not think is found elsewhere, "to the praise of the glory of his grace". So, too, in chapter 2, "That in the ages to come he might *shew* the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness towards us in Christ Jesus". God will be glorified in the display of "the exceeding riches of his grace" and by that expression I understand the public witness in ages to come to the riches of His grace, and that witness will be in the church. You will find in the Revelation that God intends to have in eternity a witness to His righteousness, and the same thing is seen in principle in Isaiah, namely, that in the millennium God will have a witness to His righteousness. But if God has a witness to
{160}
His righteousness, He will have also a witness to His grace, and it is that which is brought out here.
Now that is what I shall come to presently, and it will involve pointing out the difference between grace in its application to us and in its display; and that will necessitate reference to another point, namely, the distinguishing a little more definitely between grace and love. I do not know that we have been quite accustomed to make the distinction, but the distinction is to me plain enough. You would not say that God is grace; but God is love; and God did not love man on account of man's condition. It was in the sovereignty of love that God loved man; God is love, and never was any other than love; it is the one word which is employed in Scripture to describe the nature of God. Every activity of God originated in love, and the result of every activity will be for the satisfaction of His love. But I understand grace to be the fruit of God's taking account of man in his condition of weakness and need down here. There was no necessity, I imagine, for grace in eternity, when there was no weakness to be dealt with; but it is a wonderful thing that the blessed God should have come out in that way, and that He should have seen fit to adapt Himself in a sense to man's condition. He might have stood at a distance; the common philosophic idea of God was that He was at far too great a distance from matter to have anything to say to man, or for man to have anything to say to Him. The truth is, that when the light of Christianity came in, it brought out the blessed truth that God, without in any way sacrificing the integrity of His Being, could adapt Himself to man in man's condition of sin and ruin down here. God takes care of righteousness, He will not sacrifice righteousness for the sake of grace; but He makes grace to reign through righteousness, and the great
{161}
end of it is "eternal life". These are the three links in the chain, it begins with grace, grace reigns "through righteousness", and it is "unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord".
I see three distinct elements in grace in its application to us; the first is light, the second is support, and the third is favour. It is remarkable that though you get the idea of grace in the gospels you get no statement in them about grace. I do not know whether others have observed it, but it is curious that the word "grace" never occurs, so far as I know, in two of the gospels, namely, Matthew and Mark, and it is never used in the sense in which I am speaking of it in the gospel of Luke, although that is the great grace gospel. The only gospel in which the word does occur in the sense I refer to is that of John, and there grace is put in contrast to law; Christ came "full of grace and truth" for He was making God known, and then it adds, "The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth have come to pass by Jesus Christ". I think that is the only connection in which the word "grace" occurs in John's gospel. When you come to the epistles, they are full of grace, they make known the glad tidings of the grace of God.
I will speak for a moment about the three points I have just referred to, and first, that the grace of God comes to us in the way of light, making God known to us and making known what the pleasure of God is in regard to man. That is the very first idea I ever get of grace, I get an insight in my soul by the gospel into the pleasure of God about me, and I could not get anything more blessed down here. The extraordinary part of it is that people are so slow to receive grace; it is so often mixed up in their minds with the idea that they must do or feel something; but the grace of God which comes out in the gospel makes known what God has done,
{162}
and His pleasure in regard to us down here. It is all worked out in the Epistle to the Romans; God has provided everything; He has set forth His pleasure in regard to man in the Lord Jesus Christ; His pleasure as to what I am to enjoy as the effect of faith is all made known; you cannot add to it, and you cannot take from it. You may be very foggy about it; but you cannot alter it, and when you get clear about it you come to this, that you might have been clear a long while before, had it not been for mists in you. The grace of God is often clouded by mists in us, but it is simple enough in itself. God has been pleased to set forth in the Lord Jesus Christ that instead of man being under the pressure of judgment and death, His pleasure in regard to man is that he may be in peace and favour. And when the gospel is accepted, it comes to the soul as light, and the soul begins to realize what the thought and pleasure of God is in regard to man. Christ is "the Head of every man", and in Christ as the Head of every man, God has set forth His pleasure; and when the truth of what God has secured and established in the Lord Jesus Christ comes home to me, the grace of God becomes my light. I can rest in the pleasure of God, and if I do not, I am unbelieving. I cannot conceive a greater slight on God than the refusal to rest in His pleasure when He has been pleased to make it known, and yet thousands and thousands of souls are practically refusing to rest there. They want to add to it; but it cannot be added to, because everything is perfectly secured in Christ, and God will not have it added to. The only thing is to accept the light of the pleasure of God, receiving everything in it, forgiveness of sins, peace and favour. There is no question outstanding or unsettled.
But when I come to speak of the saint, then I
{163}
get grace in another aspect, namely, support. I learn that grace is the pre-eminent and governing principle. Whatever can be brought against man, grace will carry him superior to it. If all the powers of earth and hell were arrayed against the saint, grace can enable him to overcome them, grace reigns through righteousness -- 'ye are not under law, but under grace', -- we are supported by grace, and the very sense in the soul of the grace of God becomes the support of the soul. We "come boldly to the throne of grace"; it is the consciousness in the soul that grace is enthroned; and the sense of that is the practical support of the soul here in this world. It is blessed to think of what is in God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and that it is available for us, and we are to have the joy of it in our hearts. That is the support of every saint down here; grace is support.
Now all this is found in Romans. In that epistle the apostle says, "I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth"; and then the first expression of God's grace is that we are "justified freely"; it is the light coming to us and making known to us that which God has secured in Christ. Then "grace reigns through righteousness", that is the principle of the moment; it is no longer the reign of sin by death, but grace reigning through righteousness unto the blessed result of eternal life; that is, that grace will effect its own result; it will not fail, and eternal life will be the issue of it. And then there is another thing, that "we are not under law but under grace", we are in God's favour.
Now I pass on to the last part of my subject, namely, grace in its display. I do not touch now on what we have had before us on a former occasion, the teaching of grace, what the effect of grace is in the soul; but I think I may just say that if grace
{164}
can be viewed as light and support, this necessitates another principle, namely, administration. And this is apparent in the gospel; the gospel is the glad tidings of the grace of God, and administration is necessarily connected with it; power has come down from on high to carry out the ministry of the gospel, and thus the thought of administration evidently is allied with grace. If it were not so, grace would not be available to man; God might have gracious thoughts in regard to man, but if God were not pleased to make those gracious thoughts known in the ministry of the gospel, the grace would not be effective for man.
But I doubt if *love* as a principle admits of the idea of administration. I think I can tell you what the principle of love is as contrasted with grace -- love is attraction, love draws everything toward it. Grace works outward from God; the grace of God brings salvation to all men; but love draws inward to God. I suppose most here are acquainted with the simplest elements of astronomy; and if so, you know that the whole system of heavenly bodies is held together by the principle of attraction. If you take a limited part, what is called the solar system, every planet in that system is held in its place by the principle of attraction centred in the sun: no planet can move out of its own orbit, because of that influence. Now I think you could hardly have a better illustration of the principle of love; and I believe that great principle of attraction will prove itself to the very widest extent in the vast universe of bliss, and that every family in heaven and upon earth will be held in its own proper place by the influence of attraction; and the source and centre of the attraction is in God. That is what love is to me, that blessed principle in God, the divine nature, by which every family which God intends to bless will be held in its own place, and disorder will be
{165}
completely shut out; all that is of evil and contrary to love will be excluded by the very power of love; it is that which will characterize, I judge, the eternal state, when God will be all in all. I do not believe that anything is acceptable to God but what is the fruit of love. God may and does bear with a great many things; He may, in a certain sense, own people that are zealous; but for a service to be really grateful and fragrant to God it must be the fruit of love. If everything is right in my family, I am a centre of affection there; of course, I am not perfect, but if I am not the centre of affection, and if all affection has not its relation to me, things are not right. But God has the right to be supreme, and God is divinely perfect, and therefore love is perfect in God, and God Himself is the blessed centre of affection. And every family in heaven and on earth will be ranged, as it were, round this blessed centre, and will be held in its own proper place; that is the great end before God. There will be the new heavens and the new earth in which righteousness resides; there must be righteousness because sin has called in question the glory of God; but righteousness is not the principle which will hold all together; that will be love. It will be effectual here upon earth. Do you think that there will be need of elaborate legislation here when every man loves God with all his heart, and his neighbour as himself? Do you think when the church is in heaven that you will find anything that tends to alienate the affection of one from another? Love will reign supreme in heaven; I believe it reigns supreme there now, but we shall know and taste it fully when we are in heaven. And we shall not get on very much together down here if we do not love one another; but if you are under the influence of God's love it will most certainly work out in love to those that are of God down here. It is impossible
{166}
for a man to know the love of God and to fail in love to the saints. It is what we lack; love is called in Scripture "the bond of perfectness", there is no other bond which will really hold all together except love. And you see the perfect exemplification of it in the Lord himself when He was here upon earth; what sustained Him in all that He had to pass through, and held to Him His own, was love, and nothing could quench it. Even if the Lord pronounced woes upon the scribes and Pharisees, it was the necessity of love, because of their terrible perversity and the hindrance which they presented to man as to the truth of God; they assumed to be the teachers and to instruct others in the things of God, and yet they were only misleading; hence it was perfect love which stirred the indignation that pronounced such terrible woes upon them. Love sustained the Lord in His arduous path here, and it was superior to every evil and opposition which He met.
One word more. The place and privilege of Christians is known; we are put in the place of children, and it is love which has given us that place in regard to God: "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God". And there is another thing to be said about love, it is love which will have us in heaven. You go to heaven because love will have you there. It has been said that love will have the company of its objects; and hence love will have the saints in heaven because it is love. This truth comes out in @Ephesians 2: "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us" -- it is not here His grace that is spoken of, but His great love -- "even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, ... and hath raised us up together [Jew and Gentile], and made us sit together in
{167}
the heavenly places in Christ Jesus". I argue from it that if you had a full sense of the love of God, you would be conscious of being in heavenly places in Christ. I have said that it is not faith that takes you to heaven now, it is love; and that is the appreciation of and response to God's love. How you will get to heaven in result will be that Christ will take you there; but in the present, it is God's love that has carried you there. It is a remarkable passage; it does not speak of grace in that connection; it shows you what is characteristic of God, that He is "rich in mercy"; but then there is also the sovereignty of His love, "his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins". I ask, Do you believe that the love of God will have you in heavenly places? The love of God would have Israel in the land; and the love of God will have its perfect satisfaction when it has the church in heavenly places. The love of God is a wonderful thing, and it is the bond by which He holds us to Himself. The first effect of the Holy Ghost's presence in the believer is that the love of God is shed abroad in his heart; and the same Spirit enables him to cry, Abba, Father. The whole thing seems to me divinely perfect; I cannot conceive any security for a blessed eternity except in love, but in love I do see it. And just as in the law of attraction I see the assured stability of the solar system, so I see in love the security for eternity of the vast universe of bliss. It would be well if we knew more about it. There is nothing I desire more for myself than in my soul to know the greatness of God's love and what His love would have. Love draws me to himself, and holds me to Himself, and is not content till I am in heavenly places.
It may be I am speaking too much about love, and yet not too much. But I want to pass on to
{168}
the display of grace. We read in @Ephesians 1: 5, "Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved". Here you get the expression, "the glory of his grace". I understand by that the climax of it, the full satisfaction of His grace. In His grace He has made us "accepted in the beloved". When it becomes evident that the saints are in the place of the sons of God before the Father, there will not be any doubt of the greatness of God's grace; it will be the glory of His grace.
There is a connection I will dwell upon for a moment. And it is this -- you would not be fit subjects for the glory of God's grace if you did not appreciate that grace now. There is an education going on in souls which is really fitting them for the display in them of the glory of God's grace; we get great acquaintance with grace now; we cannot get on a day without it; we have to come to the throne of grace continually, and in serving the Lord according to our measure, we are conscious of the support of His grace. And thus we get such an acquaintance with the grace of God now that it will not be a strange thing if we become vessels for its display hereafter. The knowledge of divine grace in the present time is part of God's way of forming the soul practically, that we may be suited to be vessels in which His grace will be set forth. Grace in the Epistle to the Ephesians has more of the character of favour than of relief, that is, that when our souls are fully acquainted with the grace of God and with the way in which that grace has adapted itself to us in a scene of contrariety, then in a scene where there is no contrariety at all, the saints will come out as the display of divine favour. There will not be in heaven a doubt about God's
{169}
favour, but I would hardly care for God's favour to be displayed in me then if I were not already acquainted with His grace; it would not be God's way. You must be morally suited if the grace of God is to have its expression in you in glory. Then the saints will come out manifestly as the bride of Christ. When the new Jerusalem, the church, comes down from God out of heaven, do you think there will be any doubt about God's grace then? Do you not think that every stone in that city will be perfectly acquainted with the grace? There will be nothing there which will not be proper in kind, every soul there will have been formed really by the ministry of grace down here; and the consequence is that when the new Jerusalem comes down from God out of heaven, it will be the perfect full expression of the grace of God, it will be "the glory of his grace".
One word more in regard to the verse in chapter 2. I have already pointed out that two qualities, two characteristics, of God are mentioned: "God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us". I repeat that the principle of love is attraction, and it is love which will have you in heavenly places for its own satisfaction; but when God has you in heavenly places then comes out something more. God will make known in us the exceeding riches, the surpassing wealth, of His grace; and how? "In kindness towards us in Christ Jesus". Just as God will have in eternity a witness of His righteousness, so He will have a witness of His grace; and the church is that witness, and in it He will make known the surpassing riches of His grace. That is a wonderful thought, and yet it is made known to us; though I do not think it is equal to the love. My delight is in the love, in being attracted to God, and to find in His love the full satisfaction of our hearts. But none the
{170}
less God has made known to us what He intends to display in the church. What expressions we thus have in regard of God: "rich in mercy"; "his great love"; "the surpassing wealth of his grace"; and, "his kindness towards us in Christ Jesus"! God has set the saints in a place and state before Him in which He can display in them the surpassing wealth of His grace, He has set us in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, in the state which is suited to His presence; He has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we might "be holy and without blame before him in love" -- not in grace only, but in love. But when in that place and state, then it is that the church will be the vessel in which God will make known the surpassing wealth of His grace in His kindness towards us in Christ Jesus.
And you get another word which confirms the idea that it is the present experience of God's grace which fits our souls for it, so that the favour of God will sit well upon you. The apostle says directly, "By grace ye are saved". You have experience now of the grace of God which has saved you, you have got salvation by grace; and when it comes to be a question of the display of God's favour, you are morally fitted to be a vessel of that display because you are so well acquainted with the grace. I do not suppose any saints will be so acquainted with the grace of God as the church. The apostle Paul said, "By the grace of God I am what I am", and I do not think any one so well realized what the grace of God was; all mercy was shown in him, and he is a pattern of all the saints, and the church is after that pattern. I cannot conceive anything more blessed than to know that it is for the satisfaction of God's love that He would have us in His own habitation, and will then make the saints the vessel in which He will set forth the
{171}
exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness towards us in Christ Jesus. Now do you not think these thoughts are divine? Did ever such things enter into the heart of man? Do you not think Scripture is true when it says, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him". I know that every saint will have his part in it when the time comes, but the point with me is present entrance; and if you love God you will get a present entrance through His grace into the things which God has prepared for them that love Him, and the very principle on which these things are communicated is love. It is love and love only which enters into the thoughts of love; it is only love that knows God, because God is love. Every family in heaven and on earth is named of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the title "Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" brings in the thought of love; Christ is the supreme object of the love of God, and every family has its character from the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
May God give to us to see the greatness of that which is before us. I could hardly tell you the satisfaction that it is to me to get away from man and man's thoughts into the greatness of God's thoughts. I see such wonderful conceptions in Scripture, utterly beyond all the power and possibility of man's heart; but those things are made known to us, and the Spirit of God works in saints, forming them according to God, that they may get an entrance into these things. Depend upon this, your capacity for entering into divine things is love. Your capacity for entering into human things may be natural intelligence, your adaptability to this world may be your ability to enter into the things of this world; but your ability to enter into the things of God is that you partake of
{172}
the divine nature. God having made us conscious of His love, He awakens our love in return; "we love him because he first loved us", and we get an entrance into the great things which God has prepared for them that love Him. But then, there is the great public display. God will make known in the church the surpassing wealth of His grace in His kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
{173}
FOUR LECTURES ON THE MORAL FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY
{174}
STABILITY
@2 Corinthians 1: 18 - 22
This passage is remarkable for the way in which the apostle vindicates himself from the accusation of levity which had been brought against him. He meets it by showing that what marked him was the stability that was in Christ, which had its reflection in the saints. This is the subject of the passage. The stability of everything is *in God*, for there is no stability in man. This thought is taken up (1) on the divine side, in the confirmation of His purposes and counsels in Christ; and then (2) on our side -- in the way in which God produces stability in us; how He works in the saints to establish them in Christ. The conduct of the apostle himself was not marked by lightness, for he had the sense of how God had established everything for Himself in His Son; and the apprehension of this cannot fail to give a man stability of purpose. It is a great thing that saints should be able to stand here firm, apart from the course and current of things around, and in spite of weakness within. This we never can do except as we have an apprehension of the purposes of God, and that all are established in Christ. Then we get a remarkable expression, "Unto the glory of God by us". This refers to the *present*, I believe. When saints are established according to the stability of God's purposes in Christ, then it is "unto the glory of God by us".
It is noticeable that Paul's statement of truth, even in regard to the names of the Lord Himself, often takes the contrary order to John's. Paul began with Christ at the highest point, namely, the Son of God as He had been revealed to him. The twelve on the other hand began with him as Messiah,
{175}
and they go on to the greater glories. John says, "These are written, that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God". Paul says, "The Son of God, Jesus Christ" (@2 Corinthians 1: 19). Now Paul was the first who preached that Jesus is the Son of God, and we never get the full truth of the gospel until we apprehend the glory of Christ's Person. "We ... beholding ... the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image". No one, until he apprehends that Jesus is the Son of God, has got to the greatness of the gospel, and consequently to the greatness of the grace of God. The more sense you get of the glory of the Lord, the truth of who He is, the greater sense you have of the grace of God; and why? Because it is the Son of God Himself who is the full expression of the grace of God. The Gospel presents a work; but the truth of the gospel centres in a Person, and that Person is the full expression of the grace of God in all that He is as Man. In the end of Luke we get the commission that "repentance and remission of sins should be preached ... among all nations"; but that is not the full height of the gospel. But in Galatians, "When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son ... to redeem ... that we might *receive sonship*"; then it is that we see the greatness of the gospel of the blessed God. The greater apprehension I have of the glory of that Person whom God sent forth -- His Son -- the greater apprehension I have of divine grace. It is a great point to remember that the measure of the grace of God is bound up with the glory of Christ's Person.
Now it is important to apprehend that the purposes of God are for Himself. Every promise is an expression of divine purpose. It is that to which God has engaged Himself. There were many promises in the Old Testament; and there are promises in the New. The former refer to earth -- promises
{176}
made to Abraham and to David. The great question of the Old Testament is whether God is to have the earth, or man. In the New Testament the field is enlarged. We get what carries us back to eternity, the hope of life "which God ... promised before the world began". The promises of the Old Testament are not yet fulfilled. They were confirmed to the Seed, and the Seed was Christ; and it was therefore impossible to get the fulfilment till Christ came. There was a provisional fulfilment, but all ended in failure; for when the vessel of promise came they killed Him. There was thus a complete breach between God and the world; not only with the Jew but also with the Gentile. This being so, where are the promises? The answer is, God has ordered and established everything for Himself in Christ; and when we see how God has done this, then it is we are established.
God does not make promises without power to fulfil them. Now, every promise of God has its confirmation in the Son of God, Christ Jesus. The great importance to be attached to the Son of God is this, that no one else could be morally competent to hold everything for God. You could not really have the Seed of the woman, who should bruise the serpent's head, nor the Christ, who should fulfil all God's will, apart from the Son of God. If things are to be held according to God's nature, it must be in some one of His nature. Death was to be annulled, and life and incorruptibility brought to light. Christ enters into death and annuls it, and as raised from the dead is a quickening Spirit to men. As such He can free man from the judgment of death, and raise him up in life. The Son of God is a life-giving Spirit. Believers are so completely freed from the judgment of death that now, what before confirmed the distance between man and God, brings us to the Lord. "Absent from the
{177}
body, present with the Lord". See what a change God has wrought in His grace! Death is now the servant of the believer: in fact it releases the believer so that he goes to be with the Lord. Now every promise of God is established in this One, the Son of God, who has annulled death and raises man up in life.
God has now secured all for Himself in the Son of God. He is morally competent to hold all as being of God's nature. He is suitable to be Heir of all things. He is the last Adam with universal dominion. He has brought in life. How? He makes us to be partakers of His nature. He will do this for Israel by-and-by, though not in the same sense as the Christian, but the law will be written in their hearts. No living soul could understand this if they did not apprehend that Jesus is the Son of God. "For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen". Nothing is lost for God. Whatever may be the incapacity of man, all is secured in the Son of God. If we are taught by grace the stability of all the promises of God, then it is that we get "unto the glory of God by us". God has plans and purposes of His own; and more than that, the establishment and confirmation of all this is in the Son of God, Jesus Christ. He is the *Vessel*: the One in whom all is to be fulfilled is a quickening Spirit. Man by nature is under death; and the Son of God, who has died for all, is a life-giving Spirit; otherwise we have no power to release ourselves from the judgment of death upon us. The promises were confirmed to the seed -- Isaac, who was in figure risen from the dead. Man is raised up in Christ's own nature -- "quickened together with him"; that is, he is made to live before God in the divine nature.
This is one side; the stability of every promise
{178}
is in the Son of God. Now I want to dwell on another point: namely, the work of establishment *in us* (verses 21, 22). Now we all have to do with God in our responsibility and walk. Every Christian has responsibilities here, for we are in the scene of them; and the title "the Lord" connects itself with this. We have to walk under His authority. What we do in word or deed has to be done in the name of the Lord Jesus. "Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord".
But there is another thing -- there is a work of grace going on *in* the believer underneath all that -- silently carried on by God, not by man. God may use a vessel to bring truth before you; but you are taught *of God*. There is no real teaching in divine things save by the Spirit of God. We have no need that any man teach us. "The anointing which ye have received ... teacheth you". There is a work going on in the believer which is forming him in the divine nature; and as we are formed in the divine nature, we are established in Christ. Only one word expresses the divine nature, and that is love. How far have you travelled on that road? As a test I offer a suggestion to you. Read @1 Corinthians 13 (from verse 4) and instead of reading "charity" read "I". Then you can measure yourself. *I* suffer long and am kind; *I* envy not; *I* do not vaunt myself; *I* am not puffed up, etc. Love is your measure for God and for the assembly. If you are formed in the divine nature you can say "I". The truth is stated in an abstract way in @1 Corinthians 13; it is what is properly descriptive of the divine nature in a scene of contrariety. Our stature is what we are as formed in the divine nature. If a Christian is not the expression of it, there is no expression of it here. Christ was it when here. It is *God* who works it.
{179}
He sets to work to establish His promises in Christ; and then it is He who works to establish us in Christ. "Now he which ... hath anointed us, is God". Christ when here was anointed, and in the Spirit's power set God forth perfectly in goodness. *He* could have set God forth perfectly without the anointing; but He received the anointing as having become the vessel in which God was to be set forth. The anointing to us is that we are divinely taught, in order that we might rightly represent God. "If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and His love is perfected in us". In the Lord there was the fulness of intelligence; and the way in which it worked out was in a full presentation of God in this world. We get divine intelligence by the Spirit; and we get that so that we may set God forth. Christianity is wonderful. The divine nature came out perfectly in Christ as Man here; now it is to come out in the Gentiles.
Then "Who hath also sealed us". The sealing is His attestation; and if we walk in the Spirit we give proof that we have the seal of God upon us. Christ had the seal of God the Father upon Him; and the attestation to the Christian, too, is the gift of the Spirit.
Then we get "hath ... given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". We are joint-heirs with Christ. The Spirit is the earnest in our hearts now of the inheritance.
All these things tend to give stability to the Christian. The testimony of the apostle gave him stability; his ways were in keeping with the testimony. It is God who establishes us, and who has anointed and sealed us. What an honour to have God's seal upon us! If we walk in the Spirit He owns us. There is no greater proof of my being His than that I am no longer a slave of the flesh. I then give
{180}
proof that I have the seal of God on me. "Ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty".
We have to wait for the inheritance; that is the fulfilment of all the promises of God. This all comes out in @Ephesians 1. We have not only an inheritance in Christ, but we have the earnest of it "until the redemption of the purchased possession".
May God be pleased to open the subject up to you. We all want stability, and it flows from seeing, first, that God has established everything for Himself in Christ; and secondly, from His work *in us*. The glory of God is the first consideration. If this is not first secured, as it is in Christ, in whom everything is established, there could be no glory for God anywhere else.
May God grant that His corresponding work may go on in us, that *we* may be established. It is all God's work. If you take this in, you will get a sense of what divine grace can do; and the effect will be that you will stand apart from the whole course of things here.
{181}
TRANSPARENCY
@2 Corinthians 3: 12 - 18; @2 Corinthians 4: 1 - 6
I see a principle in Scripture, and that is, that if God reveals Himself to us in a certain way, we are privileged to answer to the particular revelation. We spoke on a former occasion of stability. We saw in Christ the stability of God's purposes. "Whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him is the amen, for glory to God by us". Everything has its yea and amen in Christ. Then the apostle goes on to speak of the work effected in the saints, for the saints are to answer to what God has made known as to His purpose. I now pass on to another point.
If God comes out without a veil, then *we* are to be without a veil -- we are to be transparent. Transparency did characterize Paul as the servant -- the minister. No doubt he had a peculiar place, but what the minister was, *we* are to be. If God comes out without anything to obscure or hide, then transparency is to mark the saints, they are to be without a veil; and I hope to show you how that is brought about. In chapter 4 we get the marks of transparency, and I judge that all of us are to be characterized by it. Certainly, nothing can be more important for a servant than to be transparent. The apostle says as to himself, "By manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God". In his work and service, the apostle was transparent, so that his testimony was in no way obscured. He was without a veil as to the gospel.
My first point is that, in Christ, God is presented without a veil. I shall show how this has come to be. There are two things in Christ; one is, that
{182}
God has come out; and the other, that man has entered in. In the Old Testament neither was true. Now, it has pleased God to come out in the grace of His ways; God has revealed Himself through the death of Christ. As the result of this, man goes in, not in the flesh, but by a new and living way, as alive by the Spirit.
It is of all importance to see how God has removed the veil on His side (read chapter 3: 13 - 18). The "open face" in verse 18 refers to the Lord, not to the apostle; that is, the Lord is with unveiled face, no veil is on the face of Christ to hide His glory -- the light that shines there. It is in contrast to Moses, who had a veil on his face before the people. You get the same thought of a veil in chapter 4: 3; "If also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost". In chapter 4 the point is, that there was no veil on the side of the servant. Moses veiled his face, but it was right for him to do so. A veil is that which hides divine effulgence. Moses was compelled to veil his face, for there was divine effulgence there, and God did not allow Israel to see it because He was dealing with man then on the ground of flesh and responsibility. When God comes out in divine effulgence, He makes known His heart to man. When the Lord Jesus was upon earth, the brightness partly shone forth (@John 3: 16). There was the effulgence of God, though it did not come out fully then. It awaited the cross. When God comes out according to His glory, He deals with men according to His love, not according to man's works; and the result is that the believer is to have eternal life, according to @John 3: 16. Moses was the law-giver; when his face shone, he was really beyond his system. Many Christians, in the same way, are bound up in their systems, but personally they are beyond them. Moses personally was a most distinguished man of faith. So when he
{183}
went in to God, he came out with the reflection of His glory. Moses as law-giver brought the law, for God was going to test man; but personally Moses had access to the mercy-seat at all times. It was from off the mercy-seat that God gave him His communications.
The effulgence of God was veiled even when Christ was here. It was veiled by the flesh. The Lord had natural links, and that tended to hide the divine effulgence in the face of Christ. Now all is altered. We see Him at the right hand of God; and who sits there? The Son of God. The great proof of His being this was the resurrection from the dead; the next proof is in the fact of His being at the right hand of God (see @Hebrews 1: 13), and we have the divine effulgence in His face. The glory of the Lord is now revealed. There is the declaration that He is the Son of God. All is out now, and you never apprehend the full height of the gospel until you apprehend that Jesus is the Son of God. At Pentecost, the testimony of Peter and John was that the One who by the wicked hands of the Jews had been crucified, was exalted and made Lord and Christ, and they preached forgiveness of sins in His name, and the gift of the Holy Ghost; but the full height of the gospel is in connection with "the glory of the Lord" -- what He is as the Son of God.
The testimony of the apostles at the beginning of the Acts was based on the commission in @Luke 24. This gospel is still preached. It was preached on the day of Pentecost, but it does not make known the purpose of God in regard of man, it is not the full height of the gospel.
When we come to @Galatians 1: 16, we have Paul saying: "When it pleased God ... to reveal his Son in me, that I should preach him (as glad tidings) among the heathen". Then, in chapter 4, "God sent forth his Son ... to redeem them that
{184}
were under the law, that we *might receive sonship*". The question here is not of responsibility, nor of repentance and remission of sins, but of God sending forth His Son to effectuate His purpose, that we might receive sonship. He makes known the height of His purpose in the One whom He sends forth, His grace is commensurate with the Person who comes out. If we did not know forgiveness, we could not come into this; but, knowing forgiveness, we learn that God sent forth His Son that we might receive sonship.
The more you apprehend the glory of the Lord, the more you perceive the fulness of the grace of God; thus we are in the light of His purpose. Nothing is more important or blessed than to apprehend the purpose of God for you. Many Christians do not go beyond the question of their responsibility being met. What I understand in the glory of the Lord is, that the more you behold it, the more you see the grace of God, for the glory of the Lord is commensurate with the grace of God, and that is in the gift of sonship.
So long as Christ was here, there were glimpses of His glory seen, but now there is no veil, He is no longer "after the flesh", but declared to be Son of God with power by resurrection of the dead: He is at God's right hand, the One to whom it has been said, "Sit on my right hand", and He has power over all flesh, to give eternal life to as many as the Father has given Him. In @John 17 He prays to be glorified to this end. The full light of God's purpose has been disclosed in the Lord Jesus Christ, and the full light of grace shines out in the Son of God.
Now a few words as to the servant. We have to answer to the way in which God has come out; so the apostle says, "We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness,
{185}
nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God". Notice three points:
<ol><li>"manifestation of the truth" (verse 2);</li><li>"preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus Lord" (verse 5);</li><li>"hath shined in our hearts" (verse 6).</li></ol>These are three marks of transparency in the servant. "By manifestation of the truth", is the use he made of the word of God, and that is the truth. Truth is that which may be known of God. God is not said to be truth, but Christ is the truth, because all that may be known of God is revealed in Christ. The apostle did not make a false use of the word of God; he did not use it to teach fallen man morality; but he used it to make God known. The word of God is the expression of Himself; the word is morally God Himself. @Hebrews 4: 12 explains this; "The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword", etc. "Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do". The antecedent to "his sight" is the word of God. The connection is as intimate as can be between the word and God. In this way the apostle used the Scriptures to make God known. If you read prophecy simply to get information as to events, it is not right. Do you read the Old Testament that you may know God? God gave the word that He might be known of man. The light came out fully in Christ. So He is the Word; and what for? That man might trust *God*, and not man or the devil. There is in Christ the complete revelation of all that God is, so that He may be known to man. The word of God is only used rightly to this end. The first mark of transparency in a servant is the simple purpose in using the word to make God known.
{186}
The second mark is, "We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus Lord". When a servant has a true idea of "Christ Jesus Lord", he does not preach himself. When he is marked by assumption and self-importance, he is out of the place of a servant. A servant in my house is not to assume a place of prominence. Apostleship only made a man a Levite; a believer is a priest. The competition among saints should be as to who will go the lowest. The one who has the greatest grace goes lowest; he does not lord it over saints but serves them. The Lord at the right hand of God was the One whom the apostle preached, because He is the One vested with power to remove all that stands in the way of the accomplishment of God's purpose. So we get in @Ephesians 6, "Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might". He has might to subdue all to Himself, and all that stands in the way He will remove. The apostle evidently had a great sense of who the Lord was: the One at the right hand of God, with unlimited power from God to give effect to the purposes of God. So he preached Christ Jesus the Lord, and "ourselves your servants for Jesus sake", He had naturally parts and energy to be a leader among men, but as Christ's apostle he competed to take the lowest place. It is a great thing if you give saints the impression that you are their servant. If you have a true sense of the glory of the Lord, this is the place that you seek to take.
Now I come to the third point: "Hath shined in *our hearts*, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". The shining was into the *heart* of the apostle. Nothing is effective in us till the heart is touched. The apostle's heart was touched by what God had made known to him of His glory. God's Son was revealed in him. The glory of God is in the face of Jesus Christ. In Him is the effulgence of all that God has
{187}
made known of Himself in the accomplishment of His purposes. There are two things in this world, sin and death, which are a contradiction to the glory of God. The first compromises the righteousness of God, and death calls in question His power. But in the Lord we see God glorified. Who is going now to say that God is unrighteous or that He is weak? The blood of Christ is the witness that sin is intolerable to Him, and is a proof of His righteousness. The resurrection of Christ is the evidence of His power. The righteousness and the power of God are thus witnessed in Christ. No one could doubt now that God is righteous and that He is powerful. But more than that, in the face of Jesus His love and grace shine out -- He did not spare His Son. The great motive at work in all was love. All has come to light now, and God's love was the spring of all for man. "The kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man appeared". The time arrived when God saw fit to make known His love. All His attributes were vindicated where they had been compromised, and the grace and love of His heart are made known. The greater our apprehension of "the glory of the Lord", the greater our apprehension of the grace of God.
God will display His grace in the saints, but there is no end to love. Love will have company, and thus, "for his great love wherewith he loved us", we are raised up, and made to sit down in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. We are raised up to God's habitation. God will have us there. All this had shone into the heart of the apostle and had taken complete possession there; so he had the greatest delight in making known "the glory of the Lord", the glory of God shining in the face of Jesus Christ, and thus that the aching heart of man might find its resting place in divine love.
The apostle had these marks of transparency.
{188}
No intrusion of the flesh was allowed so as to make himself prominent and obscure the truth. When the truth takes possession of the heart, a man is so delighted that he takes pleasure in proclaiming it, whatever the difficulties may be which he has to pass through. May God give us understanding to see how completely God has revealed Himself. And the servant is to be a reflex of it. The apostle could say he was so, without a veil; that, if his gospel were veiled, it was veiled in them that are lost.
{189}
CONFIDENCE
@2 Corinthians 4: 16 - 18; @2 Corinthians 5: 1 - 10
My object in previous addresses has been to present certain moral characteristics by which Christians should be marked, and how they are produced in us. The first was stability; the second transparency; and I want now to present another very important characteristic -- namely, confidence, and the way in which it is reached in our souls. The apostle speaks of it twice in the fifth chapter. He was "always confident", and in connection with confidence was diligence. "We are zealous" because we are confident, and not in order that we might be. The true divine way is zeal because of confidence.
I think everybody will own the great importance to the Christian of these principles. As regards stability, it results from the apprehension of purpose, how God has secured everything for His own glory in Christ, and then that the saints are established in Him.
You will never be stable so long as you are on the ground of responsibility; it is when in your soul you get off the ground of responsibility on to the ground of purpose that you are established; it is there that God establishes you in Christ.
Next, as to transparency, there is no veil on God's side, and we are privileged to be in the light as God is in the light. Jesus stands as the anti-type of Moses. We can see that the mediator of the new covenant is the Son of God. Thus, because there is no veil on God's side, there is to be none on ours. Paul says, "If also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost", not in himself.
The apostle did not obtrude himself; if he had made anything at all of himself he would so far have
{190}
veiled the truth. The meaning of transparency is walking in the light, flesh completely judged, everything *out*.
Everything is out on God's part, and it should be so on ours, with the result that "we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin". If you allow the flesh you are more or less artificial, for you have to keep up appearances. People of the world keep up appearances. They have not the courage to appear what they are -- they are artificial. If you put on anything you are not transparent.
With the apostle it was not only what he said, but what he *was*. The system of the world depends on the keeping up of appearances, for things would be intolerable if every one appeared nakedly what he was.
Now I come to confidence, an important principle in Christian life. It is a great thing to see on what these things depend. It is evident from the passage I read that confidence depends on the work of God not *for* but *in* us. "He that hath wrought us for this self-same thing (the glorified condition) is God". "Therefore we are always confident", etc. If we are conscious of the work of God *in* us, the effect is that we are always confident. If you know that God has wrought you for His purpose, whatever may be the difficulty or contrariety you will be confident, and the effect of that will be that you are zealous, whether present or absent, to be acceptable to the Lord. I have been sometimes afraid lest the Lord's coming should find me unprepared -- not confident. If you are confident, you are prepared. I want to refer a little to the work of God in us. People may tell me I am turning saints in on themselves. Nothing of the kind! I do them great harm if I do not seek to help them to recognize the nature of God's work in them. Before touching on that
{191}
I will, however, say a word as to the work of God for us. This is to give the believer a standing before Him. He has been pleased in Christ to bring in the condemnation of sin in the flesh, and in resurrection to give man a new status before God -- completely justified. This is the result of a work *for*, not in us. We are not only freed from judgment, but raised up to life.
That is the blessed footing on which saints are. We can only enter on life on the footing of resurrection, because the judgment of death is on man, and until you accept death with Christ you do not get on to the footing of resurrection. The work of God for us is to give us this standing (see @Colossians 2: 12).
But now as to the work of God in us. In the first verse I read (@2 Corinthians 4: 16) we have "the outward man" and "the inward man" spoken of. You could not talk of that in connection with any one but a Christian, because there is only one man in the unconverted. But as to the Christian, Scripture speaks of "the outward man", which is in touch with seen things, and "the inward man", which is in touch with unseen things. The outward man is that which is connected with the things of human life down here -- that in which we can suffer. The things in which an unconverted man lives do not go beyond that which is seen. But in the Christian there is the inward man, and the inward man is in touch with the things that are not seen. "The things which are seen are temporal, the things which are not seen are eternal". There is a power in the Christian by which he can be abstracted from the seen things and placed in relation consciously with unseen things. Our blessings are all connected with unseen things, though we enjoy temporal mercies in connection with seen things. I have had large experience of mercy with regard to seen things; but my blessings as a Christian are all
{192}
connected with unseen things. Eternal life, for instance, is so because eternal things are unseen.
The word of God gives light as to unseen things; we could not have to do with them unless they were revealed -- it would be only imagination. Our place as sons of God and our proper blessings as Christians are unseen. "We are all sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus"; we have the light of the word as to these things, and the "inward man" is therefore in touch with them. The Christian can abstract himself from seen things, and in the power of the Spirit have to do with unseen things. It may be difficult to some to understand this; but all spiritual life is connected with the power of abstraction, and the power of abstraction represents the work of God *in us*. The unseen things are the same that we shall have to do with in heaven; *now* we see them through a dim glass -- obscurely; by-and-by we shall see "face to face", but they are the same things.
The Christianity of many believers does not rise much beyond seen things. They honour God in their life down here, but it is in connection with seen things. The "inward man" is connected with unseen things. Most of us know, I trust, something of being withdrawn from things down here into a region where everything is of God.
Now to speak more of what is called state. "We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For in this we groan ... not that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord".
{193}
I turn to a verse in Hebrews (@Hebrews 4: 12) for the sake of one expression, "the dividing asunder of soul and spirit". That is what you would call dissection.
The word of God can carry out the most delicate dissection, cutting even between the soul and spirit. You must understand that, in order to enter into this fifth chapter of 2 Corinthians. Whatever may be God's work in the Christian, his individuality, the conscious "I", remains unchanged. The being connected with the "old man" or "new man" does not alter this. You may have before you an individual, who was once in a certain moral condition, now detached from that condition and connected with another, but the individuality is never changed. Whatever the measure of the work of God in us we are not different persons. Paul as an apostle was the same individual as Saul the persecutor.
New creation does not touch the fact of individuality; it leaves us the same in person that we were before we became the subjects of the new creation; but the word of God is living and can come between the spirit, in which the truth of our individuality lies, and the natural condition which the soul represents, and can divide between the two. The effect of it is very remarkable. You have here in @2 Corinthians 5 an individual in a certain condition, and yet having power to detach himself in his own thought from that condition and to attach himself in spirit to a condition which as to him has not yet come to pass.
The "tabernacle" was Paul's natural condition down here, but even if it were dissolved he was not touched by it. We are all in this condition down here, subject to suffering and death, but able in spirit to attach ourselves to a new condition not yet made manifest. No Old Testament saint could do that, because the new glorious condition
{194}
of man was not revealed, and until it was, no such thing could be known. Now it is revealed, but not yet manifested. We are waiting for it, we look for the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour from heaven, who shall change our vile bodies into the fashion of His glorious body. The new condition is revealed, though not manifested; and as the effect of the work of God the Christian can detach himself from the one condition and in spirit attach himself to the other. "If our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands". A tabernacle is not an adequate or permanent dwelling for man. It may do for a time, but a man looks to live some day in a house. We are here in a tent, but we look some day to be clothed with a house. One is content to be in the tabernacle -- our present earthly condition -- for a time; but the work of God in us represents that for which a tabernacle is not adequate, and the apostle presents the thought of the tabernacle being exchanged for a house, a building in contrast to a tent.
"In this we groan". Why do we groan? Because we are conscious of being hampered in our present condition. If my tabernacle were big enough I should not groan. The Christian groans by reason of the weakness of the condition in which he is. Even if the will is not at work the condition is one of weakness. The work of God is greater than the actual condition in which we are. The house is looked at as *out* of heaven, "a building from God", suited to one who is heavenly. The idea of being clothed so that we should not be "found naked" is introduced by way of warning. I understand by it the possibility of people being clothed in another condition and yet Christless. Man can only stand before God as covered. The principle of covering runs through Scripture. Adam and Eve needed a
{195}
covering. When Balaam would have cursed Israel, they were seen covered in their tents. Laodicea is counselled to buy raiment that she may be clothed. But the desire of the saints is to be "clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life". Life is connected with the glorious condition which God has been pleased to purpose for us. It is a great thing to have this in view. If we understood much about it, we should be different in our ways here, and prepared even for dissolution. I can conceive nothing more wonderful than that a work of God has taken place in me which enables me to detach myself from one condition and connect myself with another.
Are we all looking for the Lord Jesus from heaven as the Saviour? He is going to change these bodies, and we shall have a house, not a tabernacle, but a building, a condition adequate to the greatness of God's work in us.
Nothing is more important for saints to recognize than the fact of the glorious condition in view. We have the earnest of the Spirit; already boldness to enter into the holiest and into sonship, before we come into the actual condition which we are awaiting. It has not yet been manifested what we shall be. The only light we have on it is the glorious condition into which Christ has entered, and "we know that ... we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is". Meantime God has given to us the earnest of the Spirit. The Spirit always connects Himself with the work of God in the Christian and operates in that. "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God".
We should be "always confident" if we understood more about the work of God in us. We have not to wait for our relationship to God, for we have a present relationship and can cry "Abba, Father".
{196}
We have not to wait for the Spirit. He bears witness, and is the pledge of the glorious condition in which we are to be; and "therefore", says the apostle, "we are always confident", for while here there is always something better in view -- if we should be absent from the body we shall be present with the Lord. It may be that we shall lose the tabernacle and for the present not get the house, and as thus apart we may not have the faculties connected with the condition; but even so we shall be "present with the Lord", which is far better.
The importance of maintaining the fact of our unchanged individuality is seen in that the individual remains -- and if absent from the body is present with the Lord.
The moral effect of this confidence in the apostle was that he was zealous, whether present or absent, to be acceptable to Him. Things will work in that line.
The first thing is that God has wrought us for His pleasure. His purpose is His pleasure. If I recognize that, I shall be always confident. If your tabernacle be dissolved you will go to be with the One who loves you and whom you love. If I am to be with Him, I want to be acceptable to Him during the little while I remain here.
I should like to put the question, Are you confident? You are not in the condition for which you are wrought, but can connect yourself in spirit with it; and if your tabernacle should be dissolved, are you willing to be absent from the body and present with the Lord? Things become very simple to the Christian where love is in exercise. If you love the Lord it is simple to cherish the thought that if absent from the body you will be present with Him. If you love Him you will seek to be near Him and to know that He is near you. Are we travelling on that road? We are here in a contrary
{197}
scene, where the Lord is not owned, but He is *our* Lord and He loves us.
I think all here will acknowledge the importance of these principles: stability, transparency and confidence. God has wrought us for the glorious condition which He has purposed for us. "When he shall appear, we shall be like him". "As we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly".
{198}
SEPARATION AND HOLINESS
@2 Corinthians 6: 14 - 18; @2 Corinthians 7: 1
I have been seeking on previous occasions to bring forward some of the moral characteristics which should distinguish the Christian; and it is important to remember the principle that, in every case, what we are to be depends on the way in which God has been pleased to make Himself known to us.
We are established in Christ because God has established everything for Himself in Christ.
Again, nothing can restore the veil on God's side, so we are privileged to answer to that in being in the light as He is in the light. I believe vast numbers of Christians think that because the veil has been removed on God's side, it has of necessity gone also on ours; but if the flesh is admitted and sanctioned and we seek to maintain a status in the world, we shall find a great hindrance in the enjoyment of the light of God. The veil ought not to exist on our side. We appropriate the death of Christ, and are circumcised in the putting off of the body of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ (@Colossians 2: 11). We do not get the good of what God has done until we reach Gilgal.
Then again as to confidence, that depends very much on the Christian's apprehension of God's work in him; we cannot work ourselves up into it. (1) God has wrought us for glory. (2) He has given us the earnest of the Spirit. He has wrought us for something greater than our "earthly house of this tabernacle", that is, the mortal part will be swallowed up by life. The Christian is thus always confident in spirit. There is no greater privilege than to account himself dead, so that he can live to God in Christ Jesus. The judgment has been
{199}
borne and the believer is crucified with Christ. He takes the place of death to things here, and death is deliverance, because it disconnects him from that in which the flesh lives and which is contrary to God down here. To be free from the world is to be free from sin, so as to enjoy the full light of the blessed revelation which God has given of Himself in the death of Christ.
We come now to *holiness*; the obligation of the people of God. It is almost the first principle of relationship with God. It came out with regard to Israel, but it is applicable in a much greater degree to the Christian. Israel had to be separate from material things; with the Christian the separation is moral; and holiness follows separation, and separation depends on the light in which God has come out -- the way in which He has been pleased to reveal Himself to us. If we fail to apprehend this I do not think we shall be marked by holiness. It is a great thing to accept an obligation, that is a principle of righteousness. An upright man in the world accepts his obligations, even though he may not be able to discharge them. We have to accept the obligation to holiness, because God is holy, and the obligation to love one another, because God loves us (@1 John 3: 16; @1 John 4: 11). "Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another". In the passage before us, we have first the obligation to separation, and then we find that holiness follows on separation. It is love which leads, I judge, to holiness, it is not faith. I do not admit the doctrine of "holiness by faith". I believe it arises from a confusion in people's minds as between righteousness and holiness. Righteousness is by faith, because it is God's righteousness, holiness is by love. There is no real antidote to lust, except love. The Spirit is against the flesh, love is against lust. If we were loving God and Christians and all men, as we are
{200}
charged to do, there would be no room in our hearts for lust. It is only as we are walking in love that we shall be "perfecting holiness in the fear of God", for love then governs the heart. If love is not there, lust will find room. In verses 14 - 16 we see how God has come out.
<ol><li>In righteousness;</li><li>in light;</li><li>in Christ;</li><li>in the believer;</li><li>in the temple;</li></ol> and this to the displacement of everything that was here: lawlessness, darkness, Belial, the unbeliever, and idols. If we do not realize the way in which God has come out, we shall not take the step which is dependent on it, namely, separation. Separation may not be quite so plain to us in these days of professing Christianity as it was at the outset. It is difficult for us to realize the state of things into which the gospel came, which the apostle refers to here; but every one of these principles is the same now, only seen in a more subtle form. We can well understand separation from heathenism, but in a corrupt Christianity we need to look at things morally. Separation from all that is contrary to God in Christendom requires a certain amount of discernment.
The first attribute in which God presents Himself in the gospel is righteousness, because the gospel came into a world of sin; "therein is the righteousness of God revealed" (@Romans 1: 17) and the testimony to it is the blood of Christ. God could not tolerate sin; He must judge it. The judgment has been borne, and sin has been put away from before God; and the gospel is a witness that God is "just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus" -- but first He is just.
Then He comes out as light; sin having been judged, He can come out in the full revelation of Himself. In the cross the veil was rent, but even light is in God subordinate to love, and it is love that has come out as light. So far we have had
{201}
principles. Then, "What concord hath Christ with Belial?" This term Belial indicates some one worthless or apostate, and might be applied to Satan or Antichrist. It is the spirit that is opposed to Christ, and which is already in the world. Then, "What part hath he that believeth with an infidel?" There is no light from God in the unbeliever; what marks the believer is that he is in the light of God, because there is faith. The light you have is according to the measure of your faith, and the unbeliever has no part with you.
The idea of the temple is, where God is sanctified in the eye of man. That was the idea of the Old Testament; and what is opposed to that is idols, for idolatry claimed the authority over men which belonged to God, and the effect was that man was debased in his thought of God. Holiness marks God's temple. The saints are now His temple. He repudiates a material house. "What house will ye build me? saith the Lord".
It is a great point for us, as it was for the Corinthians, to recognize the way in which God has come out, otherwise we shall not see the obligation to separation. Lawlessness has overspread Christianity; we do not need to look for it among the heathen. In the "great house" the terrible spirit of Antichrist is working. "The mystery of iniquity doth already work". In the Revelation the harlot rides the beast; and the beast turns the harlot to his own purpose before he casts her off, and she is burnt with fire. The principle of popery, for instance, is essentially sin: man claiming what is due to God only. Look abroad in Christendom and see how Judaism has been built up again, shutting out the fact that God has come out in light. A priesthood is not wanted if God has come out. It is not now a question of clergy and laity. The earthly priesthood depended on the veil being there.
{202}
"If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another". So we might speak of the influence of Belial in the "great house", the unbeliever also and idols; all are tolerated in what professes to be the house of God. We have to judge of these principles, and maintain a rigid separation from evil. Never was there a moment when the obligation to separation was so urgent. If we are going to get what properly belongs to us, the separation must be complete and absolute, otherwise we shall be greatly hindered from getting all that God would be to us. "Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate", that is, from the world and the principles we see around: "all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life". We have to judge all these in the light of God. "Touch not the unclean thing" -- do not parley with it, "and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you saith the Lord (Jehovah) Almighty". These titles of God were connected with His people down here, but the Christian gets the gain of them. This comes very close home, for if the Christian is looking to gain advantage by man, he will not get the good of them.
The idea of Jehovah is the eternally faithful One; Almighty is the One who showed Himself so, on behalf of those who feared Him. Abram would not take the least thing from the king of Sodom -- the world. God was enough for him. The Christian who walks in separation is now the one who gets the benefit of these names. I quite admit the very special way in which we know God as Father; but in this passage it is not a question of entering into the highest Christian privilege, but of being sons and daughters of Jehovah Almighty. He will be a Father to His earthly people, but not in the sense in which we know Him as such in heaven. All the promises
{203}
are established in Christ and they belong to the Christian.
Now a word in regard to holiness. I turn to @1 Thessalonians 3: 12, 13. "The Lord make you to increase and abound in love ... to the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness". The real way to holiness is love; that is the way it works. In @Ephesians 5: 1 - 4 we have the contrast of love with lust. Lust will never be subdued in the heart except by love. In covetousness I naturally make self the object, and seek to turn everything to my own gratification. Love dispenses, does not consider itself, but serves its object, which is not self. Christ is the expression of God's love to us, and we are to be "imitators of God, as beloved children, and walk in love". That is the way in which the heart of the Christian is governed by love; we shall love others in proportion as we realize that God loves us. Then "perfecting holiness in the fear of God". It is a very good thing to walk in the fear of God. The thought of God for us is, that we should be "holy and without blame before him in love". There has hardly been a greater delusion palmed off on the Christian than "holiness by faith". It is by love, but at the same time we shall not come to the enjoyment of the love of God till we are apart from things which are contrary to Him down here. We have to judge them, and then it is, "I ... will be a Father unto you". He can then make known His love; but the love of God is a holy love, and love seeks not its own, but finds its joy in the gratification of its object. The love of the Christian too is a holy love, it is without partiality. We have to answer to the love of God to us; and thus the heart will be established unblameable in holiness before God.
{204}
{205}
THE HEADING UP OF ALL THINGS IN CHRIST
{206}
(1) THE HEAVENLY COMPANY AND THE CHURCH
@Hebrews 11: 1 - 10; @Hebrews 12: 1, 2; @Hebrews 6: 13 - 20
It is clear that in this epistle we get the thought of the Christian running a race. The fact that Christ has entered in "within the veil" as Forerunner indicates that there are people running a race in regard to whom He is the "Forerunner". If there were not others following, the expression would not have any force. When we come to chapter 12 we get the admonition to "lay aside every weight, and the sin which so easily entangles us, run with endurance the race that lies before us, looking stedfastly on Jesus the leader and completer of faith". Running with patience the race set before us is that which is to mark the Christian. We know that the Apostle Paul himself had the idea of running a race (we see that in @Philippians 3) he was running a race, and properly every Christian is doing so, and in order to run a race it is necessary to "lay aside every weight". If a man is running a race, he will keep his eye upon the goal or he will not run steadily. We want to be unencumbered on the one hand, and to keep our eye steadily on the goal on the other; the latter is the admonition in chapter 12.
In the race, we are running from the joys of earth to the joys of heaven; and if you ask where the race is performed, I answer it is performed in the soul of the believer. No one can see what is going on within, but very many people, if they observed, could see the effects of it. We have the great fact that Christ has entered in as Forerunner. I have considerable hesitation in applying to the Lord
{207}
thoughts such as that of a race, which are really connected with the Christian; but at all events He was taking the course from earth to heaven.
In this epistle we have Christ presented to us in the early part in two lights, that is, as Apostle and High Priest. In the beginning of chapter 3 we are admonished to "consider" the Apostle and High Priest of our profession. It is a great point to "consider". You will never get understanding if you do not "consider". The Lord gives understanding, but His giving understanding follows on our considering. Paul said to Timothy: "Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things". The thing which is lacking in most of us is the habit of considering; and this is so as regards the Apostle and High Priest of our confession. We believe in Him, but now we have to "consider" Him.
There are two main thoughts with regard to the course of Christ -- He "came out" and He has "entered in"; He came out as Apostle, but He has gone in as Priest. In this epistle no apostle is named, for Christ is the apostle; the apostle is the One whom God employs to inaugurate a system, We see this in Moses. We are told in the beginning of the epistle that God has spoken in the last days in the Son. The Son came out in order that in Him God might make known His mind. God was not speaking any longer by prophets -- He had spoken in that way -- but now He took in hand to speak by the Son. The idea connected with that is, that, as Apostle, Christ "comes out". He says, "I came from God" -- He came into the world. He was the Apostle -- He is a great deal more than that, for, "God has spoken in the last days by the *Son*".
But Christ has "entered in" as Priest. He was not properly Priest until He "entered in"; and the reason is, that He had come to accomplish
{208}
redemption and establish righteousness, and on the basis of righteousness He is Priest. "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec".
I think you will have no difficulty in apprehending the difference of idea between "coming out" and "entering in". The one who has "entered in" as Forerunner helps others who are on the road. Christ is Priest at the right hand of God, and as Priest He helps us who are on the road. Do you know how you are helped? Well, it appears to me that nothing is indispensable to us down here except Christ. You may think the good of this world in your circumstances is indispensable. But nothing is indispensable. Health is not even indispensable. The one thing indispensable is Christ. The end to which Christ is working in regard to us is to make us conscious that He is indispensable to us, and it is when this is so that we are helped on the road.
Now another thought comes out, and that is of *our* "entering in". What I want to point out is, that though God was making known from time to time, and by one person and another, His purpose with regard to earth, after all from the beginning He was really gathering together a company for heaven. It will not be difficult to show that, all along the line, from the time that sin came into the world, God was engaged in gathering a company out of the world.
At the same time God was working in view of the world to come, and many past things are not repeated in the ways of God. The flood happened once for all. It was used to purge the earth. The flood came in order that the earth might be regenerated (in a certain sense) to be a theatre for the world to come. There is no repetition of the flood. Evidently there will be an eventual purging of the earth and heaven by fire, but there will be no purging again of the earth by a flood. In @Revelation 4
{209}
is seen a rainbow. It is intended to remind us that the earth has once been purged by the flood -- in the way in which God allowed the flood to come upon it -- in order that it might be a theatre for His ways. I take another case: God brought Israel out of Egypt, and He brought them out for good, and will never bring them out again. God has called His Son "out of Egypt". I have no doubt that God brought Israel out of Egypt in view of the world to come. It is extremely interesting to see how many things in the ways of God in the past are in view of the world to come -- not really in view of this world. Israel was brought into the land, but I think only provisionally; for while they were still in the wilderness they had forfeited the land by making the golden calf. That makes it plain that they were only brought into the land provisionally, but they were brought out of Egypt once for all.
God was thus acting from time to time, and through one and another in times past, in regard to the world to come. But while He was doing that, all along the line there was being gathered a company for heaven. All those named in @Hebrews 11 formed part of a company which was being gathered for heaven. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Sarah -- all formed part of a heavenly company. They had not a forerunner, the way was not very clear to them, they could not probably see the end to which God was leading them; but in the light *we* have we can see what God was doing -- He was forming a company for heaven, and if all these were not to have their part in the resurrection, they really had nothing.
You may depend upon it we shall find all these witnesses of faith in heaven: "we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses". They are the sons of God, being the sons of the resurrection, and will have their part in heavenly glory;
{210}
they form part of the twenty-four elders that we find in the beginning of the Revelation. When John is shown "the things that are to be after these", he sees the throne and the twenty-four elders. I have no doubt that the twenty-four elders include the entire heavenly company, and God has been preparing that company from the outset. In the twenty-four elders we do not get the church seen in distinction, we get one compact, complete company; they form one whole, they worship together, and their worship is intelligent; they are not like the angels in their way of praising, for it is noticeable that whenever they praise they give a reason for their worship, that is, they are intelligent in the ways of God. They form a heavenly company around the throne, having their part in regard to the Lamb and to the throne.
Now in the end of the Revelation we find the church distinguished, and we do not read much about the twenty-four elders. I do not think the twenty-four elders are the bride, the Lamb's wife. We are told that in the twelve foundations of the holy city are the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb; and hence the bride, the Lamb's wife, is distinctive of the church. If it included the whole of the twenty-four elders, that is, the whole heavenly company, we would scarcely get the names of the twelve apostles in the foundation. I think we may safely conclude that the city represents the church, that is, the church in that aspect, as having had its foundations laid in the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
The saints who died before Christ never had a forerunner. The future to them was to a large extent indefinite. They had their faith and hope in God, and no doubt they had the sense that God would provide for them; but certainly they had not a forerunner who had entered in. The end in regard to us is very distinct, therefore we can be said
{211}
to be running a race; and at the same time the Forerunner has for us entered in, which is a very important point. The fact of the Forerunner having entered in has an immense effect on us, as it gives us a link with the scene into which He has entered: "It became him ... in bringing many sons unto glory". God has revealed His name in that way, and the truth for us is, not only that the Forerunner has entered in, but that we have a link with the Forerunner who has thus entered in. "Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec".
Christ has entered in as the Forerunner; He was the first to enter in. He has travelled the road from earth to heaven, in order that He might be Forerunner and Priest, and no one ever trod that road intelligently before Christ. He "endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God".
It is very important to remember that Christ has the place of the "Firstborn among many brethren". The course is clear, so to speak. We can keep our eye upon the goal -- "looking off unto Jesus". We can see where the race leads to, can apprehend the goal, and are going on to it. And what are we going on to the goal for? That in the day of the kingdom, in the day when everything is in display, we may have part with Christ. We are seeking to reach the goal, that we may have part in the glory of that day, "When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe".
The holy Jerusalem is seen "descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God: and her light like unto a stone most precious". It is
{212}
most important to remember that for us it is not simply a question of entering heaven, but of entering in order that we may come out. Christ has entered in, but it is in order that He may come out. He has gone to the right hand of God that He may come forth from the right hand of God. We shall be taken to heaven, but it is in order that we may come out of heaven with Christ -- never to be separated from Christ, but ever to be with Him.
Now it is the link with the Forerunner which makes all the distinction between those of old and ourselves. It is a great point to apprehend what is common to all the heavenly company. There is the part which we shall undoubtedly have with them, and I think you must take that into account. I see plainly enough the distinctiveness of the church, and yet we ought to contemplate the entire heavenly company, because it is presented to us in a complete way in Scripture. As I have said, we have a link with the Forerunner. Until the Holy Ghost was given, there was no link with the Forerunner. Some people would say that faith is the link; but the Spirit is the link, and it thus makes all the difference to us that the Spirit has been given.
The first consequence of this is, that we live by Christ, and come under the ministry of Christ. Christ looked at from that point of view is the Minister, and He brings us by the Spirit under the influence of light and warmth. All healthy natural existence here upon earth is dependent upon our keeping in light and warmth. If you were to shut up a new-born child in a dark cellar, life would not be very long maintained. There are certain conditions essential to life, and none more than light and warmth. I believe that we get these by the ministry of Christ. He brings us into the light, that is, into the revelation of God, and He brings us into warmth, that is, the sense of His love. We
{213}
are brought thus into conditions favourable to health. It is in that way that we live by Christ. I cannot describe how He does it -- perhaps by bringing Himself before us. The ministry of Christ is not exactly like the ministry of an apostle. The apostles ministered the truth to the saints; but the ministry of Christ is to keep Himself before the saints. The glory of God shines in His face, and we are told that nothing can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. I judge that Christ by the Spirit keeps Himself in our view, and attracts and attaches us to Himself; and it is in the apprehension of what subsists in Christ that we are in conditions which are favourable to spiritual life.
I suppose every believer cherishes Christ in thought. The point for us is not only what Christ has done, but what Christ is. We want to have Christ before us livingly, to get the good of the light that is set forth in Him. No one can know anything about God, except in Christ. The great declaration of God -- of divine love -- was in the death of Christ. There it is that "God commends his love towards us"; and if you want to know the disposition of God towards man, you must learn it in Christ. I judge that the point of the ministry of Christ is to keep Himself in our view, in order that we might get all the good of that which God has been pleased to set forth in Him, and the end of it is, that we might live by Christ. A man who lives by the world dies by the world. The world will court a man so long as that man is useful to it; but let that man grow old and fail or be no longer useful, the world will very soon put him aside, and hence if a man lives by the world he dies by the world. Christians do not live by the world, neither by its excitement nor its literature, but by Christ. The Lord Jesus said, "He that eateth me, even he shall live by me". "A little while, and the world seeth
{214}
me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also".
If you are wishing to be healthy and vigorous, you must be in healthy conditions; and to be in healthy conditions you must have Christ in view by the Spirit, and then it is that your constitution is formed by that which you enjoy in Christ as Christ is known to us. In human things it may be said that a wife lives by her husband. God has subjected the wife to the husband, and the husband is to love the wife, and, properly speaking, the wife lives morally by the love of the husband; and, on the other hand, the husband is known in the wife, not the wife in the husband. We get that thought at the end of Proverbs. A faithful wife is depicted, and the comment is, that the husband is known by her in the gates. If all of us were kept by the Spirit in the light of Christ (because "the darkness is passing, and the true light now shines"), what would be the result? The character of Christ would come out in us, and we should be marked down here by three qualities -- truth and meekness and righteousness. I speak of these because I find them to be connected with the Lord Himself; and those who are living by Christ, in the light of our Sun, in conditions favourable to spiritual life (as it is possible now to live by the Spirit), will come out in truth and meekness and righteousness. These would be exemplified in the saints down here.
As regards truth, the affections are regulated by truth, and no affection is disproportionate if truth has its place. Then what marks the Christian is meekness, because if affections are in activity in every right direction, the Christian will not be marked by haughtiness. Then there is righteousness, that is, fidelity in every relationship in which it has pleased God to place the Christian. Clever as men may be (and men are clever), there never was a
{215}
man in the world that could give you any clear and definite idea of truth and meekness and righteousness. You can get no conception of them except in Christ.
The gain we have in having Christ as Forerunner is that we are linked with the Forerunner, and in the future the Husband will be known in the bride. The bride will be in all the brightness of the Bridegroom; the glory of God is there, and "her light like unto a stone most precious". The peculiarity of the church is dependent, partly on the calling of God, but even more, in a way, on the link which subsists at this moment between the Forerunner and the many sons whom God is bringing to glory.
There is an education that is going on in the people of God, which is fitting them for the part to be enacted in them in the world to come. The church will be carried up to heaven to be presented in heaven. Christ will present the entire heavenly company there. There would be a great lack if He did not present the church in heavenly array, "not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing". But the holy city will come out, and the Bridegroom will be known in the bride in that day. In principle this is true now. If we "lived by Him", in the light and warmth of our blessed Sun, depend upon it that He would be known in us, we should be characterised by truth, meekness, righteousness, gentleness -- all that is of Him.
{216}
(2) THE HEAD OVER ALL THINGS
@Ephesians 1
I sought to make plain last time the line on which God had been working from the beginning, that is, gathering a company for heaven. I noticed the distinction between things at this present time, and what had been. The first point was, that, in contrast to saints of old, we have a Forerunner who has entered in, and we are linked with the Forerunner -- that is peculiar to the present time. But while there is that distinction, which is very marked, yet all the saints in heaven form one company. They do not form one church, but they form one company; all are in perfect unity in heaven. The company is presented to us in the Revelation under the figure of the twenty-four elders. They surround the throne, and form, so to speak, a complete company -- they have that part.
At the end of the Revelation, however, we get the church distinctively: it is spoken of as the bride, the Lamb's wife -- that is distinctive, and the bride is presented under the figure of the holy city, Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from God. There are thus two thoughts in the Revelation -- the entire heavenly company, and the bride, the Lamb's wife.
Now I come to another point very intimately connected with what I have said, that is, the truth of the Head, the One that God had in view in all His dealings; even anterior to the world God had the Head in view; the thought of eternal life is connected with the Head. God had, as we find in the early part of this chapter, certain purposes connected
{217}
with the Head, and He has "abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence, having made known to us the mystery of his will". There were thus not only the public and outward dealings of God in the world, but the mystery of His will, and it is the mystery of His will still, and will be until everything becomes manifest. When all things are made manifest, they are evidently no longer mysteries; meanwhile the apostle's labour was to make manifest the mystery of the gospel, as he was bound to do, and God "has made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he has purposed in himself for the dispensation of the fulness of times, to head up in one all things in Christ". The mystery of God's will underlay all the outward and public dealings of God; and you see how different is our position with regard to those that went before. God did not make known the mystery of His will before, for saints would not have understood it; I do not think Abraham and David really knew what God was going to effect. But now the Head has come in, and the Holy Ghost has been given, in order that He might make known to us the "mystery of his will". That is the thought in regard to us (before the dispensation of the fulness of times), on which I want to touch, as well as on our place in connection with the "good pleasure of his will".
There are three points that come out here (I do not touch on the first six verses) in regard to saints -- first, redemption; then inheritance; then the Spirit as the earnest of the inheritance. It has struck me that you get redemption and inheritance coming together in Scripture. When the commission was given by the Lord to the apostle Paul, to go to the Gentiles to "open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God", it was that they might receive
{218}
"forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Christ". You get the same thought here -- "By whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins" -- then "In whom we have obtained an inheritance". Therefore these things are common to every Christian, they are not the peculiar possession of any select company. All have forgiveness of sins, inheritance in Christ, and finally, the Spirit as the earnest of the inheritance.
I shall touch on these points, but will first say a little with regard to the mystery of God's will. And to that end I am going to trace in a few words the course of things in the world. I have thought over the expression "the world" in Scripture -- and judge that there is often a peculiar force in the use of the term.
As to the public dealings of God, things were allowed to go on much as they might before the flood, and then God brought in the judgment. Man had revolted from God, and was pretty much given up; the earth was filled with violence and corruption, so that God had to bring in the flood, and there was an end to all that course of things. It was the era of licence; men were unrestrained, liable to direct Satanic influences -- a state which God could not allow to continue. Then after the flood there was a new departure, and it began with the principle of government. But things were not morally changed. Man began to show his hand again, he had a thought that does not seem to have come out before -- he was going to make a name for himself, to build a city (it was a Babylonish idea) and a tower to reach to heaven, and that led to the formation of nations; but as yet there was hardly the "world".
In course of time, after giving promises to the fathers, God took up a particular people, the seed of
{219}
the fathers. They were in bondage for four hundred years or more; and then God interfered to accomplish His purpose, to bring them into the land promised to the fathers. But before bringing them in, God established in their midst a religious system, He gave them His law, and a system of worship was ordained; and when they came into the land, they were not simply a nation, but in a sense, though separate, were the centre of a system, and that system is the "world" as I judge Scripture often speaks of it. There was eventually a city, and in the city a throne and a temple -- there was an organised system, not consisting of one nation, but of a number of nations connected with one nation, of which system this was the centre. I have thought that we have hardly always got the scriptural idea of the "world"; I think "world" implies an organised system with a centre, and an order of worship; you get that thought implied in the Hebrews.
But the nation which was the centre of this system became perverse and idolatrous. They were this really from the start, in the wilderness they worshipped the golden calf, and when they came into the land of promise they did worse than the nations round about them. In the meantime God allowed to spring up in the world what I may call a rival system, which settled finally in Babylon. Babylon became the beginning of a series of empires, and God allowed the "world", which He had established, to be swallowed up by Babylon. Babylon had its throne and its system of worship, and was the centre, not of a world that God had formed but of man's world. This did not come to pass in a moment: I do not think it was thoroughly effected until Christ had been rejected. Long before Christ came the Jews had been under the power of Babylon; but when Christ was rejected, the divinely-appointed
{220}
system was wholly swallowed up by Babylon, in its successor Rome.
Then what came to pass was, that the succession of empires, which began with Babylon and ended with Rome, was in its turn set aside. A deadly wound, largely attributable to Christianity, was inflicted on the Gentile system -- on man's world. The Gentile empires are spoken of as "beasts" -- wild beasts -- and we are told that the beast received a "deadly wound". But *now* we have in the world, not the system that God appointed, nor the Roman empire exactly, but a corrupted Christianity; but in result this empire, this system of man, will be reconstituted, the deadly wound will be healed, and this great "beast" will be revived -- though in a new form.
Now amid all this God has brought in the Man of His right hand, the Man in whom He purposed to head everything up. The mystery of His will from the beginning was bound up with the Man of His purpose. We get very many hints and allusions to this in the Old Testament; but now God has brought to light the Son of man, whom He has made strong for Himself, and that Man has in God's grace "tasted death for everything". It is on that ground that He is the Head of the world to come. The world to come is in contrast with the world which began with Israel (the world which has been), and is brought into view in the One whom God has made "Head over all things"; and the mystery of God's will is made known.
The mystery of God's will has reference to the dispensation of the "fulness of times". Now I do not want you to defer that thought wholly to the future. You see many things which in the way of their public application are future; but the "fulness of times" in a certain sense is already brought in, for the reason that the One is brought in,
{221}
in whom everything is headed up. At the close of the chapter we read that Christ is given to be Head over all things. Whatever God has instituted, God has purposed to gather up in Him: whether in heaven in the way of power, or on earth in the way of thrones, they are all headed up in Christ, and in order that Christ may give character to them all.
It is a great point to get hold of the truth of the Head, because you get then the system of things which centres in the Head, and you are entitled to know it, because God "has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence" to make it known to us. I think one end in view is, that we might be delivered from the influence of things down here, that we might not be captivated and allured by them, for if we are in the light of God's will, we see also the One in whom that will is centred. God has seen fit to gather up in one all things in Christ; and one purpose that will be served in it is, that in all there will be brought about perfect unity, not Israel bent on one thing and the nations on another, not heaven bent on one thing and earth on another, but unity prevailing throughout. I judge that to be one great reason for everything being headed up in one Man, and we need to have that before us. The fact is, that the greatest man of the world, the greatest politician, is not a head -- he does not really influence the course of things in this world -- he follows it rather than directs it. Things in general take their course, and man cannot help it. The politician in a kind of way seeks to moderate things, and if possible to avoid complications, but the politician does not direct the course of the world; the course of the world has been much more ordered by military success than by the politician. The world takes its course, but where are we in regard to it all.
As far as I can tell, the place of interest to the Christian is the right hand of God, and the point
{222}
of interest, the One who is there, and the mystery of God's will. I wish to point out the interest that we have in the One who is at the right hand of God. That is much more important to us than even the principalities and powers and thrones and dominions over which He is Head. We read "To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved: in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace". The thing spoken of here is redemption, and the form which redemption now takes with regard to us is the forgiveness of sins. Redemption will yet have a fuller application in regard to the people of God, that is, as to the body. God has not yet released the body, but we have forgiveness of sins. The believer does not come into judgment, and has the forgiveness of sins that he may have a purged conscience, so as to approach God. If we had not forgiveness of sins, we could never be apart from the man who had sinned; but God has given forgiveness to us that we might be apart from that man, and thus it is that we have no more conscience of sins. The point is, that the believer is born of God. If I can take account of myself in that way as formed by the Spirit of God in the divine nature, then I can say: "No more I, but sin that dwelleth in me". It is a very important point to take account of the inward man. The man who is formed in the divine nature is, it is evident, morally new. When a man has believed and received forgiveness of sins, the next thing that happens is that he is buried with Christ by baptism unto death. This ends his history as a man in the flesh, and he can "account himself dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus".
That is a great point to have come to; but the thought of God is not only forgiveness but inheritance,
{223}
and the basis of that is, that Christ has died. Christ has died to secure forgiveness as the expression of divine love; and if God has been pleased to give expression thus to His love, you can understand that there is nothing which He will withhold. All that Christ is as man is given in the grace of God. If the love of God were such that He would give His Son to die for us, you can understand that "with him" God would "give us all things". Divine love would give all that Christ is as Man; and God has thus given us that greatest privilege that God could give, that is, sonship. With sonship, which is the gift of God, you naturally come to inheritance. The apostle Paul went among the Gentiles preaching the "unsearchable riches of Christ". The fact is, that you can only measure what is given in the grace of God by Christ Himself; if you get an apprehension of what Christ is as man, and what belongs to Him as man, you can understand the "unsearchable riches of Christ". And if God has seen fit in grace to give us redemption (that is, forgiveness of sins), that must carry everything else with it, for the simple reason that the forgiveness of sins is the consequence of the death of Christ; and if God gave up His Son to death, the love which thus gave up His Son must give everything else with it. Thus we have two great things which belong to the Christian: first, redemption, and then inheritance. Inheritance involves companionship with Christ; it hangs on sonship.
But a further point is, that we have the Spirit as the earnest of the inheritance -- for nothing is displayed yet. The Spirit is the earnest of the inheritance, because it is by the Spirit that we are brought into the life of Christ. If you want to get the present enjoyment of the inheritance, you must find it in the life of Christ. It is connected in my mind with the thought that "your life is hid with
{224}
Christ in God". The Lord refers to this in @John 14: "A little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also". It is a very wonderful thing that we live because Christ lives. Speaking in a moral sense, we do not live because we have been begotten by our parents into this world, but because Christ lives. The fact of a Christian living is really a witness of Christ being at the right hand of God. Every Christian ought to know that he is living because Christ lives: "At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you". And if the Christian lives because Christ lives, the life of a Christian is a witness that Christ is alive at the right hand of God. The great mass of people in the world live because the world goes on; and if the system of the world could come to an end, in a way man's life would come to an end, for he would have nothing to live for -- man's life would be nothing to him if it were not for the system of the world. But the Christian lives because Christ lives. Well, how has that been brought about? Simply by the Spirit. The Spirit has brought us into the reality of the love of God. The Spirit (being the Spirit of God's Son) has enabled us to cry "Abba, Father", that is the expression of affection towards God; He has brought us effectually into that circle, and hence it is that we live because Christ lives.
But if you live where Christ lives and because He lives, you can understand that the inheritance is assured to you. If we could be all brought to that point by the Spirit of God -- that we live because Christ lives -- the effect would be that we should get the assurance of the inheritance. That is what I understand by the expression, "He has given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". We need to cease from resting on terms. I do not think Scripture
{225}
intends that we should rest simply on texts. Scripture tells us what is for us, but it really gives us nothing; all is given to you effectually by the power of the Spirit, and I am not content to rest simply on the statement that the Spirit is the earnest of the inheritance, but I would go a step further, and understand how it is that the Spirit is the earnest of the inheritance.
It is a great thing if we can in mind detach ourselves from the course and interests of this world, and be kept by the Spirit in the sense that we live because Christ lives. But if we live because Christ lives, in the day of His manifestation we shall come into the inheritance, and the apostle prays in the end of the chapter: "That ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead". Meantime we have the seal of the Spirit, and the Spirit is an effectual seal and earnest, for by the Spirit we are conscious that we live because Christ lives.
I pray that our attention may be fixed upon the One who is at God's right hand, that we may get into the good of all that God intends for us, and be divinely instructed in the mystery of God's will. It is a great thing to know the portion that belongs to us in the One who is the centre and the Head of all things; and we have a very large portion in Christ, for the death of Christ is the expression of divine love that will hold nothing back.
{226}
(3) SALVATION, AND THE SETTING FORTH OF GOD'S WILL IN THE SAINTS
@Ephesians 2
I was referring last time to two things which are spoken of in connection with the gospel, namely, forgiveness of sins and inheritance; and to show us what the inheritance is, we get unfolded in the first chapter of Ephesians the purpose of God to gather up in one all things in Christ. And then the Spirit is spoken of as the earnest of the inheritance. It would be difficult to get the thought of the inheritance unless we saw God's purpose to head up in one all things in Christ. That is a very important consideration for us. The will of God is not yet manifest, it is hitherto mystery, no man sees it. It is not seen in this world, for there is confusion there, and it is certain that cannot exist where the will of God is. God "has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; having made known unto us the mystery of his will". Whenever you find in the New Testament the thought of mystery, it refers to something which is made manifest to faith. When the Lord spoke of the mysteries of the kingdom He expounded the parables; and the apostle Paul said, "That I may ... make known the mystery of the gospel". When the ways of God all come to an issue and everything is made manifest, it is evident there will be no longer mystery; but it is equally evident that there is mystery at the present time.
Christ is the Sun of righteousness, not yet risen above the horizon of man's vision but hidden at the right hand of God. He will arise "with healing in his wings"; but what is now made manifest to
{227}
faith is, that all things are headed up in Christ; when everything comes into display, all things will be subdued to Christ. The purpose of God's will is, I take it, that all things may be subdued to Christ, so that all may be held in unity.
Now I want to show the place which the church has in the scheme of God. Nothing can be of more importance than that we should apprehend the divine scheme "in Christ". "In Christ" is a peculiar expression, and one of great moment. Properly speaking it contemplates Christ as the great Head and vessel of God's purpose; and hence if I think of Christ, what comes before my mind is the system of which Christ is the Head and the Centre. It is a great thing for us to have not only Christ before us, but the system and order of things which God has purposed in Christ. Whatever promises there are of God, in Christ is the yea, and in Him the Amen. The fact is, that in the foreshadowing of things (as in the Old Testament), God had before Him the whole system which it was His purpose to establish in Christ. Of course this did not come to light before Christ came; but now that Christ has come, there is an expression which is extremely common in the New Testament -- "all things". "All things that the Father hath are mine". "All things are delivered unto me of my Father". The "all things" are, of course, the things which are centred in Christ -- they are delivered to Him of His Father.
As I have said before, my point is to bring before you *the place* which the church has in this system. This comes out specially in the early part of this chapter. Then we can see the consequences of that place which God has been pleased to assign to the church in Christ Jesus. There is no doubt that when these things take possession of the heart of man, they produce a revolution in his ways down
{228}
here. They have the greatest effect in regard to our walk, because the place that we have must occupy the attention largely with another order of things, and in view of this everything connected with this world becomes comparatively small and unimportant. God has His own weapons and means, and will use them to deal with the present course of things; it will all have to pass away to make room for that system which God has designed in Christ Jesus.
Now in the early part of the chapter (verses 1 - 10) there are two thoughts that appear, namely, our place, and that which is intimately connected with it, salvation. I want to make plain that salvation, in a full sense, is connected with a change of place. If there were not in regard to us such a thought as a change of place, it would be impossible to realise salvation in its full sense. It says, "But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith HE loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved); and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God". The thought of salvation comes out here manifestly in connection with a change of place; therefore I will dwell, first, on the change of place, and then on salvation in connection with the change of place. Then we can see that we are left here in the knowledge of the change of place, and in the reality of salvation, in order that everything that is of God may be maintained through us. You may depend upon it, God never sent us into the world simply to get our living and bring up our families. God sent us into the world (He first took
{229}
us out of it in a way) in order that what is of Him might be maintained through us.
No one can gainsay that there is a change of place for the Christian, because you and I were born for the earth, and all that we had naturally was connected with the earth. The expectation which men commonly entertain of going to heaven is fallacious. God may give a man title to heaven, but there is nothing of that kind naturally attaching to man down here. When God created Adam there was no idea of his going to heaven, that was no part of his life down here, there was no such hope then attaching to him. And in regard of man departed from God, there can be no idea of his going to heaven. Man's life is connected with the earth, and does not properly go beyond the earth -- except that beyond death there is judgment. "It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment". Scripture does not say: "It is appointed unto men to go to heaven". But we find in the early part of this chapter that God has wrought (it is the work of God that is contemplated), in connection with the system which He has purposed in Christ, to quicken Jew and Gentile with Christ, and raise them up together, and make them sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. According to the work of God, Christians are made to sit in the "heavenly places", but that is a question of God's sovereignty: man's work never can form a claim to heaven. Man's works might form a kind of claim to live on earth, but not at all of going to heaven. The law said, "Do this, and live"; but the idea of going to heaven was never entertained, and our going to heaven involves, in the first place, God's sovereignty. He has made Jew and Gentile sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus with a purpose of His own, "That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward
{230}
us in Christ Jesus". The church is to be the vessel in which the "exceeding riches of God's grace" are set forth; and hence it is that the nations of the earth walk in the light of the holy Jerusalem.
Now in this great scheme of God's purpose in Christ our part is not upon earth. There are those who will have their part, in connection with this scheme, on earth, because God will gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth. But God has not given us a place on earth. That is a very important consideration. The Lord spoke of going to prepare a place for His disciples; and He was coming again to receive them to Himself, that they might be with Him in the place which He had gone to prepare.
And now the work of God in us has reference to the place which God has appointed to us in the scheme He has purposed in Christ Jesus. To enter into that thought, the first thing is to get hold of the scheme of God's purpose to head up in one all things in Christ Jesus; and the next consideration is our place in that scheme, and the object of it, that the church in the ages to come may be the witness and vessel of the exceeding riches of God's grace. What can be more remarkable, when one considers their alienation from God and from one another, than that Jew and Gentile should be raised up together in order that in them the exceeding riches of God's grace might be set forth! What a change it indicates as regards Jew and Gentile, for how could the riches of God's grace be set forth in them if they were not in perfect accord with God? But the fact is, that God in His rich mercy has called us, and we have been affected and influenced by the love of God. Even those in whom God has not wrought in the same manner will here upon earth walk in the light of the heavenly city, and the kings of the earth will bring their glory and honour
{231}
unto it. It is blessed to contemplate the place which the church has in the scheme in Christ Jesus. It is a great vessel coming down from God out of heaven -- the holy Jerusalem, the city which presents the kingdom and rule of God -- which in the presence of the universe is the public witness of the exceeding riches of God's grace.
Now you will see the change of place. If you think of yourselves in connection with the scheme of God in Christ Jesus, your place is heaven. It is a great thing for the mind to entertain the change of place. The thought of the change of place is brought in in connection with salvation, for the apostle says, "By grace ye are saved", and he repeats this, "By grace ye are saved", adding "through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God". The apostle was writing to the Ephesians to show them the true condition of salvation, and he emphasises salvation; for unless we are in salvation, the will of God cannot fully come out in us. If Christians are entangled in the world system, evidently they must be more or less in bondage; and while they are in bondage, it is impossible that the will of God can come out clearly in them. I think it is a very painful consideration at the present time that Christians so much regard their status and interests in the world -- and in attaching so much importance to these, they greatly hinder and obscure the expression of God's will in them. Salvation is a most important consideration for every one. When the Lord comes, and you are taken to heaven, you will realise salvation very fully; salvation will be connected then with a change of place. So it says, "He shall appear the second time without sin unto salvation".
It has occurred to me that we get in Jonah an illustration of salvation. Jonah says, "I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving;
{232}
I will pay that that I have vowed. Salvation is of Jehovah". Then it adds, "And Jehovah spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land". That conveys to my mind very simply that salvation is connected with a change of place. There was no salvation for Jonah while in the fish's belly; but when Jonah comes to the point that salvation is of Jehovah, then he is vomited out on the dry land: Jonah realises salvation.
Israel could not realise salvation in Egypt -- God did not intend them to; neither when they were between the Egyptians and the Red Sea, there was no salvation there. But when they were on the other side of the Red Sea, and the waters had swallowed up their enemies, then they could say: "Salvation is of Jehovah" -- their place was changed; and if we want to enter into the reality of salvation now, it must connect itself with the apprehension of a change of place. And if I apprehend the divine scheme and our place in that scheme, I am delivered from the influence and entanglements of this present world. And that is a very important point for us, if the will of God is to be set forth in man down here. It would be a strange thing to translate a beggar into the palace of the king. But what has occurred in regard to us? We have been taken up from earth where we had forfeited all -- God has taken us up from the scene of moral death, and has set us in "heavenly places" in Christ. When I was alive in the world I was subject to the judgment of death; it is another thing entirely now. I apprehend (and every Christian is entitled to apprehend) the place that God has given us in that scheme in Christ.
Salvation does not come out in the same way in regard to Israel, for their place has already been changed. They will be delivered from their enemies, the Lord will be their Saviour, and they will be
{233}
brought back to their place in the land. But we are not brought back to the land, we never had a place in the land at all, but God has given us a new place, and in the apprehension of that place we are brought into the reality of salvation down here; and I can conceive of nothing more important than to be delivered from the entanglements of this world.
I pass on now to the latter part of the chapter (verses 13, 18, 19, 21, 22). We have here different points of God's will which are to have their expression in the saints; and all hangs on the realisation of salvation, that is, that a revolution has really been wrought in the mind of the Christian. He has been brought to the surrender of worldly status and interest in the apprehension of the place that God has given to him in Christ Jesus. Now the object of this is that the will of God might be maintained in us at the present moment: not the will of God in regard to things in *heaven*, but the will of God in regard to things *down here*.
The first thought we have is of nearness, we are "become nigh"; then in verse 18 we have access; in verse 19 we are "fellow citizens of the saints and of the household of God"; in verse 21 we get the thought of the temple; and in verse 22 the "habitation of God through the Spirit". Now no thought in all that is really new -- for all these things had been shadowed beforehand. The thought "ye are become nigh" is dispensationally nigh, Israel had been dispensationally nigh. Access is not exactly a new thought, because access in a limited way had been set forth in Israel, the priests entered into the holy place. Then the household of God is not a new thought, for Israel had come under God's care and protection, they had in a sense enjoyed the privileges of the household of God. The "temple of God" is not a new thought, the temple of God
{234}
was built in connection with the kingdom. Again, the "habitation of God" was not new, for in the wilderness God was there -- Israel prepared a tabernacle that He might dwell among them.
Thus we get a number of thoughts which are not new, but the point is, that these thoughts, having been set forth as the will of God, are to be maintained now in those who are in the enjoyment of salvation. It is a great thing to see that divine thoughts are not allowed to lapse, but that they are now maintained in the saints.
The priests did not enter into the holiest of all; but *we* enter in, and the ground of our entering in is that we have a place in heaven. If we did not know that God had designed a place for us there, I cannot see how we should have the power to enter in. But if we enter in, it means that everything that is of God and for God is maintained in us. That is what we are set here for at the present time. Jew and Gentile are become nigh by the blood of Christ; that is, they are dispensationally nigh. They have access to the Father, reality of access too. The truth is that we are in the light of the revelation which God has been pleased to give of Himself. The revelation of God in regard to Israel was very limited; they had God in a sense, but God had not yet come out. The truth now is, that God has come out, and we are privileged to be in the light of this; we have access through Jesus by one Spirit to the Father. It is part of the will of God, that we are nigh; and we have access, for that too is part of God's will. Then we are fellow citizens of the saints and of the household of God -- coming under the care and discipline of God. As Israel was under the discipline of God, so in a very much more real way are the saints who are of the household of God. God provides food for His household, and the household comes under His eye.
{235}
If a man neglects his own household, he is a bad father. I care for my household and am concerned that they should have food. And so in regard to God's household, He cares for it, ministers to it, furnishes food for it, the household is under His discipline and care.
Then there is the thought of a holy temple. The oracles of God are found there. "All the building fitly framed together groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord". In the Epistle to the Corinthians the apostle goes so far as to say that they were God's temple. The light and oracles of God were there, as in the temple in Jerusalem. But still another thought comes out, that God is dwelling here by the Spirit; and that means great blessing for those among whom God dwells. When God dwelt in Israel, He was the blessing in their midst; the very fact of His dwelling was fraught with blessing for them; and in the future I have no doubt that God will be the blessing in the midst of Israel, and Israel a blessing in the midst of the nations.
Now all these things were part of God's will. They are things which are for God, things which God had foreshadowed, and which are to be maintained in the saints. We have not an earthly portion nor an earthly place. In a sense we have no tie to earth. I venture to say that on earth there is really nothing indispensable to us. There is one thing which is indispensable to us, and that is Christ. The great point is that our links, properly speaking, are above, we have a place and associations above; and because of it we have privilege to enter in, and to be free from entanglements here, and thus we are fitted to set forth what is of God here. When Jacob began to form attachments in connection with earth, God came in in the way of discipline; and the same is true in regard to us
{236}
here. If we form attachments on earth, it is extremely likely that God will come in in discipline. And why? Because God would have us realise that our place in connection with His scheme in Christ is not on earth but heaven. Thus it is that salvation is a reality to us, and God's will can be maintained in us here.
God has made known that place to us that we may "enter in"! It is a wonderful thing that at the present time we have the privilege of entering in, that is, that we may be in the secret of God. The secret of God is the purpose of His will in Christ. All will come out in the time to come, but in the meantime we are left here to hold the ground for the will of God.
{237}
(4) PAUL'S TEACHING CONFIRMED BY THAT OF PETER AND JOHN
@1 Peter 2: 1 - 10; @1 John 4: 7 - 21
I desire at this time to show you how the teaching of Peter and of John runs parallel with that of Paul, which came before us last time in connection with @Ephesians 2. We find the confirmation of Paul's teachings (we get further light too) in the writings of Peter and John. We cannot do without any part of the New Testament, we want one part to amplify another. It is something of the same principle that is seen in the Old Testament. "No prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation ... but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit". Every prophetic writing is part of the system, you cannot understand any part by itself, it has to be viewed in the light of what we may call the prophetic system. People who take up a particular book of prophecy and think they can by study get the meaning of it by itself, are mistaken. So in the New Testament, we want all the writers, not only Paul, but John and Peter, if we are to get anything like a complete thought of Christianity, for they are all employed in setting forth Christianity from some point of view; and the point of view of one can hardly be said to carry completeness -- we want the whole system of truth in that way.
I refer back for a moment to what we had before us last time in connection with @Ephesians 2, as to the main points. I was showing that the point on which, so to speak, the chapter turns, is salvation; and that salvation is connected with a change of place. The change of place is brought out conspicuously
{238}
in that chapter; but in order to emphasise the thought of salvation, I sought also to bring before you the object of salvation, that is, that the mind and will of God might find its expression in us down here. It is not enough for us to know that there is such a thing as salvation (I suppose most Christians know that), but that we should be so in the reality of it that the mind and will of God may be set forth in us down here. If we are in bondage to anything that is not of God, that so far presents a hindrance to God's will being set forth in us; any one can understand that we cannot be here entirely for the will of God, if we are not free of what is unsuitable to God. You cannot serve two masters; the Lord said: "Ye cannot serve God and mammon". If a man is serving mammon, he does not serve God; I do not say that he is not a believer, that is another point; but if a man is in bondage to the world, he is not free to serve God. God would not be served by the Israelites while in bondage in Egypt; that was what Pharaoh wanted, but God would have the people brought out of bondage, if He was to be served by them, and I think that is always the principle with God.
Now in @1 Peter 2 the apostle exhorts us "As newborn babes to desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby *unto salvation*" (I add those two words because they ought to be there), "If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious". We get here (in Peter) the same thoughts practically as in @Ephesians 2. To begin with, we get the thought of salvation; then of nearness and access then the thought of a spiritual house. Thus we have mainly the things which are taught in @Ephesians 2; that is, Paul and Peter do not teach different things, but practically the same thing. Of course, the truth is spoken here in connection with the Jews of the dispersion, but then what applies to
{239}
those to whom Peter wrote applies also to us; Paul takes up the same line of thought and applies it to the Gentiles.
I would like to enlarge on salvation so far as I understand it. I think one can see three steps in salvation. The first is, that we are delivered from bondage to one lord by being brought into bondage to Another. That is what I should call the first principle of salvation. Israel was delivered from bondage to Pharaoh really by being brought into bondage to God: that was the power of their deliverance, and the same principle applies to us. We are brought out of bondage to the god and prince of this world and into bondage to Christ. The apostle Paul could propose salvation to the Philippian jailor, and how was it to come to pass? By believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. He had been in bondage to the god and prince of this world, and the apostle spoke to him the word of the Lord; and the practical result was that he became in bondage to the Lord Jesus Christ -- in other words, there was a change of master. That is the first principle with regard to the believer -- the believer is "delivered from the authority of darkness and translated into the kingdom of the Son of God's love". We can see how very real this was in the early days, when we remember that idolatry was the "power of darkness"; when the Colossians and Thessalonians worshipped dumb idols it was not simply dumb idols, but the authority of darkness, and people were "translated into the kingdom of the Son of God's love". If you want to understand that expression, I would refer you to what occurred on the mount of transfiguration. Everything there was subdued to the authority of Christ, and Christ was announced to be "God's beloved Son". There we get the idea of the "kingdom of the Son of God's love". Any one can appreciate the immense moral
{240}
change which took place, in the fact of people being delivered from idolatry and "translated into the kingdom of the Son of God's love". The change was immense, and we see it exemplified in the case of the jailor.
The next stage of salvation is in the question of association. You might look at @1 Peter 3: 21, 22, and at @Titus 3: 4 - 7, for in these two passages we get the idea of salvation, that is, in the change of association. You can realise it in some measure, if you go back to early times and contemplate what took place at Jerusalem or among the Gentiles; those who had been affected by the gospel were brought out of unclean and filthy associations into Christian fellowship. I have no doubt it is that to which Peter refers when he says, "Baptism doth also now save us". People were very much affected by being brought into pure and holy associations. The apostle Paul alludes to the same thing, speaking of the mercy of God, in his Epistle to Titus: "According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost" the "washing of regeneration" is probably an allusion to baptism, through which those who were converted were brought into Christian associations, and at the same time there was a renewing of the Spirit which fitted them for those associations.
The first step in the Christian course is evidently in the confession of Christ as Lord, so that there is a "change of master", and the second step is in the "change of association", that is, that the Gentile was brought out of his heathenism, and the Jew out of his Judaism, and both were brought into associations which took their character from the Holy Ghost. What is the effect in our case? The time was when we were entangled in the great systems of the world -- man's world. You may call them Christian systems; you may call the State church
{241}
a Christian church; you may call popery a Christian church; or a dissenting body a Christian church; but every one of them is part of the great world system, and it is very difficult for any one in any of these systems to understand salvation, because they are still entangled in the world. I think salvation can only be rightly known in being brought into the reality of Christian association outside of these great systems, where things take their character from the Holy Ghost. It is true of us, as it was at the beginning, that salvation depends upon being brought into the reality of Christian association.
Now I pass on to another step in salvation, that is change of place. I took that up in connection with @Ephesians 2. The point there is change of place. Those who had had a place on earth, or even those who had not had it (for the Gentiles have no place on earth), now have a place in heaven. I alluded to what I think is an illustration of this -- that the expression of Jonah, "Salvation is of the Lord", was immediately followed by a change of place: "And the Lord spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land".
We have thus three simple thoughts in regard to salvation: namely, change of lord and master, change of association, and change of place; and I think I may say that you will apprehend that salvation is thus in Christ Jesus, because it is only in Christ Jesus that change of place can be realised: God has "raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in *Christ Jesus*".
Now the apostle says here, "As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby unto salvation". All will admit that it is a great thing to be free of bondage to Satan, and from evil and worldly associations, and to be free too even as regards yourself. I think a great
{242}
many Christians are like the two and a-half tribes, they are delivered from *evil* associations, but they fall into bondage to a place down here; we want to grow unto salvation for the purpose of God, for He has made us to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
We will pass on to verses 4 and 5, where it says, "to whom coming as unto a living stone". I will say a word or two in regard to the "Living Stone". You see in this passage an advance on the thought, "that ye may grow thereby *unto salvation*", it is, "to whom coming as unto a living stone". Now there are two things spoken of in connection with the Living Stone, that is, that it is "chosen of God", and "precious". Previously it said, "Disallowed indeed of men"; men disallowed Christ -- they crucified Him. But the point is, that He is "chosen of God and precious", and later on in the passage we are told that "to you who believe he is precious". What I make out of it is this, that Christ is the way of access, because it is in Christ that God and believers are really drawn together. If, on the one hand, Christ is a Living Stone, chosen of God: and, on the other hand, to you precious, God and you are really together in Christ. If you approach God by One who is chosen of Him (as Christ is), you have access to Him. Christ became precious to the woman of Samaria. She said, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" But then Christ is the "chosen of God", and thus in a sense God and she were really brought together. Again, in Mary of Bethany: for the same reason God and Mary were brought together. So it is in regard to us. Christ is precious to us; He took our liabilities, and has given us "living water", and now through Him we have "access by one Spirit unto the Father". Christ in that way has become the practical link between
{243}
God and you or me. Now what I have said is extremely practical; and Christianity does not consist in the holding of doctrine, but in living association with Christ. There is nothing more important than that Christ is chosen of God and at the same time precious to us. He will not be otherwise than precious; if He is not precious to us we are nothing, but if He is precious we have everything in Him. I venture to say that there is only One who is indispensable to us down here, and that is Christ; a man might be bereft of everything down here, but if he had Christ he could get on. If Christ is everything to us, then we have great liberty in approaching the Father. The Lord said, "The Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God". If Christ is not practically precious, do not let any one be content; but if He is precious to you, He is also the "chosen of God".
I take up that thought in connection with access, but now we come to the "house". "To whom coming ... ye also ... are built up a spiritual house". We are built up a spiritual house, that is, we are of the household of God, and at the same time God dwells in us here -- we are "builded together for an habitation of God by the Spirit"; we are builded together thus that God may dwell here. We get these two thoughts realised in the saints. Now it is an immense point to recognise the mind of God in regard to His saints. God cares for His household; it is a privilege for a servant to minister a morsel of meat to God's household in due season; His household comes under His care and discipline. God takes care to provide spiritual food for the household. The servant of the Lord is to be occupied, when the Lord comes, with ministering to His household in due season. It is a great point to recognise that the saints are built up a spiritual house so that God may
{244}
abide here. And we need to take that into account, so that it may have a profound effect upon our conduct, ways and associations, and everything else in this world. I do not know any thought that has more impressed me than that God is dwelling here by the Spirit. When one came to realise that, it produced a very profound effect. I do not believe any Christian entangled in the systems of the world can have any real sense that God is dwelling here by the Spirit, for the Lord very distinctly says "Whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you". And if we have had to leave these great systems, and in leaving them to leave the world, we have had great compensation on the other hand, for we have come to realise that God dwelling here by the Spirit is the basis of all Christian conduct. The apostle exhorts us to walk "with all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace": all that is based upon the fact that Jew and Gentile are "builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit".
We are built up "a spiritual house" -- not a material house -- "an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". We can thus praise God and do good to men, since we are a holy priesthood to "offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". I think people sometimes regard sacrifices as being out of their reach, but they are really very simple. You get in the last chapter of Hebrews the sacrifice of praise to God. The very thought of being a holy priesthood is really a basis of practical life down here. James says, "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to
{245}
keep oneself unspotted from the world". That is priestly.
I think you will admit that we get, in this chapter of Peter, thoughts which are very much akin to those in @Ephesians 2, that is, the thought of access, because the Living Stone is chosen of God and precious to us; and then that we are God's household and God is dwelling here by the Spirit. If we recognise that God is dwelling here by the Spirit we order our conduct before God, and not with reference to men. The point is, to be acceptable with God and so to be approved to men. The fact of God dwelling here by the Spirit is, so to speak, the first principle of Christian ways and conduct in the world.
Now we get the same thoughts in the first Epistle of John. In @1 John 3: 21, 22, we have access. In @1 John 4: 11 - 14 we get the thought of God dwelling. Verses 12 and 13 appear on the surface contradictory; the first says, "If we love one another", as though God dwelling were dependent upon our loving one another; and the next verse says, "Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, *because he hath given us of his Spirit*". It is true that God has "given to us of his Spirit", but then it is equally true that it is "if we love one another" God dwells in us. Had there not been those who loved one another, the Spirit would never have been given. There were those who loved one another on the day of Pentecost, the condition was fulfilled, and the Comforter came. And if we are not loving one another, we shall not realise very much that God "dwells in us". If we love, God abides in us -- and His love is "perfected in us". If you want any sense of the reality of God abiding here, you must have love one for another. The realisation of the presence of God depends very much upon two considerations: one is, our separation from the world, that is, being in
{246}
the reality of salvation, and the other, our love one towards another. I think we want to pay great attention to this; not to take up the truth of God dwelling in us as a dogma or part of a creed, or a sentiment. To go back to Judaism for a moment -- the bond there was in a sense social and national, they were all derived from Abraham; but we are not derived from Abraham, not the sons of Jacob, but the children of God; if we are not the children of God we are nothing, but to be so, we must be in the blessedness of the reality of the commandment to love one another.
We want to be in the reality of salvation -- disentangled from the power of evil, from evil associations, and even from attachment to a place down here, in order that the mind and will of God may be realised in us; we are in the place of nearness, and have confidence in God (so affected by the love of God that we have confidence in Him); we are under the care of God, nourished and furnished by the love of God; and at the same time (which is perhaps the greatest thing of all) we realise that God is abiding here. Now that is a very wonderful consideration to my mind. It may be in a very feeble measure that we love one another, but we cannot help loving. You may be confident that the saints will love those who are of God; if I love "Him that begat", I love those who are "begotten of him"; and if it is true that there are those who love God, it is most surely true that there are those who love one another. And that is what we are here for, that the mind of God might be realised in us, that we might be brought into salvation, so that God's mind might have expression in us down here.
{247}
(5) THE CHURCH AS WITNESS TO GOD'S END
@Ephesians 3
I suppose the thought and desire which comes out in this chapter is that the saints here might be qualified to be a witness for God: that appears to be the purport of the prayer. It is plain that the prayer has reference to the spiritual state of the saints; the apostle prays at the beginning that they might be "strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man", and the end of it is that they might be filled unto all the fulness of God. The secret of this is in having the Christ "dwelling in your hearts by faith". It is the tendency of every one of us to witness of what is dwelling in our hearts; and if Christ is dwelling intelligently in the heart, then we are witnesses of Christ. I think the prayer refers to the apprehension of Christ, not exactly to what Christ has been, but more to what Christ is going to be, and therefore it is "by faith". It is not so much Christ as a Saviour in relation to us, but more in the light of the Bridegroom, so it takes in all that which belongs to Christ. I say that much in reference to the object of the prayer. The prayer is one that has been thought over many and many a time, and yet it is very little apprehension that one has got of the greatness of it. It shows the great privilege properly attaching to the church, that it should be a witness here to what Christ is according to God, that is, on the part of God, for the accomplishment of His will.
Before I touch on the chapter, I refer for a moment to what I have already spoken of in connection with chapter 2. The point of chapter 2 is the
{248}
realisation of a change of place, and salvation in a full sense is realised in a change of place. It is a very important point to apprehend that; you and I would be practically saved from the earth and all that is upon it if we realised that we have a place in heaven; it belongs to the saints and no one can defraud them of it; it is the purpose of God in regard to His people. The purpose of God as to Israel involved a place; the wilderness, it has been said, was no part of God's purpose for His people -- they were to dwell with God in God's own land. And God has purposed that we should dwell with Him in His habitation. It was: "For his great love" (the spring of His work in us really is His great love) "wherewith he loved us"; and the end and purpose of that was that we should dwell with God in His habitation.
Peter conveys the same idea morally when he says, "Christ ... suffered ... the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God". That is the end which God has in view, that we should have a place with God in His habitation.
I spoke of salvation as in a sense a means to an end; and the end is, that all that God had foreshadowed should be accomplished in us. Nearness, access, God's household, and the habitation of God are all set forth in the people of God down here. Salvation is essential to this; if we are not in the reality of it, I do not think the will of God can be well expressed in us down here -- one depends upon the other. We get the same principle in @John 14; in the early part of the chapter the Lord made known to His disciples that He was going to prepare a place for them -- that meant there was a place for them where He went, and the Lord would come again and receive them to that place, that where He was, there they might be also. But we also get in that chapter that the Father and the Son will "come
{249}
unto him" and "make our abode with him". So in @Ephesians 2; on the one hand, God has "raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus"; but on the other, Jew and Gentile are "builded together for an habitation of God by the Spirit", that is, that God is dwelling here by the Spirit.
God dwells here that He may be known. In figure that was true as regards the children of Israel; they were to prepare a habitation for God, a "tent" in which He might abide; and the purpose and aim of it was that He might be known. It was the pleasure of God to be known by the people; no other nation had that opportunity at all, but Israel had, for God dwelt among them that He might in measure be known. I can understand some one saying that God was not yet revealed, but evidently there was some sense in which God might be known by the people; you cannot read the books of Moses -- the Book of Deuteronomy for instance -- without seeing that He purposed to dwell among them that in measure He might be known. We have come to the reality of this. Jew and Gentile are "builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit". God has brought us to His dwelling-place, and is made known by the Spirit. We come into the habitation of God with very little knowledge of God; but it is where we can learn God if we are set upon it. When people are first converted, their knowledge of God is limited to the grace of God; I do not think they have much knowledge of God beyond this. But the thought of God is that we should enter into the knowledge of Him, advance in that direction, and into the purpose of His love. There is every encouragement to do it. We find that in the Epistle to the Hebrews; the purpose for which the apostle is writing is to encourage the saints to enter in. All is leading up to that point
{250}
in chapter 10: "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus"; and to enter into the holiest is to enter into that which has come out in Christ. The present moment is marked by this, that God has come out in Christ; not only in grace, but in His nature and in the attributes and rights of His nature, and hence it is that we can go in. And "entering in" is not exactly a thing of a moment: you enter in as you are formed by God. The scripture says, "Every one that loveth is born of God and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love".
The first Epistle of John is very interesting, as showing the way in which we are led on. I speak especially of chapter 3 where we find righteousness. When a person is brought into the place of a child of God, he begins to recognise the obligations he has in the various relationships in which God has placed him. That is a very important point to wake up to, for every one has to begin with righteousness, and righteousness is the recognition of "ought", that is, the recognition of obligation. God's grace comes to us in Christ, we receive by Him forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Spirit, and the first thing that marks us as the children of God is the recognition of obligation, and that is on our part righteousness.
But the next point is, that we love the brethren. We are brought into immediate contact with the brethren, and it is useless to say we love God if we do not love the brethren. The test which God proposes to His people down here is the brethren, and "we know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren"; then in chapter 4 we get access into the love of God.
I do not think we *begin* with apprehending the love of God and answering to that love; I think
{251}
we begin with grace and righteousness, then we love the brethren because we are brought into immediate contact with them. And we are led into the apprehension of the love which God has towards us. That is learned in the house of God, we are brought into the habitation of God in order that He may be learned. Then we have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus.
But not only is God love, but there are certain purposes of that love. Love is an active principle, it is so in man, it is not prepared to be quiescent. The love of God cannot be quiescent with regard to evil, and has its purposes which it is going to accomplish. For instance, the purpose of God's love eternal life, which was ordained in Christ before the world began. I might speak of other things: the promises were all the outcome of divine love, they are purposes of that love. A promise on the part of God must be an expression of purpose; a promise on my part is not necessarily so, but promise on the part of God must originate in the purpose of God; and the promises of God are the purposes of His love. It was the purpose of His love that Israel should possess the land of Canaan; and it was the purpose of God's love that in Abraham all the nations of the earth should be blessed.
In entering the holiest, not only do we get an entrance into the love of God, but an insight into the purposes of that love. I do not think that any one enters into the love of God without getting an apprehension of the purposes of that love. Then if there are the purposes of God's love, how is God going to accomplish those purposes, things being as they are, both in heaven and on earth? -- man being in death, and sin ruling in the world? Israel, too, at the present time under the wrath of God and scattered over the face of the earth, how is God going to bring them into the promises? And
{252}
then, in face of the discord in the earth at the present time, how is God going to bring all the nations into blessing? The answer is, that God has provided the Man in whom all His purposes can be accomplished suitably to His love. That is what we learn in the holiest; we get an apprehension of Christ, the true ark of the covenant. The kingdom was seen on the mount of transfiguration. So, too, eternal life is brought to pass in the blessed Son of God who can give effect to all the purposes of God, and break all the power of evil.
Now you will get into the truth of that in apprehending the Son as the Object of the Father's love. It is a great thing to apprehend the Father's love to us; but it is a greater thing morally to apprehend that "the Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand". It is a wonderful thought that the Son is our Saviour and our Head and our life; but the Son is the Object of the Father's love, and has had all things given into His hand. What we need to be led into is the power of the grace of God. We want courage to leave the world, and, according to the admonition in @Hebrews 10, to "draw near", and apprehend the One in whom God can give effect to all His purposes. All that is dependent upon the fact of God dwelling here by the Spirit. We are brought into the house of God that all these things might be available to us. And Christ as the Minister of the holy places is to lead us in; and if you ask me where you are to be led into, I do not know where, except into the knowledge of God; but you could not enter into the knowledge of God, if God had not come out. In one sense God could and did come out in a moment but it takes us a long time to enter in, we are so much hindered by things here. We enter in when we are prepared to enter in, as we are formed in the divine nature, so that we are *capable* of
{253}
entering into the love of God. "He that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God". We really begin with righteousness and love to the brethren; it is a great thing when a saint is characterised by love to the brethren, he is "passed from death unto life", and he will enter into the knowledge of God and of the place where the love of God abides in "Christ Jesus our Lord". I say that in connection with the great gain of being brought into the habitation of God by the Spirit. We form part of that habitation, to be led by the Spirit into the knowledge of God.
If you read @Ephesians 3 you will notice that the first part of the chapter down to verse 13 brings out the qualification and suitability of the apostle to pray for the saints. He speaks of his ministry and how that ministry was given to him, and what for; he brings all this in to show his qualification to pray for the saints. The early part of the chapter seems to be parenthetical, showing the apostle's special right to pray for the Gentiles; and he has shown the reason why he prays for them. They were "builded together for an habitation of God by the Spirit". The prayer supposes that we have got the good of entering in, that is, that we have got some apprehension of Christ as to what Christ is on the part of God. It is very important to distinguish between what Christ is on our part and what Christ is on the part of God; many who have apprehension of what Christ is on their part have no apprehension of what Christ is on the part of God. When I say "on the part of God", I mean Christ as the One in whom all the purposes of God's love are to be accomplished -- the Head of all principality and power.
The next point is, that Christ might dwell in our hearts by faith. The prayer supposes that the saints are here in the place of the bride, and are
{254}
taken up with the interests of the Bridegroom, or the interests of God in the Bridegroom. We apprehend the Son as the One whom the Father loves and into whose hands the Father has given all things; but great as Christ is in that way, HE is the Bridegroom, and it is only natural that the Bridegroom should dwell in the heart of the bride: I think that is the thought that appears in the early part of the prayer. "That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith". Our profession is, that we have gone forth to meet the Bridegroom; we are fasting because the Bridegroom is absent, but the Bridegroom is coming, and while we are looking for Him, He dwells in our hearts by faith. I think that all of us are looking for the introduction of what I may call God's world, that world in which God will be glorified and man blessed. It is not simply that one is looking to go to heaven -- I know I have a place there -- but I am looking for the appearing of Jesus Christ, in order that all God's purposes may be brought into effect in Him. We are looking to see God glorified in this world in everything being headed up in Christ. We want to see everything in His hand. "Hand" in Scripture is usually symbolic of power -- the Father has given everything into His power, and we want to see this. The point of the prayer is, "That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith". It is wonderful to apprehend the relation that exists between Christ, as Bridegroom, and the bride. The church is in a way new, it is not part of the old. "Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it"; and He is active at the present moment in regard to it, that is, He is sanctifying and cleansing it with the washing of water by the word, and He is going "to present it ... a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing". That is what the church is in the eye of Christ, and what Christ is
{255}
effecting in regard to it -- and the church is responsive (or ought to be responsive) to the love of Christ, Christ should be dwelling in our hearts by faith.
May God give us to enter into the prayer of the apostle. The apostle had a title to pray that no one else ever had, and he used that title, he "bowed his knees"; and we ought to be in concert with the apostle. The apostle knew very well that much could not be brought about by ministry, therefore he prayed. Ministry is after all comparatively a feeble thing, there is not power in it to effect anything; the saints may be enlightened by it, but they can only be *affected* by the Spirit. And therefore the apostle bowed his knees. In the anticipation of the coming day and the power of Christ, what a thing it would be if the Christ were dwelling in all our hearts by faith, that we might be rooted and grounded in love. It supposes that we have really got the gain of God's house, then it is that we are "able to comprehend the breadth and length and depth and height" of all that God has given to the Son. The Lord said in @John 16, speaking of the Comforter: "All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you". "All things" is a very large expression; evidently it covers much. And we comprehend the "breadth and length and depth and height". The secret of understanding is, that our hearts are in accord with God. There is nothing unsuitable there, if we have the Christ dwelling by faith in our hearts; then it is that we "comprehend the breadth and length and depth and height".
And one thing more. We get here what I may call the atmosphere of the moral universe. Of course the word atmosphere conveys a material idea, but I think the word may be applied in a moral sense. In any company there is a certain moral
{256}
atmosphere. Well, now, in the world to come, in that which God will manifest in Christ in the accomplishment of His purposes, a certain moral atmosphere will prevail, and the moral atmosphere is set in motion by the love of Christ. Just as the sun gives an impulse to light in the physical universe, so in the moral universe the impulse will be given from the Sun of righteousness. Now the apostle prays here that we may "know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled unto all the fulness of God".
I think the object of the prayer is, as I said before, that we may be here in the place of witness for Christ; Christ is the fulness of God, and we are to be filled unto all the fulness of God -- suitable and competent in that way. Having a sense of divine love and divine wisdom, of the ability of God to give effect to the purposes of His love, we are to be here as witnesses to the love of Christ. As Abraham was allowed to view the land, so we apprehend "the breadth and length and depth and height", and "we know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that we may be filled unto all the fulness of God".
God is to be glorified in the church. That is what the apostle finishes up with: "Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages". The church is the heavenly city in which God will be glorified. There is a vessel in which perfection will be, "Having the glory of God, and her light like unto a stone most precious". All that God is in His grace and goodness and righteousness will be set forth in the church in the ages to come. That is what God has purposed.
Now the end is, that we might be "filled unto all the fulness of God" -- that saints might be livingly in the place of witness for Christ. I quite admit that the Scriptures have their place of witness
{257}
-- the Scriptures testify of Christ -- but the living witness for Christ down here is the church. But the Spirit is not only *dwelling* here in the church, but is *active, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith*. What a disclosure it will be on the part of God when He brings in the First-begotten, the Son of God, and everything is gathered up in Him for God's glory. And that is what God has before Him, and what we learn in connection with Christ. Looking abroad on the world as it is now, what a scene it is! The atmosphere of the world is ambition and covetousness. What will be the atmosphere of the world when everything is according to God, when the Bridegroom -- Christ -- comes in, and has His own proper place? What was the atmosphere in the little company around Christ when He was on earth? It was His love; they poorly understood it, but there it was, and it will be so when God comes in in power, when we are filled unto all the fulness of God.
I add just one word more. This is only a passing moment in the ways of God; God has prolonged it for wise reasons; but it is only a passing moment. There is an end in view with God (in all His past dealings there was an end in view), and it is a great thing to get an apprehension of what God's end is, and to learn how God is going to accomplish that end suitably to Himself. And if we get an apprehension of this, we have Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith.
{258}
THE SITUATION, AND HOW GOD EFFECTS HIS PURPOSE
@Genesis 11: 1 - 9; @Genesis 12: 1 - 3 @Romans 11: 15 - 22; @Isaiah 42: 1 - 8
The thought before me s to touch on two things equally important. One is the situation, as I must call it; and nothing can be more important at the present time, particularly to those who take any part in the work of God down here, than to see the situation. We want to be men of understanding; we are not worth much without understanding. Scripture puts great stress upon understanding -- I mean understanding of the times, in other words, of the situation.
Everybody will allow that the situation is formed by God, whatever the situation may be. It would have no foundation if it were not formed by God. The first point therefore is to apprehend the situation which God has formed. I do not think we can much benefit others or take part in God's testimony if, as a first principle, we do not understand the situation.
Then there is another thing, and that is, how God effects His purpose. Both are equally important, but in our minds we have to keep them clear.
I want this morning, if the Lord help me, to unfold the situation on the one hand, and on the other, to speak of the way in which God effects His purpose. God always effects His purpose through a moral process in man. God always has effected His purpose in that way, and ever will, whether with regard to the church, or to Israel, or to the nations.
The situation which God has formed is not always the same, but whatever it may be, it is the light
{259}
for the moment. It always has been and always will be.
I go back to @Genesis 11. There you get a situation not formed by God, and it was a very terrible one. Man was alienated from God, and God took account of the alienation. I use the word alienation in contrast to reconciliation: I find Scripture uses it in that way. Well, there you get alienation. Men came to the plain of Shinar. This is in Scripture the great seat of idolatry. You find this in @Zechariah 5 -- the woman sitting in the midst of the ephah was borne to the land of Shinar, to build a house there, and there to be established and set upon her base. The land of Shinar is the base of idolatry. There they prepared to make a city and a tower that should reach up to heaven. The practical result was complete alienation from God. If I may use such an expression, God's mind was alienated from man on account of man's state. There is, I think, that view of it. Men were allowed in a sense to go their own ways, and in result were alienated from one another. That was the moment from which nations sprang. There was confusion of language, and that was the proof and evidence that God's mind was turned away from man. There cannot be a doubt that that is the point where alienation is really marked.
Well, the world goes on its way, and the next thing is, God takes up a man. That man was Abraham. Abraham became the beginning of a world. God proposed to take up a world of which the seed of Abraham should be the centre. God's purpose was not merely to take up a nation. He *did* take up a nation, but a world was formed and that was the situation for the moment, I do not go into the detail of that. But the existence of that world depended to a large extent upon the fidelity of God's witness in it. Israel was the witness against
{260}
idolatry, and to the faithfulness and goodness of Jehovah, and the world depended upon the faithfulness of God's witness. What came to pass was that, instead of being faithful to Jehovah, Israel fell under the influence of idolatry, and God in time allowed that world to be swallowed up by Babylon -- not merely Israel, but the whole world of which Israel was the centre, and in which it was the witness. It was entirely set aside, and another world was allowed to come in in its place, the great system headed up in Babylon. God gave authority to the Gentiles, and we get the times of the Gentiles.
Then another situation comes in. The final test to the Jews returned from captivity was Christ. He came into the midst of God's people as the seed of Abraham and of David, the sign of God's covenant; and Israel stood or fell by Christ. God in a way overlooked all that had happened -- and this was the final test, and Israel did not answer to it. Then we get the casting off of Israel consequent upon the rejection of Christ. Then that introduces another and new situation, a remarkable situation, that is the reconciliation of the world, not God introducing a world as with Israel, but the reconciliation of the world. Israel became lost among the nations, but there was the reconciliation of the nations consequent upon the casting off of Israel. Provisionally the nations come under the influence of the goodness of God. That was a remarkable situation for God to create.
A good many would ask me, but how does it come about? Well, the moment Christ was born you find, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in man". That was the announcement of the heavenly host; their song in connection with the birth of Christ. "Good pleasure in man"! That is a wonderful thing. Then further on we read that Christ bought the field. And
{261}
another wonderful statement, He "gave himself a ransom for all". So too, "He died for all". He accomplished redemption, and on that ground the world provisionally comes into reconciliation. The casting off of the Jew is the reconciling of the world. By the world I understand the people in it, not an organisation. The world stands provisionally in the goodness of God.
Now the point is, would the Gentiles continue in God's goodness? That is the point you get raised in @Romans 11. They would not continue; and the proof is that eventually they disallow Christ and set up a rival. They set up Antichrist, and so prove that they do not continue in the goodness of God. They are cut off. Then God reverts to His promises to Israel; He takes them up again, and you get the world to come formed.
I do not go into that; but I want to speak for a moment on the importance of the present situation, the reconciliation of the world, and the position of Christ in regard of men. I cannot conceive anything more important than the consequence of that in the way men come under the regard of God. The point especially with those of us who attempt in any way to preach is to open eyes; we want men to see the situation, the position that Christ occupies in regard of man. He is the "one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave Himself a ransom for all". That is the truth on one side, in virtue of which the world has come into reconciliation. All the world has come by Christ into God's view, and is being tested as to whether it will continue in the goodness of God. If the Gentiles do not continue in God's goodness, they will be cut off. But in a certain way they have come into the tree of promise, the line of Abraham.
I take that to be the situation, and what we, as servants, have to unfold. We have to unfold what
{262}
redemption is in its bearing in regard to men, what the position of Christ is in reference to the world, and the position of the world in regard to Christ. Christ has a claim upon every man in having died for all. If Christ has a claim upon every man in virtue of redemption, it is also true that every man has a claim upon Christ on the same ground. Every man can come in on that ground. In virtue of having taken up all men's liabilities and discharged them, he has rightfully a claim upon every man, and every man has a claim upon Christ. Christ is available and accessible to every man.
That is the situation which we endeavour to make plain in the gospel. Christ has bought the field; He has paid a price for it; He gave Himself a ransom for all. The world has come provisionally into reconciliation. It is not a state of things that is final, but provisional. The Gentiles are being tested at the present time as to whether they will continue in the goodness of God.
As a matter of fact we know they will not answer to the test. The world will become apostate. Antichrist will be set up in opposition to Christ.
I say that much in regard to the situation. Now I will add a word in regard to the effect of it -- how God accomplishes His purpose. If you look at @Acts 26: 16 - 20, you can see that the apostle was the great vessel God was pleased to employ for the opening of the eyes of the Gentiles. The first item of his commission was to open their eyes. I understand by that he was to undeceive them. The way in which that was to be effected was by the opening up of the situation. This would always be the case; if people are in a false position, and you want to undeceive them, you would seek to open up to them the situation. The apostle understood the situation, and was to go to the Gentiles to open it up to them, and their eyes would thus be opened.
{263}
If you could unfold to men the light that has come unto them on the part of God -- the advent of Christ from heaven, His becoming a man (God having thus good pleasure in men) to accomplish redemption, the discharging of man's liabilities that he should not be under judgment -- what would be the effect? People would be made conscious that they have been in darkness and lawless. That is always the proper effect of the preaching of the gospel, the presentation of the situation, and the consequence is that they turn from Satan to God. The practical result is that they repent. It is there that every one has to begin. We must all begin with repentance.
The situation is of great benefit to us; if it were not there, there would be no opportunity of repentance. It opens the door: we all have to go in at that door. Man has to repent on account of his previous state. Man has been in darkness; he turns to light; he was lawless, and he turns from lawlessness to God.
The next thing is this: when man is affected by the situation he apprehends that there is redemption in Christ; he begins to apprehend what the mind of God is toward us in Christ. There is forgiveness of sins. He gets that light, the knowledge of the forgiveness of sins, the gain of redemption. What follows upon that is that he receives the gift of the Spirit. Christ is the giver of living water to those who come to Him. "To him that is athirst I will give to drink of the water of life freely". He gets the living water, and the effect of coming near Christ is to bring us into the appreciation of Christ as the covenant. "I have set thee to be a covenant of the people", we read in Isaiah.
When Christ was here on earth He was the covenant. Those who surrounded Christ and appreciated Him appreciated the covenant. Take
{264}
Mary of Bethany; she sat at the feet of Jesus and heard His word. To her Christ was the covenant. The woman of the city who came to Him and washed His feet with her tears apprehended Christ as the covenant. That may not be quite plain to all, but it is important. I mean this, that Christ was the perfect expression of God's disposition toward man, and the effect of the presence of Christ was to make men -- those who came to Him -- conscious of what the disposition of God was toward man. He was the covenant. Do you not think that the disciples entered somewhat into the light of God's disposition toward men? I think they had a sense of it with Christ in their midst. It was so in the cases I have cited, and I might cite others. Christ was the perfect expression of what God was toward man, and this was learned in the presence of Christ, and in approach to Christ. He was the covenant to the people.
We want to appreciate Christ in that light. If you want a verse to confirm it, I give you the last verse of @Romans 8: "The love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord". There are two points in the new covenant, forgiveness of sins and divine teaching. What is divine teaching to us? As we come under the influence of Christ we find that He is the expression of all God's disposition towards us. If you understand the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, you come under that from which nothing can separate you. That is the covenant. It is a great thing to appreciate Christ, the divinely given covenant to man. The old covenant was the law, the new covenant is Christ.
What I plead for is the appreciation of Christ as the expression of God's disposition to man. You will find the thought in @2 Corinthians 3 where the apostle is contrasting the two ministrations. "Now the Lord is that Spirit", that is, the Spirit of the
{265}
covenant. If you want to find the perfect expression of God's disposition toward man, you find it in Christ. Christ stands as a Mediator in relation to all men.
I will tell you now another step. As you come into the appreciation of Christ, you come under the love of Christ. Christ loves those who appreciate Him. I am quite alive to the fact that "We love him, because he first loved us"; but in coming into the appreciation of Christ, in a way we command the affection of Christ. You could not understand the affection of Christ going out to those who do not appreciate Him. His affection goes out to those who do appreciate Him.
"To whom much is forgiven, the same loveth much". That is the principle. We appreciate Him, and in that appreciation we come under His love. Then we love Him, because He first loved us.
You find this in what came out on earth. Mary of Bethany appreciated Christ in a peculiar way, and came under the affection of the Lord. So, too, the disciple whom Jesus loved. It was that he had a special and peculiar appreciation of Christ. Jesus loved Peter and James too, but there was a peculiar way in which John came under His affection.
Well, how is it with regard to us? I do not doubt that we are all orthodox and intelligent in the truth; but how much do we appreciate Christ as the covenant of God? How does it affect you in the detail of life? How far are you prepared to throw everything over in order to reach Him because you appreciate Him? One is not to be detained by country or kindred or father's house. It does not matter whether one is a rich man or a pauper, because one is prepared to sacrifice all because of appreciation of Christ as the blessed expression of God's disposition toward man. As you appreciate Christ you come under His affection, and you know His
{266}
love and you love Him. I do not believe things work in any other way. It is along that line that God effectuates His purposes. God can create a situation. He has created every situation and will create yet another; but God goes on, and by a moral process in men he brings to pass the purposes of His mind.
There is no doubt as to what God is doing at this time. He has formed the church, and it is by loving Christ that the church is brought into view. What would be the good of the church if it did not love Him?
Christ bought the field for the sake of the treasure, He had the treasure in view, but that did not bring the church to light. What brought it to light was the response to His love. It is a great thing to see the way by which God effectuates all His own blessed purpose. I am often very thankful that it is by a moral process which takes place in man.
We need to get things distinguished in our minds. We want to be clear as to God's testimony and the situation as it regards all men. If you want to have any part in the testimony it is of all-importance to be clear as to this, but not to mix it up with God's purpose to us. You see it as it affects all men.
It is another thing to see how God brings to pass His purpose, how He effectuates His will. We have to begin very low down indeed; we were in darkness and lawlessness; but it is a very true and real beginning. Then we get a little more light, step by step, until we come by the Spirit to the appreciation of Christ as God's covenant. This is a great point, because it brings you to this, that you are prepared to sacrifice everything for Christ. I do not believe we shall really get on until we are prepared for that. It is a real moment in the career of a Christian when he comes to that -- he
{267}
counts everything dross and dung that he may have Christ for his gain.
Then we keep His commandments, and come into the consciousness of His love. He loves us, and we love Him. Thus the church is brought into view down here. Not only do we love Christ, but we love one another. You could not love Christ without loving one another, and it is by loving one another that men know that we are His disciples; the church comes into view morally before the world. It is not conspicuous in this world, but in view morally because there is the setting forth of what is characteristic of Christ; the saints in that way present the likeness of Christ. "As I have loved you, that ye also love one another".
It would, I am sure, be a great help to us to understand these two things -- first the situation, and how it regards all men; and then the way that God effectuates His will by a moral process in man, beginning with repentance.
{268}
RESPONSIBILITY AS TO MAINTENANCE OF THE TRUTH
@Joshua 5
I would not venture to say anything at all, after what has been before us, did I not in some sense feel conscious of having a word from the Lord. And what I first wish to press upon each one is our individual responsibility in regard to the maintenance of the truth. It is very easy to put the responsibility of maintaining the truth on those who minister the truth. It is certainly not given to every one to minister the truth. Ministry is in the power of gifts from Christ, and He claims to be sovereign in that matter; and it is a privilege to minister in the truth. But I say without any hesitation that it is the responsibility of every one of us to maintain the truth. We do not maintain the truth merely by clinging tenaciously to the terms of the truth, but by being ourselves the exponents of the truth. You may think what I say is hard, but I judge that we ought *to be prepared* to surrender everything -- whatever we have in this life, the dearest ties and associations, whatever honour or glory or position we may have -- in order to be exponents of the truth which the Lord has given us to maintain. It is very easy to justify having things agreeable here -- and God may allow us to enjoy many things here -- but they may readily be too prominent with us, and when they are the truth has a second place; and which, I ask, should have the first place -- the things of this life, or the truth? Every right-minded person would allow that the truth is to be the first thing, and we are at all costs to maintain it; and the divine way to maintain it is by ourselves being the expression of
{269}
it, and everything has to be subordinate to that. So I say that, in a sense the less a man has in this world the better. If we have confidence in God, God can care for His people, and He is not limited to human methods. People make provision for their families in their way, and think that God is bound to that way. God has His own way, and can make provision in His own way; He is not bound to any particular way.
I think we often lack in piety. Faith is, that we have the light of God's things; piety is, that we bring God into our own things. If you make the truth the first concern and are here entirely for the Lord, the Lord will own you, and He will provide for your things; we have no need to be anxious on that score. For myself I can say, that is the line which I would seek to follow.
I only say that by way of preface, for what I want to come to is this -- we have heard of what the Lord has been pleased to give back to us in these last days -- the truth that Christ, the glorified Man, is the Head in heaven, and that His body is here. There are thousands of Christians who would allow the body in glory. What I saw long since was that the practical difficulty with saints lay in inability to realise the truth that the body was *here* in completeness. I imagine that it is accepted by every one here today that the body is here, and that Christ is Head to the body. That is the prominent truth, as I should understand, which the Lord has given back to us in this century, and in which we have to stand.
There is another cognate truth, and that is, that the body is derived from Christ. Eve was taken from Adam that she might be united to Adam. No other was fit to be a helpmeet for him. So the body has been taken from Christ in the time of His death to Israel, in order to be fit to be His companion in
{270}
glory -- His bride; that is, that she might be for His pleasure and share His honour. I just refer to it, because that is what God has been pleased to bring us to.
I want to say another word in regard to our responsibility to maintain the truth. There are two things here to which we have to return; two things which marked saints at the beginning. Where there has been departure you are bound to go back to first principles, and you have to go to the outset to find them. If the Spirit of God has opened your eyes in any measure to the true state of things, that is what you have to do. Now the two things to which I refer are great safeguards; and you must keep within them if you want to be in the truth, and in liberty from what is about. They are the reproach of Christ and the power of the Spirit. If I may speak of them as principles (though they are not exactly principles, for the Spirit of God is not a principle), these are what you must hold to, if you want to be maintained in liberty from all that is about us -- that is, from Babylon.
I want to show the working of these principles at the beginning and now. You must remember that at the time Christ came the people of God were under the power of Babylon. Of course, it was the Roman power at the moment, but it was the continuation of Babylon; it was the lower part of the same great image. That is where the people of God were at the moment -- captive to Babylon; they had been under captivity *in* Babylon, now they were not captive *in* Babylon, but *to it*. The course of things is prophetically told by the prophet Isaiah. God brought a remnant of the people back into the land under Gentile protection, in order that Christ might be presented to them. That was the external state of things, and Christ was presented to the responsibility of the people; but
{271}
as to ecclesiastical form and order, everything was under the protection of the Gentile power. The Gentile power was dominant, and if it saw fit to set aside the Jewish form and order, it had power to do it. If it saw fit to maintain it, they could have it. They were dependent on the Gentile power. Christ was presented to the responsibility of the people under these conditions, but rejected.
The point is this: the Babylonish power was not set aside. Christ was crucified at the hand of that power. The Gentile was guilty in this. The Jew cast Him out of the vineyard, and put Him into the hand of the Roman power; and that power was immediately responsible for crucifying the Lord of glory. The apostle holds that the princes of this world crucified the Lord of glory. God did not come in at the moment to destroy the Romish power; on the contrary, He allowed it to remain and to completely set aside the Jewish polity and ecclesiastical order. The whole thing was broken up, Jerusalem became a heap of stones, and it was done by the hand of the beast -- the Roman power; and the ecclesiastical order -- the camp -- was completely set aside.
Now, I would ask, how were the saints -- the remnant of that day -- who did not surrender the truth (for the mass had turned apostate), how were they to escape from the Babylonish power? For Rome was not publicly judged at that time; on the contrary, it got more complete power. I will tell you how they were set free from it. It was by the acceptance of the two principles to which I have referred, the reproach of Christ and the power of the Spirit. It was thus that Christians were saved in that day from the Babylonish power. In accepting the reproach of Christ they were delivered from ecclesiastical form and order, from dependence on the camp, as we read in the last
{272}
chapter of Hebrews: "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach"; and had no longer occasion to look for countenance from the Gentile power. They might in leaving the camp have to come under the reproach of impiety, for that matter, but they did not concern themselves about that. Their language was, Christ suffered without the gate; we go to Him, and bear His reproach. In thus leaving outward form and order they became independent of man, and dependent on a power which man cannot understand at all -- on the power of the Spirit of God. Some may perhaps say: Did not the apostles set up an ecclesiastical form and order? I believe the apostles set up nothing but what was in the power of the Spirit of God. Jew and Gentile were builded together to be the habitation of God through the Spirit; but that is not form or ecclesiastical order, that is spiritual. The idea of it is that the saints are "a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices". The whole thing was pervaded by the Spirit. That is my idea of what was set up by the apostles; nothing outside the vital power of the Holy Ghost in the soul, and that was the work of the apostles. The point to me is this -- that Christians were practically set free from the Romish power because they were not dependent on it. They were prepared to suffer as Christ had suffered if need be; they had nothing but the Spirit of God. The two things that guarded them were the reproach of Christ and the power of the Spirit.
Now I want to come to the present time, which is much more difficult. Things are in such confusion. Babylon is now within; not the Romish power, but the popish power, and I want to tell you the character of that power. It is a *worldly* power. I do not believe in the inherent power of the Pope a bit. He is ruled by the world. How did he get his
{273}
power? By trimming his sails to the powers that were, and playing off one against another. It was diplomacy, by which he maintained and does maintain his power; but he is not the power, the world is the power. The *form* of Babylon is ecclesiastical, and there the saints were in bondage; but in being in bondage to popery they were in bondage to the world.
And how have we got free? On just the same principles as at the beginning, namely, by being apart from ecclesiastical form and organisation and order in the acceptance of the reproach of Christ, and by the power of the Spirit. I want every one to weigh these things, to see the immense importance of them. It is only thus that we can be maintained free from the tyranny of the world-power which has come into the professing church.
I do not believe that the Lord intended that the prominent thing with us should be ecclesiastical form and order. The assumption of this was the first great declension at Plymouth, the evil which sought to isolate the meeting there, and to give to it a certain distinct form. We do not want to fall into the same error. We are in the scene of Christ's reproach, in the place in which He has been rejected; and we should be distrustful of everything which is not the immediate fruit of the power of the Spirit of God. If we look at the things about us, as, for instance, the State Churches, we see that while they have escaped in a certain sense from Rome, they have halted half way, and have set up in some degree the same thing in themselves. They are not in liberty. Then the various dissenting systems have set up for themselves a form and order -- not exactly on the lines of Babylon, but they have not escaped the bondage of the world, and are fast going back under it. Why? Because they have not accepted the reproach of Christ and the power
{274}
of the Spirit. We have professedly accepted both, and they are our safeguards. The moment you surrender either you will get back into bondage to the great world-power. You may get back into it in greater or less degree, but you will surely end there if you travel away from these two great principles.
What we find in this chapter (@Joshua 5) connects itself very intimately with what I have sought to put before you; and I may remark first that what we come to here is typical of *assembly* privilege and blessing, that is, of what is not individual but collective. Where it is a question of the wilderness everything is individual. The wilderness regards the saints as individuals; we enter into that path in which we prove God individually. My exercises in the wilderness are not the exercises of another, and the exercises of another saint are not my exercises. The experience of God which I gain in the wilderness is my own, and the experience which another gains is not mine. As has often been said, the wilderness formed no part of the purpose of God, but of His ways. It is where we learn His ways, where we learn practically what God is to us; and there it is that the manna is the food of our souls. We are supported here by the grace of Christ. Manna is daily grace for daily need. It was Christ's path as a man here. The wilderness is where I learn what Christ was in His lonely pathway down here; the lowly grace of the heavenly Man, the perfect setting forth of what is according to God "in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is", as we get it in @Psalm 16, and again in @Psalm 23.
But here in @Joshua 5 we come in type to church associations, to that which is collective and corporate.
The first point to which I want to call your attention is in verse 1. When all the kings on the other side of Jordan "heard that the Lord had
{275}
dried up the waters of Jordan ... their heart melted, neither was there any spirit in them any more, because of the children of Israel". Mark the connection with this of the next verse, "*At that time* the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel". You would have thought that if there was no more spirit left in the kings because of what God had done for Israel, that the way was clear for the children of Israel, and that it merely remained for them to go up and take possession. But a great deal of preparation was needful on their part. The first thing you get is circumcision. Circumcision has to be realised in the saints. Why so? That they may "keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace". We could not go further without circumcision. That is what we have to come to. What is it that brings in divergence of feeling and judgment among saints? Not the Spirit, but the flesh. Before we can get on collectively you must have "the putting off the body of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ". Without that you cannot keep in the unity of the Spirit. Every one is responsible to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. What is the unity of the Spirit? It is a unity of judgment and spiritual affection, and there is no real unity apart from spiritual affections. I cannot understand it without. How the Spirit produces it, I judge, is that He keeps the saints under the influence of God's love, and that is the way in which we are bound together.
When I look around at a company of saints it is not unity of doctrine I look for, I should not care for our bond to be unity of doctrine, but I look for unity of affection. Doctrine is not the bond of perfectness, but love. We may be lacking as to affection though orthodox as to doctrine. I cannot understand the unity of the Spirit apart from
{276}
spiritual affection, and it is to be kept in the uniting bond of peace. Peace is there, on God's part there is no disturbing element. God has removed every cause of disturbance. The only thing likely to intrude is the flesh, and it is to be kept out by the power of the Spirit; we are to be maintained in this unity, and to be diligent to keep it in the bond of peace. To that end there is circumcision: "the putting off the body of the flesh through the circumcision of Christ". The body of the flesh I understand to be the weight, the incubus of the flesh; the whole thing goes. That breaks the link with Egypt. If flesh goes, Egypt is gone. Flesh subsists in the things of Egypt, not of the wilderness or of the land. Flesh must have its food, and the food of flesh is in Egypt: the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life. If the body of the flesh is put off, the link with Egypt is for ever broken. Thus the flesh is not to intrude at all. The moment it intrudes it brings in a bit of grit and so disturbs the peace. God has been pleased in divine goodness to remove everything that had any title or pretension to disturb. Now we are at liberty and privileged to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; let us look to it then that we do not fail in this! Let us see that our hearts are kept under the influence of divine love, and that thus we *love* one another, and not *watch* one another to see if there be evil. It ought to be pain to see evil in one another; we need to be enlarged in the knowledge of divine love and in love to one another. How can I prove that I love God? By loving the brethren. "If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?" "Every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him".
{277}
That is the first great principle, and so far we have only come to human weakness. If the body of the flesh is put off, man has come to the extremity of human weakness, he is no longer supported by natural power. Natural power is connected with the flesh, but I do not accept that support (verse 9). "This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you". I cannot attempt to carry out the things of God in the energy of the flesh; there is no resource left now but the Spirit of God, and in that, man is as to himself weak. As sure as you are in the power of the Spirit of God, you will know that you are weak, "When I am weak, then am I strong". Where the Spirit of God is, there is bound to be the sense of weakness.
In Israel, it may be remarked, the males only were circumcised, because they were the strength of Israel. But it is not so now. The males are not the strength of the church. "By one Spirit you are *all* baptized into one body". "As many of you as have been baptized unto Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek ... there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus" (@Galatians 3: 27, 28). Every one now is to have put off the body of the flesh in the circumcision of Christ. It is a principle of universal application: and on it hangs the truth of our being one body in Christ.
We read in verses 10, 11, "And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the passover and they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the self-same day". Two things go together here, following on the morrow of the passover; there is unleavened bread, which maintained circumcision, and at the same time the old corn of the land. The first is what the apostle put before the Corinthians, "Christ our passover is
{278}
sacrificed for us: therefore let us keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth". Here you get the two things combined, and if you know anything about the old corn of the land you will be certain to keep the feast with unleavened bread.
You may ask, What do you understand by the "old corn of the land"? I will tell you -- "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above". If you can tell me what is proper to and characteristic of Christ in the scene where He is, I will tell you what the old corn of the land is. It is not the manna; the manna is the grace of Christ in a scene where all is contrary. By the old corn of the land I understand all that is characteristic of Christ in a scene where everything is congruous. Christ is gone back into that scene from which He came, where all is suitable. There is no change in that sense morally, and Christ is the centre there and commands and controls all spiritual affections. That is to me the thought of the old corn of the land. If we know what it is to have to say to that scene we shall not fail to eat the unleavened bread; you may be sure we shall realise that sincerity and truth are suitable if we know anything of the "things above" where Christ is sitting.
One word more; I understand the eating of the old corn of the land to be not individual but collective privilege. Here you are come, I think, on to assembly ground. It is like the new man, the two (Jew and Gentile), made in Christ into one. I think the old corn of the land has been looked at too much as food individually. It appears to me that it refers to the affections and joys of the holiest, what we feed on in communion. It is spiritual privilege, the appropriation of Christ in what He is before the Father in heavenly affection and order. If you accept that you will understand why the
{279}
manna ceases. The moment I enter into that scene in which Christ is Head I have done with the wilderness and the individual path, and for the moment I have done with the manna. I have to go back to it; but I enter in spirit on a scene where Christ is all, and for the moment the manna ceases. Of course you get it presented only typically in @Joshua 5, for when Israel were actually come into the land the manna ceased completely. And for the Christian, when we truly reach assembly ground, when we enter into the scene of heavenly affections, the manna ceases and you eat the old corn of the land.
The old corn of the land connects itself as we have seen with unleavened bread; and so in @Hebrews 10 it says, "Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith". "They did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year" (verse 12). The fruit of the land of Canaan is what is proper to heaven.
One point more. All that we have seen is paving the way for conflict (see verses 13 - 15). And in speaking of conflict I may refer to a mistake into which I think we have fallen. We have been accustomed to say that Christ is Head to the assembly and that He is not Lord to the assembly. I quite admit He is Head to the assembly, but there is a tendency to think that when we come to the assembly we have done with the Lord. I admit Christ is not Lord to the assembly as such, but the assembly is privileged to be with the Lord in the conflict. I see in Ephesians we are to be "strong in the Lord and in the power of his might"; I do not think that is individual. It is a question of conflict and testimony. The privilege of the assembly is to be with the Lord in the conflict against the power of evil.
The mistake Joshua made was in thinking that the Lord was to be with them, as if the captain of
{280}
the Lord's host was to fight their battles. He asks, "Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?" The angel says directly, "Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come". It is not a question of My being with you, but of your being with Me. That is the great point. If we understand anything about collective privilege, that is, if we know Christ as the Head of the assembly, then there is another privilege conferred, and that is, to be with Him in conflict against His adversaries -- to be associated with Him against the power of evil. I do not think that is much understood by the saints. I think we know what it is to love the Lord individually, to confess Him as Lord, to love Him, and to look for His appearing, and we rejoice to have the Lord with us in our pathway through the wilderness; but that is all connected with our individual path. There is another thing, which is the proper privilege of the church, namely, to be *with the Lord* in conflict with the wickedness in the heavenly places. "Our conflict is not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against wicked spirits in heavenly places".
One word more in connection with verse 15. "Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy". The ground is holy. When you are with the Lord in spiritual conflict you will not do much if you do not follow holiness. You must put off your shoes from off your feet, for it is holy ground you are upon. You are with the Lord. You have known Him in the assembly declaring the Father's name to His brethren, leading the praises there; you have tasted that. But now there is the being with Him in the spiritual conflict; and the ground on which you stand is holy.
I only took up this chapter just to indicate these
{281}
things; and what we have come back to are the two principles that we spoke of -- the reproach of Christ and the power of the Spirit. We have escaped in measure from Babylonish captivity, but the liberty can only be maintained on the principles on which we began; we cannot surrender them for a moment; we must accept the reproach of Christ in the power of the Spirit. The Spirit *is* *here*; the Spirit has come down and convicts the world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment. He is the power to maintain for Christ; and if we accept the reproach of Christ we know no power but that of the Spirit.
You have come to spiritual circumcision that every difficulty between one and another may be removed, that we may be able to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and in eating the old corn of the land you have come to heavenly associations (the manna, the food of the wilderness, ceases); and you have come to the Captain of the Lord's host; you are occupied with His interests you are led by Him into conflict with the power of evil -- and the place is holy.
Do not make the fatal mistake of supposing that this refers only to those who minister -- that no one is responsible for maintaining and guarding the truth but those who minister it. The spiritual circumcision refers to all. We all have to stand to the truth of it. It is not the "males" now, we have all as a company to stand in the truth which we have professed to accept. "We being many are one body". "All one in Christ". Though it may only be given to a few to minister, it is the responsibility and privilege of each one to stand to, and seek to maintain the truth, and that, not by dogmatism, but by being exponents of it.
{282}
THE GRAVITY OF THE MOMENT
@Revelation 2: 18, 19
I desire to draw attention, as the Lord may enable me, to the gravity of the present moment. I think that the value and importance of these addresses to the assemblies is in that they show us the gravity of the moment, the state of things as in the eye of the Lord. People might be gratified in a way with the state of things in the world; men might congratulate themselves on the outward spread of Christianity and the like; but that would be only according to man's judgment, and man's judgment in the things of God may, of course, be very much at fault. Therefore you can appreciate how important it is that the Lord has given us His mind in regard to things here, from the beginning to the end of the history of the church -- of course, prophetically.
There is such a thing as prophetic communication in Scripture. You get a great deal of it in the Old Testament, and you get it also in the New, though not to the same extent. It is a principle which God avows; He makes no secret of this. He makes known the end from the beginning. He avowed the principle in connection with Israel, and it comes out too in reference to the church: that from the outset of a dispensation God makes known the end. I quite admit that it is made known in a symbolic and obscure way, and no doubt there is wisdom in that; but for every one who has ears to hear there is no difficulty in understanding what the course of things would be from the very start of the church till the end. God has been pleased to make this known to us in a remarkable way in these addresses to the seven churches.
{283}
I take up the address to Thyatira on account of there being one peculiar feature about it, and that is that, out of the seven addressed, this is the church in which you get for the last time the recognition of the assembly as a whole. In the three remaining addresses we get it looked at in a sense partially. Thyatira is the last church representing the whole as on the ground of responsibility. What becomes of it? "I will give unto every one of you according to your works". Being connected with the church system was no longer a ground of security; judgment was to be according to their works. What a state the church must have lapsed into when the Lord had to present Himself in that way, for that is the way in which He presents Himself to the world.
I want to take up a few details connected with the address, and I think they have a very distinct voice to us, because they bring into view the coming of the Lord. It is the first address in which the word spoken to the overcomer brings the Lord's coming into view. When the church has failed of the purpose for which God set it up on the earth, there remains nothing but for the Lord to come and to take up His authority in connection with the kingdom. Hence the promise to the overcomer is in connection with the kingdom: "To him will I give power over the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers, even as I received of my Father".
In taking up some of the details in the address, I will first say a word or two as to the aspect in which the Lord presents Himself. He presents Himself as the "Son of God who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass". Now, I think that is extremely significant. His eyes are searching, and His feet like fine brass are
{284}
symbolic of judgment according to works. You say that is a strange idea as connected with the Son of God, and John had indeed very different thoughts concerning the Son of God. He tells us that "for this purpose the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the devil" (@1 John 3: 8), and again that, "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believeth on him should not perish but have everlasting life" (@John 3: 16). He brings out the great thought of eternal life in the Son of God. Is it not strange then that we should have such different features presented in the Son of God, "His eyes like a flame of fire and his feet like fine brass"? The truth is that there are two distinct lines connected with the name of the Son of God. "The hour is coming and now is when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live" (@John 5: 25). That is one line. The other is that He is the One who exercises judgment and authority over the nations as in @Psalm 2. In Him are set forth all the rights and authority of God. You get this last idea in connection with the coming of the Lord in @Revelation 19. He is there presented as the Word of God, clothed with all the rights and authority of God. The two lines are very different, but both are true and each has its place. The first line is what marks the present moment: "He that heareth my word and believeth on him that sent me hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life" (@John 5: 24). But the time is at hand when Christ will come forth as the Word of God, followed by the armies of heaven, to use the sharp sword which proceeds out of His mouth, to exercise authority over the nations and to break them to pieces. I will not dwell on that now; I merely refer to it as showing that the way
{285}
in which the Lord is introduced in the opening of the address to Thyatira is according to the second line of truth I have mentioned. He is brought before us as the One who has been rejected, according to @Psalm 2. The kings of the earth have been in tumult and agitation against the Lord and against His Anointed. They would not have the throne of David and God's kingdom. Then it is that the decree is declared: "Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for, thy possession". This is God's answer to the rejection of His Anointed One.
Now if you do not see the aspect in which the Son of God is presented here, you cannot understand the peculiar sin of Jezebel, nor can you rightly understand the promise to the overcomer in Thyatira. The sin of Jezebel has, I have no doubt, to do with what we find in @Psalm 2; and the promise to the overcomer has relation to the sin of Jezebel. The whole hangs together; and if you fail to see the connection with the Son of God and that which is given to Him of the Father, you can hardly understand either the gravity of the sin or the import of the promise.
It is important in a Christianised country like this to understand the character of Jezebel. I want you to apprehend what men have built up in this world, under the name of Christ, as it appears under the eye of God -- to see the character of it, and what its end is to be. You must not confound Thyatira and Jezebel. Thyatira is the church; but Jezebel is not exactly the church but, rather, a system which has been permitted to grow up in the church: "Thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things
{286}
sacrificed unto idols". A woman in Scripture is very often employed as symbolic of a system, and I have no doubt that there is an identity between Jezebel here and great Babylon, the mother of harlots, in the end of the Book of Revelation; both the one and the other represent the great popish, Babylonish system.
I will point out what the character of this system is. Jezebel calls herself a prophetess: the system pretends to speak authoritatively from God, that is its avowed character. Now the church was set up here on the foundation of the apostles and prophets (@Ephesians 2: 20). There have been no apostles or prophets since; there could be none, because the church was built upon them. They completed the word of God, and there has been no subsequent communication from God in that sense; for when the foundation has been laid you do not want any further inspired communication from God. But here you find a system springing up in the church which avows to speak authoritatively from God, so that you have, as they say, to "hear the church". That is the most wicked part of the whole system, denying practically that the mind of God communicated in His word has been completed. The apostle Paul speaks of its having been given to him to complete the word of God (@Colossians 1: 25). And yet here is a system which avows to be prophetic, to speak authoritatively the mind of God. While she does that you have to look at her works: "To teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols". There was a system seducing the servants of Christ into unholy commerce with the world, into the acknowledging the god and prince of this world; that was the character of the great popish system. It is a teaching system which, while professing to speak authoritatively from God, has the moral effect of
{287}
leading the servants of Christ to lose all idea of separation, and to acknowledge the god and prince of this world.
There are two Christian sacraments -- I use the word only for convenience for want of a better -- two Christian ordinances, baptism and the Lord's supper. Now I will tell you what they set forth morally, and I do not think anybody can refuse what I say. Baptism speaks of dissociation from the world, and the Lord's supper of the fellowship of Christ's death. The second really embraces and confirms the first. Baptism is the act of another -- no one baptises himself: on the other hand, the Lord's supper is your own act, and in it you endorse what was set forth in your baptism. Apart from my own act I was a subject of baptism, which signifies dissociation from the world (as Ananias said to Saul: "Arise and be baptised, and wash away thy sins"; which really meant dissociation from all that he had been identified with before); but in the Lord's supper, by my own act, I am identified with the death of Christ. "In that he died, he died unto sin once"; and if you take the ground of association with Christ, you are "to reckon yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord" (@Romans 6). It is most important to see the true character of the Christian ordinances and what they convey. They signify the moral dissociation of Christians from the present evil world. The children of Israel were baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and were thus dissociated from all that with which they had been connected before; so we having been baptised unto Christ in the water of baptism, have been dissociated from all that in which we were before. We have been made also to partake of spiritual food and spiritual drink, that is, fellowship of the body and blood of Christ, which means in the
{288}
very strongest way dissociation from the great world system.
Now if we look at the great popish, Babylonish system, what use have they made of the sacraments? They have used the sacraments for the support of priest-craft, for no one can administer the sacraments except the clergy. For the laity everything is made to depend upon the administration of the sacraments, and as the sacraments can be administered only by the clergy, you see at once the great importance that is given to the priestly order.
Another feature in the system is that it is a great organisation in which man is glorified, not quite in his position in this world, but ecclesiastically. It is not Christ that is exalted in the system, but man. The head of the system is a great worldly dignitary. If you want to see its true character and description, you find this depicted in the latter part of the Book of Revelation. My only object in speaking of it now is to bring before you the character of the work that has been built up -- this great Babylonish system, in which the sacraments have been used to confer honour and authority upon men, and to make of the priesthood something entirely contrary to the mind of Christ. When He spoke of what would take place during His absence, of the evil servant who would say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming, and would begin to smite his fellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, I cannot doubt for a moment that the Lord had in view the wickedness of priest-craft. That is what has come to pass in perfection in the great system here called Jezebel. Her children, the children of the system, are killed with death -- I have no doubt moral death, that is, they become apostate.
Now the Lord comes to this church as in judgment, and He says, "All the churches shall know that I
{289}
am he which searcheth the reins and hearts" -- He is the judge of the thoughts and intents of the heart -- and further, "I will give unto every one of you according to your works". It has come to pass in the professing church, that the Lord has to give to every one according to their works, not according to their profession. In the early days of the church, as recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, the Lord's people were all known as Christians, it was not then a time to judge every man according to his works; they were not judged at all in that sense, the Lord would not have presented Himself then in that light. But now He comes in with eyes like a flame of fire, searching the reins and the hearts, and giving to every one of them according to his works. You and I have to regard ourselves morally, in the light of the Son of God, and to see whether we are prepared to receive from Him according to our works. Will your works pass muster in the sight of the Son of God? Remember that the church has to do with One whose eyes are as a flame of fire and His feet like fine brass.
Before we come to the promise to the overcomer we have, "But unto you I say, to the rest" [or remnant], in Thyatira [there should be no 'and' here; it is the remnant only that is addressed], "as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other burden, but that which ye have already hold fast till I come". It is interesting to see here the recognition of a remnant that have not the doctrine of Jezebel, and the Lord puts no great burden upon them; what He looks for is that what they have they should hold fast till He comes.
But now as to the overcomer. I have tried to bring before you something of the character of the works of Jezebel, the building up of that vast
{290}
Babylonish system in which man is glorified. But the Lord speaks "to him that overcometh and keepeth *my works* unto the end". What are the works of Christ? I think they are works in which the character of God is expressed, and these are what we are admonished to keep unto the end. I will try to give you an idea of the character of these works later on, but how are you going to arrive at them? I think the first great point is the kingdom, for having been brought into the kingdom, you have your responsibility there. The first point for the apprehension of a soul is God as a Saviour God. If you apprehend God in that light you must be saved. God has no other attitude towards men, as men, at this time than that of a Saviour God, and therefore to any one who apprehends God now there can be nothing but salvation. In the past God came out as a lawgiver and then there was law for men; by-and-by He will come out as a Judge and then there will be judgment for men; but now on the ground of the cross of Christ He presents Himself as a Saviour God, and any present apprehension of God must mean salvation for the person who so apprehends Him. If you have not salvation it proves that you do not know God, because if you knew Him it would be as a Saviour God, and that must mean salvation for you.
Now the first great object in salvation is to bring us under the sway of grace. Grace reigns now and it reigns through righteousness. Under the sway of grace you get the obligation to righteousness. When the kingdom is established in the future under the Lord Jesus Christ grace will reign for the blessing of man, and sin will be disallowed. Also the Psalm will be fulfilled which says, "There he commanded the blessing, even life for evermore (@Psalm 133). We get the principle of this in Christianity, in that grace should reign through righteousness
{291}
unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord".
God's first great object, as I have said, is to bring the soul of the believer under the moral sway of the grace that reigns through righteousness, that is through the practical setting aside of sin, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Supposing we have got thus far, that a soul has been brought under the sway of grace and has confessed Christ as Lord; what is the next step The next step is that the Lord directs the heart into the will of God, so that you may be here not for your own will, but for God's, and I think the Lord enforces that by means of discipline. It is a great thing to take account of the discipline of the Lord, for it is a very real thing. "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten". There is a beautiful instance of this in the last chapter of John's gospel. The Lord brought conviction to Peter of his sin, but besides bringing conviction to him He disciplined him; He told him what the manner of his death would be "Another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". That was the Lord's discipline in regard to Peter, that Peter might be kept in the path of the Lord's will down here, and not in that of his own will. And I believe the object of the Lord's discipline in regard to every one of us is that we might be kept in the way of righteousness and might not wander away into the tortuous paths of self-will. This discipline is individual, "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten", or "convict and discipline".
It is a great thing to he here for the will of God, and thus to keep the works of Christ. Now I will tell you what the works of Christ are: works of beneficence to men according to God. Works of philanthropy are works of beneficence to men according to man. The works of Christ are works which express the will and character of God, for
{292}
God is the great Benefactor of man. But if man is benefited it is according to God. The great benefit is to give to man's heart the light of what God is, that He Himself may be known in the heart of man. That is the work of God. It is very important to distinguish clearly and definitely between man's works -- works of philanthropy -- and the works of Christ. When He was down here all His works were works of beneficence to man. But with what object? To make God known to the heart of man. Christ would not accept honour for Himself. When one comes to Him and says, "Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" the Lord answers, "Why callest thou me good? None is good save one, that is God". He brought out the goodness of God, and all His works tended to that end, to make known the goodness of God to men. Are those the works that you and I are keeping unto the end?
It is very important to go back to the foundation, to see how far our hearts are really established in the kingdom, or rather how far it is established in us, so that we are under the sway of grace, of grace reigning through righteousness; how far we are found here zealous of good works. It is most important to be zealous of good works; but then be sure that they are good works, and do not let man be the judge of them, but Christ. Good works according to Christ are works of goodness and mercy and beneficence to man, but according to God, so that the light of God may be brought into men's hearts. You may do this in preaching, visiting, in a thousand ways, if you are really set upon the light of God penetrating and pervading the hearts of men. I think that is the idea of Christ's works in this passage.
While looking at the promise to the overcomer, let me say one word about the state of things contemplated
{293}
here. Rome is the wickedest system that ever was seen upon the face of the earth. Could anything be so unfaithful as for Christ's servants to be led into commerce with the world that rejected Christ? The church has assumed to rule the nations, the nations that rejected Christ who alone had authority or title to rule the nations (@Psalm 2). Christ has not yet taken up His title to rule, yet Rome has assumed to rule the nations while Christ is absent. What can be more evil than that? We find that in a sense Christ mocks her. There is the idea in Scripture of God mocking (@Proverbs 1: 26). The Lord mocks Rome by allowing her, since she *would* rule, to ride the beast, but it is only to her own destruction. She had taught the servants of Christ to commit fornication, to enter into unholy connection with the world, with the very world-power that rejected Christ, and she is herself rejected. Would you care to be distinguished in the world that rejected Christ? The world is in character Babylonish. There are two antagonistic cities, and they cannot co-exist -- Jerusalem and Babylon. When Jerusalem is trodden down Babylon is in the ascendant; when Babylon is cast down Jerusalem is exalted.
Now let us see what the Lord says to the overcomer. We have to come back in principle to the truth of baptism and the Lord's supper, separation from the world and identification with the death of Christ. "To him that overcometh and keepeth my works unto the end". You are overcoming in the midst of departure from separation, and are keeping Christ's works; and if you are thus separate from the great world system the Lord's promise is "To him will I give power over the nations and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers even as I received of my Father". I wonder if all have an
{294}
eye to this: that we are going to reign with Christ? When the apostle Paul was sent to preach the gospel to the Gentiles, he was "to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins *and an inheritance* among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me". Now what is the inheritance? It is to reign with Christ. And the preparation for that is suffering. So long as Christ does not take up His rights your part and mine is to suffer. If you are going to inherit the kingdom your proper place here is to show it by suffering for the kingdom. If you want to avoid suffering, carry out the will of man; but if you seek to carry out the will of God you are likely to have to suffer. Then you are counted worthy of the kingdom for which you also suffer (@2 Thessalonians 1: 5); you are being put through an education that will fit you for reigning with Christ. Our path is in dissociation from the world and the whole system of things down here which is dominated by sin, and therefore we must be prepared to suffer with Christ; but then we have before us this promise of reigning with Christ. When He rules over the nations and breaks them to shivers as the vessels of a potter, we shall be with Him. There is an allusion here, I take it, to Daniel's prophecy which speaks of the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which smote the great image of the vision upon its feet, so that it was broken to pieces and became as the chaff of the summer threshing floor. The great reconstituted Roman empire, the confederation bolstered up and supported by Satan cast out of heaven, is to be broken to pieces by Christ.
Now there is one point more "And I will give him the morning star;" the morning star refers, I think, to the present rather than the future. The morning star is, as I understand it, the harbinger
{295}
of day. It is Christ in the heart of a Christian. And the effect of this is to animate the heart of the Christian with *hope*. It is not merely that your heart rests in faith, but it is animated by hope. I think there is a defect in us generally in the lack of hope. It is not faith that is lacking, for we have the light, but hope; and hope is a very important element in Christian experience. The morning star, Christ, in the heart animating it with hope, is the Lord's promise to the overcomer. Do you believe this scripture to be the inspired word of God? Do you believe this to be the thought of Christ in regard to things down here at this moment? There is nothing more encouraging to me than that there is no moment in the history of the church in regard to which Christ has not His particular and distinct mind. He has His mind in regard to the state of things existing at this moment, and He has made it known to us. You have the works of Jezebel, and that wicked system -- Rome -- as plainly as possible under your eyes. On the other hand you have the blessed promise of Christ to the overcomer, to the one who goes against the stream, and keeps the works of Christ to the end.
It is a day when much is made of the works of men, but the point for Christians is to keep the works of Christ. Men carry out most wonderful achievements in the present day. I could tell you of great works which have been done in my time, and which have extorted universal admiration. But do you think they have helped man, or enabled him to meet the pressure of sickness and death and sorrow? No, it is the works of Christ that do that.
"To him that overcometh will I give authority over the nations". You are being fitted by Christ here to bear company with Him when He shall rule. I would like to know how far every heart here is animated by the hope of this. By-and-by
{296}
Christ will arise as the Sun of Righteousness upon the earth; but the Daystar has arisen in the heart of the Christian, and the heart of the Christian is full of hope in the thought of the coming of the Lord. In the meantime he is content to be nothing, just going on keeping the works of Christ unto the end, not seeking to do great or conspicuous things to make his mark in the world, but simply keeping the works of Christ. If you want to be conspicuous, wait for the time when Christ will exercise authority over the nations, and then you will reign with Him. It will not be fornication then, or the acknowledging the god of this world, because Satan will have been cast out and the whole world system broken to shivers.
May we have understanding to know God as a Saviour God, and, being under the sway of grace, able in the sense of that grace to carry out the demands of righteousness and then to be directed by the blessed Lord, and disciplined if need be by Him, so that we may be down here, not for the will of man, but for God's will, "proving what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God" -- so affected by the compassions of God that we desire to be here through grace for His will. May God give us to know that blessed path in which the Shepherd leads. He leads in the paths of righteousness for His name's sake.
{297}
THE REFUGE OF SAINTS IN A DAY OF DARKNESS
@Philippians 3: 17 - 21
I desire to say a little in regard to the place which is given in Scripture to the heavens and the earth -- that is, their place relatively. The apprehension of it may be a help in enabling us to understand the influences by which the people of God are to be governed down here.
We are all much exposed to influences of earth, and I do not think (as far as I know myself) that there is anything by which we are so affected as influences. They are extremely subtle, and one comes almost insensibly under the power of them down here. If you see a violent man you can avoid him, but it is extremely difficult to avoid an influence. It is in the air, as one might say, and we are affected and defiled very often before we are aware of it. Hence it becomes a matter of great moment to know the influences to which we are exposed down here.
The Scriptures begin with the heavens and the earth, and end with the heavens and the earth. I just call your attention to a passage in Peter's second epistle (@2 Peter 3: 7, 13), "We according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth". Then if you look on to @Revelation 21: 1 you read, "I saw a new heaven and a new earth". Revelation looks on to the accomplishment of that of which Peter speaks. You will notice that the scripture gives precedence to the heavens. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". I have no doubt that this is intentional. It is a principle which will he brought into effect in due time, that the heavens rule; and the heavens will rule morally,
{298}
not simply politically. I will come to that presently in connection with our citizenship. But God has, in the first instance, been pleased to make the earth the scene of His ways, and in the main the Old Testament is taken up with the development of those ways upon earth. There is very little about heaven in the Old Testament, and yet it is plain that the heavens had precedence of the earth. God set great lights in the heavens, and they were to rule the earth. Yet in God's ways the earth comes first into view. In the same way there is a spiritual body, and there is a natural body: the natural comes first into view, and yet the spiritual takes precedence over the natural, as according to the purpose of God. In the Old Testament the course of events is pretty much this: God begins by dealing in discipline with individuals -- as Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; then you get a nation taken up in connection with the ways of God. There was the throne of God in Jerusalem, and a system of nations, in the midst of which God exercised influence; and after that a succession of beasts or empires. This last has been continued till the present time. The Lord referred to it, "the times of the Gentiles" have to be fulfilled. The times of the Gentiles are going on still, and Jerusalem is trodden under foot. But the system of nations taken up in the Old Testament, with Jerusalem as its centre, looks on also to the future when the throne of David will be re-established; very little of heaven comes into view; just enough to show that it had a great place in the thoughts of God with regard to man.
You get heaven first coming into view in regard to Enoch. Death had come in by sin. Enoch was translated that he should not see death. The effect that faith had on him was this -- he prophesied, "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his
{299}
saints, to execute judgment on the ungodly"; he had faith to be translated, as we see in @Hebrews 11.
Further on we get Abraham, and heaven comes into view in connection with him. Two things mark him, "He looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God"; and he "sought a better, that is a heavenly, country". The fathers were not content with the land of promise; God showed it to them, but they sought a better, that is a heavenly, country. I suppose this means that they sought a country where God dwelt. Jesus said, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad". Therefore, "God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he has prepared for them a city".
I pass on a little further, and in the book of Isaiah we are told that God creates new heavens and a new earth, and we get another thought; that heaven is God's throne; the earth is His footstool.
I refer to these passages to show that heaven had a place in the thought of God and in the faith of men; but it was not prominent, and God was unfolding His ways in regard to the earth, which will have their issue in the kingdom in the future day.
I pass on now to the New Testament, and the first thing you find is that there is a stir in heaven, and from that point and forward heaven takes precedence, it gets its own proper place. In the Old Testament, while God was testing man, heaven could not get its proper place. Abraham's faith went beyond that testing; there is no testing of faith in heaven. I have no doubt the faith of other men went beyond that testing, still in the main the Old Testament is taken up with the testing. But the New Testament is different. It means the establishment by God of all that was in His mind, and
{300}
from the outset the heavens are astir. The stir is first in connection with the birth of Christ. When Christ was born the heavenly hosts announced -- "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". I refer to this, because it shows heaven in motion in connection with the birth of Christ.
You will find it of interest to observe the way in which heaven comes into view in connection with the pathway of the Lord Jesus down here on earth. First the Lord is baptised in due time; the Holy Ghost comes down, and a voice from heaven says, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased". The same thing occurs on the Mount of Transfiguration. Heaven comes into view in connection with Jesus, and there came a voice from heaven, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him". I think it is of great interest to see the movement in heaven in connection with the presence of Christ here. It is perfectly natural.
The point before me is this: the heavens were getting their own proper precedence and it meant the superiority of all that was of heaven. It leads on in result to the rule of heaven. We see the "living bread" come down from heaven, not merely a voice from heaven, nor even the Holy Ghost from heaven, but "living bread" come down from heaven to give life to the world. Now you see the source of life. The life of the world is dependent on the living bread come down from heaven.
I would like to point out some of the moral excellencies of what came down from heaven.
All here are doubtless pretty familiar with the idea of the living bread come down from heaven. To begin with, there was in it untainted and unselfish love, a thing hitherto completely unknown in man. There never had been seen the like. Another
{301}
thing was seen in the living bread come down from heaven -- unwearying goodness. This came out in the path of the Lord Jesus down here. You have only to read the gospels to see it. Another thing -- there was meekness and lowliness, and with this complete superiority to every influence of earth. And further -- there was power and energy against all the force of evil, that could say, "I have overcome the world". "The prince of this world cometh and hath nothing in me". I only just put these points before you, as I would like all to reflect on what has come down here to earth, and been set forth in the living bread come down from heaven -- perfect holy love, unwearying goodness, meekness and lowliness superior to every influence of earth; whereas influences of a character commendable in the eye of man had no place there. At the same time, Christ was the "lion of the tribe of Judah", strong to resist every power of evil. Satan had no power at all against the Lord.
Just let me call your attention to @Revelation 5: 5, 6 for a moment. I want to point out two expressions brought into juxtaposition: the Lion of the tribe of Judah and the Lamb as it had been slain. These expressions come out in connection with the kingdom. The form used for "Lamb" is a diminutive -- no doubt an expression of affection -- but it is curious that in the two verses you should get the lion and the lamb brought together. All this will come out in the kingdom. When the Lord rode into Jerusalem on an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass, He came in meekness. Whoever heard of that in a king? In our modern notions of kings we admire condescension and that sort of thing; but in this King there is meekness. It is recorded of Moses that he was the meekest man on earth. The Lord had title, but with the greatest title He was meek. He said, "I am meek and lowly in
{302}
heart". But at the same time, He is the lion of the tribe of Judah; He is strong against evil. We need to measure things according to God, and not according to man. We see people often admiring things that are according to man, not according to God, and this affects one painfully. I have only tried to indicate what came out in the living bread come down from heaven. I could not attempt to describe it fully; I can only take two or three features: love, goodness, meekness, and energy against the power of evil. But what I may say in regard of it is, it was too good for earth. It was living bread from heaven, and that could not find its permanent abode on earth. It came to earth. The Lord will no doubt in result give life to the world, but the abode of goodness must be with God. It is *of* God and its permanent abode is *with* God. Though it came to earth for a moment the rapture must take place. It must go up to heaven. That is the principle of @Psalm 16. You find in that Psalm something so surpassingly excellent that it cannot remain on earth; it must go up to the right hand of God in heaven. In @Revelation 12 the man-child is caught up to God on account of the moral excellence there, which was too bright for earth and must go up to heaven.
Now we come to another point. There must be the continuation of Christ here morally in His body. The church is the body of Christ; and if it is the body of Christ, it must set forth Christ. My body is the vessel in which I am set forth; but it is not impossible to distinguish myself from my body. What a man is gets no expression except through his body; and I take it that is what the church is to Christ, the vessel in which he is set forth. It is said of the body in @Ephesians 1 that it is the fulness of Him that filleth all in all. Every lineament of Christ was set forth in the body down here. I look
{303}
upon the church in that sense as the continuation of Christ. There was thus a witness to the world, and that witness was to be maintained in unity. You get this in @John 17: "That they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou hast sent me". The unity of saints was witness of the unity of the Father and the Son, the witness to the world that the Father sent the Son. This will come out in glory. The body of Christ served that purpose down here; but as Christ belonged to heaven, it is clear the body must go up to heaven. You could not separate Christ from His body. The body belongs to heaven, not to earth. What is set forth in the body was nothing short of Christ, properly speaking. The church left its first love, I know; but if Christ was caught up to heaven, the body of Christ must be caught up to heaven. The man-child in @Revelation 12 has been held to be a picture of Christ and the church. Heaven is the place and the expectation of the church.
It is plain that the witness of the church has been completely obscured. It is vain in the present day to talk much about it. In a general way saints have lost all idea of the truth of the body of Christ: hence unity has been almost completely surrendered, and it cannot be doubted that the church has lost very largely its proper place of witness. It has left its first love and lost its true place on earth. It has taken a worldly place, and has come under the power of earthly influence, and has lost its own proper heavenly light and lustre. The body is here, I know, as the Spirit is here; but it is clear that the heavenly light and lustre have been obscured. The point is -- what remains for us?
I see a great principle in Scripture, pointed out years ago, that when failure has come to pass in
{304}
any dispensation, it is no use to go back to the past; you must go on to what is to come. You find that in the old days. There were those who looked for redemption in Jerusalem, and who waited for the Redeemer. This is seen in Luke's gospel, in Simeon and Anna and others.
What have we to look for? I think, for the heavenly city. That led me to read the passage in @Philippians 3. Things had gone very much to the bad in the apostle's days -- the mass were minding earthly things. Then it is that he says, "Our citizenship is in heaven". I think it is when things have gone into decay that the citizenship comes into view.
Another thing becomes prominent, and that is eternal life. It was not so prominent a thought when the church was in its first estate, but comes more into view when things are in decay. It is seen in the later epistles, as was pointed out years ago, that the apostle Paul speaks of himself as apostle in connection with the hope of eternal life. The city and eternal life belong properly to the world to come; but they become prominent when the church has failed in its proper place as witness on earth. Then we are cast very much on the city and eternal life. "Grasp eternal life" the apostle says to Timothy.
But what I want to refer to is the thought that "Our citizenship is in heaven". I do not think you can know much about this practically except as you know something about the heavenly city. The idea of a city in Scripture is that of a source and centre of light and rule and blessing. Jerusalem was that in some sort upon earth. You find many expressions of this in the Psalms. Jerusalem was compact, the joy of the earth, the gathering centre of the tribes, and so on. The divine idea, I do not doubt, was that the city of the great King was to be
{305}
a source of light and rule upon earth. If that was true of the earthly city, how much more of the heavenly city! We want to be well acquainted with the heavenly city. I should recommend every one to seek to become acquainted with the moral features and excellencies of the heavenly city. In the idea of rule upon earth in the present time there are many elements, for example, diplomacy, expediency, might; but you may be confident that no principle of that kind can have any place in the city of the living God. In the heavenly city all must be according to God and suitable to His nature; there can be nothing in the city that is contrary to any attribute of God. You may take that for granted. The walls are great and high; everything will be excluded that is not consistent with the holiness of God. It will bear being measured. All is according to the righteousness of God. All His rights are maintained there. The righteousness of God has its proper place there, and so I might go on. You get perfection of light in it. "Its light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal". The throne of God and the Lamb are there -- the moral sway of God and the Lamb are absolute and complete. The river of living water flows from it. It is a source of living water to the nations -- health giving influences issue from it.
I allude to these few features, for if you do not understand a little about the heavenly city you will not understand much about our citizenship being in heaven. All is according to God, and no attribute of God can find any contradiction in the heavenly city. You have to take that into account. And another thing is said, "Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother". There is liberty. And yet another thing is said, "From whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall
{306}
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself". It is a great thing to take into account the moral power connected with the Lord Jesus to subdue all things unto Himself. And it is in connection with the heavenly city that the heavens get their proper precedence. The earth ceases to have the place it had: heaven comes into prominence, and it will ever have precedence. Light and rule have their source in heaven. The earthly Jerusalem will never have quite the same place again, because the heavenly city comes in and the throne of God and of the Lamb are in it. The kings of the earth bring their glory and honour unto it. Nothing enters into it which defiles; all that is unworthy and contaminating is excluded by the very power and energy of life that marks all that is of God.
I only just sought to bring these things under your notice, for it is interesting to see that though God for a time continued His ways on earth, yet heaven is to have precedence, and the time has come when heaven is in view. In the New Testament it comes very much to the front, and when you get the consummation of God's ways the heavenly city comes out to give light and bear rule on the earth.
We have to accept the fact that our being here is in a way a witness to it. All has failed in the church. Its light has become obscured by an immense mass of unholy profession, which bears the name of Christ upon earth. It is not much good going back upon the past; we want to have fully and continually in view the marks of that which will be prominent in the world to come, it is of great moment that we should understand that our citizenship is in heaven, and that we have only to await the coming of the Lord from heaven.
{307}
DELIVERANCE AND ITS END - NOTES OF LECTURES 1895
{308}
DELIVERANCE FROM SIN AND THE WORLD
@1 John 2: 29; @1 John 3
The subject that I have before me for this evening, and for some subsequent occasions, is that of deliverance. The great importance of it to every one of us will be admitted, since we cannot be for God here except as delivered, and deliverance has come in to that end. God has taken in hand to set us free from all that to which we were in bondage in order that we might be for Himself; and I think that every right-minded person would admit that God is entitled, by the very nature of what He is, to have all for Himself. Such a thought as that is not naturally in the mind of man; but for all that I maintain that it is a right thought. "The Lord hath made all things for himself", we read in Scripture. God never created man for man's satisfaction, but for His own satisfaction. I think there was to be satisfaction for man; but his satisfaction was in his being for God's satisfaction -- all was very good in God's eye.
I dare say some might think at first sight that this is a strange chapter to take up as a text on which to speak about deliverance; but really it is not so strange as it may appear, for there is in it a kind of bringing together of the truth of both Romans and Colossians. Deliverance, in the way in which I want to speak of it, is three-fold. Tonight, I take up the subject of deliverance from sin, the world, and the power of Satan; these are rightly put together in a line of a hymn, and are inseparably connected. That is one aspect of deliverance, and a very important one too. Another aspect of deliverance, which is distinct from the first, is from the law. And the third aspect is from
{309}
the flesh. All three are distinctly treated in Scripture, though they coalesce in the believer. My subject tonight is deliverance from sin, the world, and Satan's power.
I think one may readily see that if you are delivered from sin and from the world, you are delivered from Satan's power; because, as far as I understand it, it is by sin and the system of the world that Satan can act upon us. He is "the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience"; and the power by which Satan holds men in bondage is sin and the world. The connection of the three is so intimate that it is difficult to draw a definite line between them, except in saying that they are three distinct things; for Satan existed as a being before sin, and sin existed before the world, so that evidently the three things are in themselves distinct.
Now in regard to the passage I read (I commend it to your study when you have leisure), I would remark that though it starts from a very small beginning, it opens out into a very large circle. The beginning is in the last verse of chapter 2. "Born of God" is the beginning with every one of us; we are subjects of the work of God. "Every one that doeth righteousness is born of God", that is John's beginning. I may say in passing, that John does not, like Paul, take up the saints on the ground of their responsibility, for that is not exactly John's line, but on the line of the work of God in them; and the beginning of the work of God in the soul evidently is, that a man is born of God. Then if you run down chapter 3 the next thing is the calling; that gives our position. "What manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God". Then you pass on to another point, the nature which is suited to the calling. "He that doeth righteousness
{310}
is righteous, even as he is righteous". And there is another element connected with it, but I cannot go fully into that point at present, and that is love; though righteousness and love do not stand on quite the same footing. But they are the two proper characteristics of the Christian, he is righteous as Christ is righteous, and he loves his brother. Then in the latter part of the chapter, in connection with this question of love, is opened out the Christian circle. "We know that we have passed out of death into life because we love the brethren". It is that which made me say that in this chapter you touch on one side Romans and on the other Colossians. You are brought first to the great truth of a man of another order -- "He that doeth righteousness is righteous even as he is righteous", and then to the truth of the Christian circle; Romans gives the one and Colossians the other.
Now, of necessity two things are involved in the chapter, deliverance from sin and from the world. Deliverance from sin is really involved in doing righteousness. How do you know that a person is righteous as Christ is righteous? Because he practises righteousness; he has been delivered from the dominion of sin. Then again, in having passed out of death into life we have passed out of the system of the world, because the world is in death. John looks at things morally, and for him the world is death, and believers know that they have "passed out of death into life, because we love the brethren"; therefore practical deliverance from sin and from the world is involved in the chapter, and I want to show how it is effectuated in the believer. Possibly many here know it well enough, much better than myself; but to all of us, to the most advanced and to the youngest, this question of deliverance is a very important one indeed. I do not judge that it is effected simply
{311}
by the acceptance of doctrine. I think you can understand the expression, that you must get a certain amount of leverage in the soul in order to bring about practical deliverance from sin and from the world. To talk about the Christian practising righteousness unless as set free from sin is out of the question, you must have died to sin to live to God. And further, it is not true of anybody that he has passed out of death into life except as set free from the world -- "He that hateth his brother abideth in death" -- that is the world morally. I will return to that point, but what I want to show you first is the leverage, that is, the power by which God effectuates deliverance in the soul of the Christian. If I were to put the question, "How is deliverance effected for the Christian from sin and from the world?" the natural answer would be, "By death". I admit it; it is effectuated in that way. But then the Christian has to die to it, and how is he to be brought to that? I dare say some would answer, "We have died to it in the death of Christ". That will not do. I say the death of Christ is your title to die to it, to die to one as to the other. "Our old man has been crucified with him" -- that is your title to die to sin; and the world is crucified to the believer in the cross of Christ -- that is your title to die to the world. I quite admit the title of the Christian to die by the death of Christ both to sin and to the world; but my present point is what it is that gives power in the soul to die to sin and to the world. I believe Scripture makes it very plain; if a Christian is going to travel that path, and to enter into the thought of God about him, he must be attracted by the grace of God and by what God presents. I do not approve of asceticism, people may make an effort in such ways to cut off the connection, but I believe it is all totally false; I do not think they know what they are doing.
{312}
I repeat what I said at the beginning, that God, by the very nature of what He is, is entitled to have everything for His own satisfaction; that God created everything, man and everything else, for Himself. If you do not accept that you cannot know what sin is. The point of departure was when man listened to the temptation to act for himself; sin came in, and man stepped outside the circle of divine satisfaction. The evidence of sin was this, that self became an object to man, he was to be governed by his own will, that is sin; you get a definition of it in this chapter, "sin is lawlessness". Man's thoughts centred round self, and self became the great controlling principle with him. It has been said, and I do not think the expression is too strong, that man set himself as a rival to God; for what God is entitled to, man claimed on his own account, and the world was all built up on that. Satan greatly helped man to that end, for he is the god and prince of this world; and it is by the system of the world that Satan keeps man in bondage. That is the working and connection of things. When the Lord came into the world, and was led of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, Satan in one of the temptations takes Him up apart into a high mountain and shows Him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time, saying, "All this power will I give unto thee, and the glory of them, for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I give it", and if you will but acknowledge me as the prince and god of this world, "all shall be thine". The Lord met it in the perfection of truth, in the power of the word of God, "It is written, Thou shalt worship Jehovah thy God, and him only shalt thou serve", and He rebuked him too. I only refer to that in order to make plain the connection between these three things, sin, the world, and Satan.
{313}
This is the one chapter in Scripture in which we get a definition of sin; "Sin", we are told, "is lawlessness", the two things are precisely equivalent, that is, lawlessness is sin and sin is lawlessness. The principle of sin is in the indisposition of man to be under restraint of God. That was the effect of man listening to the enemy, he became as God. You remember what the temptation was -- "Ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil"; man became an object to himself, and in becoming an object to himself set himself as a rival to God. When the man of sin is revealed, he shows himself that he is God, and claims to be worshipped as God -- man has gained his end, he is bolstered up by Satan, and thus it is that you get the climax and full expression of sin in "the man of sin", "the son of perdition". It does not appear to me as if Satan came to the front; he has taken the place of god and prince of this world, but his way is to act through man. You find in the Revelation a trinity of evil; there is the first beast, which I suppose represents the great Imperial system; and the second beast, that is the personal Antichrist, the man of sin; and finally there is Satan, who has then been cast out of the heavens, and who gives his power and authority to the beast -- he is the ruling spirit. And Satan exercises great power in regard to man now, through the system of this world; for this world has been built up in sin, and man has turned everything to account for his own satisfaction, to his own ends, to please himself, and through this great system Satan works on man and holds him in bondage. I do not go further into it, but only allude to it in order to show the intimate connection between sin, the world, and Satan.
I think you will understand now that if one is to be for God he must be set free from sin and the world; for if I am in bondage to sin and to the
{314}
world, I am practically under the power of Satan, the enemy of God; and more than that, sin and the world are so totally opposed in nature and principle to God that I could not possibly be for God if I were not free from their power. Christ died for our sins, "that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father". It is a great thing to understand where the secret of deliverance lies, how you are practically set free from sin and the world in such a way as that you can live to God. It is a blessed thing to live to God as dead to sin. We read of Christ, "In that he died, he died unto sin once; but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God". He died to sin to live to God. As to His own personal path, of course that was ever to God; but He died to sin once and lives to God, that we too might die to sin and live to God. It is a great thing for all of us to reach that point; for God is entitled to have everything for His own satisfaction, and to live to God, as I understand it, is to live for His satisfaction.
There are two things in Scripture to which the Christian is said to die, sin and the world. In regard to law you are become dead to it; God has released you from one bond, and formed another. Then in regard to the flesh, "you are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you"; that is the change that takes place in the Christian, he is no longer in the flesh, but in the Spirit. You are never said to die to the flesh, that I know of, but by the Spirit you "mortify the deeds of the body". But you can very well understand that in each case deliverance stands on a different basis. The law is compared to a husband; and you could not be free from law if God had not dissolved the bond. On the other hand, you could not be in the Spirit, if you had not received the Spirit of God. But in regard to sin and the world,
{315}
which is my point tonight, we have to die.
I lay this down as an undoubted principle, that the title of a Christian to die is in the death of Christ; it is not that I have died in the death of Christ, but the death of Christ is my title to die. I could not think of dying to sin if our old man had not been crucified with Christ. That is my title to die to sin. What I understand by it is, that all that comes under the idea of our old man, what a man is as in the flesh, God has dealt with judicially in the death of Christ for Himself and for me too. If it were not so, you could not die; if our old man had not been crucified in the cross of Christ, you would be on the footing of responsibility as to the old man; but our old man has been dealt with in the cross of Christ, that we might not be on that footing, but that we might be privileged to die with Christ.
And in regard to the world, the same truth applies. The apostle says, "God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world" that is, that for the Christian the world has come to an end in the cross, as Christ Himself said as to it, "Now is the judgment of this world". Our title to die to sin and to the world lies in the cross of Christ, and were it not for that we should still be alive in the responsibility of the old man. That is the first thing we have to learn, for we have to apprehend the truth of God in divine order. First we have to learn the great work that Christ has done, the foundation of righteousness, and the grace in which God presents Himself to us; and until that lesson is learnt the soul cannot learn any other. Peace, and favour, the hope of glory, and reconciliation, all express the grace in which God presents Himself to us, for "Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". If you are not established in the grace of the gospel,
{316}
it is futile to attempt any other lesson; but the instant the soul is established in the sense of what God is toward it in grace, then the question is raised, what am I going to be for God? And it is a very simple answer -- I am to live to God. And how are you going to live to God? Not on the old footing, that is perfectly certain, because there is no such thing as man living to God on the footing of a man upon earth now that Christ is gone. Christ has been rejected; His life is taken from the earth, and therefore it is totally impossible to live to God on the footing of a man upon earth. On what footing, then, are you going to live to God? I want to bring before you, in the answer to this, what really gives a person power to reckon himself dead indeed unto sin. It is in the apprehension of Christ as the second Man that the soul is drawn away from all that is connected with sin, and from all that in which sin is operative. That I believe to be the leverage by which a soul is enabled to die to sin, that is, to reckon itself dead unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus. I would that I might be enabled in a few words to bring before you what God has brought to pass for Himself in the Lord Jesus Christ, as the second Man. God has secured this -- that man should be to His infinite and eternal satisfaction. I am looking at the Lord Jesus Christ now in a different aspect from what He is as making known to me the grace of God: He has done that, and I know nothing about the grace of God except what reaches me through the Lord Jesus Christ; but now I apprehend Him as the second Man, who has entered in to the eternal satisfaction of God. He is thus to us the tree of life; and it is in our apprehension of Him thus that we are enabled to reckon ourselves "dead indeed unto sin", for we have in view the thought of being alive unto God in Christ Jesus. It is a wonderful privilege to join Him, to be
{317}
of His company; but you first have to learn what He is as Man before you can have the thought of joining Him, and by that I mean that you account yourself alive to God in Christ Jesus. He is the second Man, who has been raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. There has been a Man here upon earth who has held everything for God; One who, in the presence of all the power of evil and everything adverse, has held, as I may say, the fortress completely alone, not another with Him, for the glory of God; One in whom the question of good and evil has been completely solved, who was divinely perfect in the knowledge of good and evil, and in whom was the perfect refusal of evil and the unvarying and consistent choosing of good. It is a great thing to apprehend that, in the midst of the terrible confusion of this world, the great question of good and evil has been completely solved in the Lord Jesus Christ. We have in Isaiah the expression, referring I suppose to Christ, "Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil and choose the good". That was perfectly illustrated in Christ down here; but that is not all the truth, for He went down into death, to bear the judgment that rested upon man, for the glory of God, and He comes forth from the dead by the glory of the Father (though the glory of the Father was indeed there before He was raised -- God had been completely glorified). And all this has come to pass in a Man: the question of good and evil is solved, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is done with in that sense, for what came in by it has been answered: God has been glorified in the putting away of sin, and Christ as Man raised again from the dead by the glory of the Father, so that "in that he died, he died unto sin once; in that he liveth, he liveth unto God" -- all to the perfect satisfaction of the heart of God. And on that
{318}
ground we can live to God, we can reckon ourselves dead to sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus. The question has to be raised in people's souls whether they prefer Christ to Adam, the second Man to the first. And yet there are very few Christians who could give you any very clear idea of the second Man. If I prefer the second Man to the first, I am delighted to think that I can be in His life in the presence of God, entitled to account myself alive unto God in Him. Then comes in the other point, that if I am to be in His life, I must part company with the first man, and in this everybody has to begin with himself. It is not quite so easy as it may seem. The first man comes very close home to us, and in that sense sin comes very close home to us, because the whole spirit and principle of the first man is wrong, and you cannot touch the first man without touching sin, The moment I become an object to myself sin is proved to be there; I have to cease from that, because I have learnt that I am in the company of One who is to the perfect and eternal satisfaction of God. Christ has to be presented to us in this way; and the question has to be raised in the soul of every Christian, whether he prefers the second Man to the first. We belong to the second Man, and we have to appreciate the second Man; and as we appreciate the second Man, we are emboldened and enabled to part company practically with the first, and that is how we die to sin. The believer practises righteousness, and proves that he is "righteous even as He [Christ] is righteous". But you will never practise righteousness save as you appreciate the second Man. The Son of God was manifested to undo the works of the devil, that is what is brought out here; He was manifested to take away our sins, and in Him is no sin; "whosoever abideth in him sinneth not". "In this the children of God are manifest, and the
{319}
children of the devil"; the children of God do not practise sin, but they practise righteousness, they belong to Christ's company, and are righteous even as He is righteous.
Then there is the other point, namely, death to the world. And I will tell you what I think emboldens a person to enter upon that ground -- it is, that it begins to dawn on the soul that there is a circle here upon earth, in which is expressed the character and ways of Christ, a circle outside of all the distinctions of flesh, a circle in which is so expressed the truth of Christ, that "we know that we have passed from death unto life because we love the brethren". It is not a circle of amiable, cultivated, or refined people, but one where are expressed, "bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another; if any man have a complaint against any"; and the peace of Christ rules in the heart, and the word of Christ dwells there in all wisdom. It is the new man, where "Christ is all and in all". I dare say some might ask me, 'Where is that found?' I will tell you where it is found -- in Scripture. It is a great point to see that a thing is found in Scripture. People want to see it in fact; I say it is lamentable if you cannot see it in fact, but if I see a thing in Scripture that is enough, I will not have anything else, because that and that only is the right thing. I see such an idea in Scripture as a blessed circle where there is neither Jew nor Greek, circumcision nor uncircumcision, bond nor free, but where Christ is all and in all; and where instead of the communion of knowledge, or of education, or art, or science, or anything of that kind, what is expressed is the character and qualities of Christ, such as He was here. It is a heavenly circle, too; and that is what is really reached by a person that is dead and risen with Christ. I believe that
{320}
the apprehension that such a circle is revealed in Scripture, and the anxiety to reach it, encourages and strengthens a person to accept the place of death to the world, for if I am going to have part in that circle, all that binds me to the world must go. Society and the organisation the world presents to me, is no longer an attraction, because of what I have discovered in Scripture. I have learnt by experience that if you are attracted simply by the character of any particular company here upon earth, you will find that company will fail you, you will discover all kinds of flaws on closer acquaintance. But if you are attracted by what Scripture presents, if you get the scriptural ideal, the effect will be that you will be anxious to constitute one of such a company, and that the power of Scripture will be maintained in you. It is sometimes urged on us that we are set to reform the world; but if I have got to reform the world, the first I have got to look after is myself. As the apostle says to Timothy, "Take heed to thyself". But whether it be a question of death to sin or to the world, you cannot bring yourself to it by effort or self abnegation; you will come to it when you really feel the necessity of it. If I have got any apprehension at all of what Christ is, as Man living to God, then the necessity comes to me, if I am going to join Him, I must die to the man that is here. And then in regard to the world, if I get, by the grace of God, any idea of that circle of blessing to which Scripture refers -- "Passed out of death into life because we love the brethren", then I must part company with the organisation and rudiments of this world, because it is a sphere of things to which all that is of the world is perfectly foreign, and which nothing but the power of God can support. And it is in that way, by the light of these things breaking across the soul, that one is strengthened and encouraged; it finds a certain
{321}
leverage in the apprehension of these things which enables it to accept the place of death to sin and to the world. Take the Christian circle as it is brought out in @Colossians 3, do you think any man of the world would be at home in that circle? He would not care to be in it; I do not think it would be the least attractive to him. But if you have got any thought of what is agreeable in the sight of God, that is a circle which is exceedingly beautiful and blessed to His eye, it is "the elect of God, holy and beloved", it is the reproduction of Christ under the eye of God, an out-of-the-world, heavenly, condition of things down here upon earth.
It is just that which I commend to you. I fear lest souls may not quite have understood all that has been presented, but I beg of you not to reject a thing because you do not understand it at the moment. Have a little patience; try to understand it; try to see if there is not something in it. I think you will find that there is a great deal in it.
{322}
DELIVERANCE FROM LAW
@Galatians 2: 15 - 21
What I desire to dwell upon at this time, by the Lord's help, is the truth of deliverance from the law. Last time our subject was deliverance from sin and from the world. Deliverance from law is equally important; and I take up this passage as showing the way by which a Christian reaches this deliverance. For it is a point to be reached, as the apostle says, "I through the law have died to the law, that I might live unto God; I am crucified with Christ". It will entail going over a certain amount of ground; and in the course of it I shall hope to show you what was the intent of the law on the part of God. It is true that the law was the ministration of death and condemnation; but I hope you will see presently that such was not the divine end in the giving of the law. The law in the letter had that effect; but that was not the spirit of the law, and the point for the Christian is to see the spirit of the law: that is where we practically get deliverance from the letter. We find out that we are joined to the One who is the spirit of the law, that we should no longer serve in the oldness of the letter, but in newness of Spirit. That is the way in which deliverance is brought about, as we shall, I trust, see.
I was noticing last week that there is an essential difference between sin and the world, and the law; for you could not speak of sin and the world in the sense in which law is spoken of as a husband in @Romans 7. The idea of a husband involves a legal bond; and without the dissolution of the bond that exists you could not form a new bond. That is what is true in regard to the law; and where the law differs from sin and the world is in that the bond has been dissolved in order that a new bond might be formed. You are "become dead to the law by the
{323}
body of Christ, that you should be married to another", that is, that a new bond might be formed on the part of the Christian. The meaning of it is, that so long as men were under the letter of the law they could not be joined to the One who is the spirit of the law; and therefore they must be freed from the first bond, the letter of the law, in order that they might be joined to the One who is the spirit of the law, and that is the way by which we "bring forth fruit unto God". That is what God has brought about. If the bond had not been dissolved you could not be free of the bond, and another bond could not be formed; for if you formed a second bond while the first existed, you would put yourself in the position of an adulteress -- that is the argument of @Romans 7. This makes an essential difference between sin and the world, and law; the former are no bond, but they are elements in which man lives naturally, they belong to Egypt -- Egypt is the type of the world of sin, but the law is another matter. In fact, the children of Israel while they were in Egypt, though under bondage to the power of the world, had no law; it was in the wilderness they came to law.
The first remark I make is this, that the way in which a Christian is righteous in the sight of God is the way by which he must live. You cannot be righteous on one principle and live on another, that will not do for God. If such a thing were possible as that a man could be righteous before God on the principle of law, then he must live on the principle of law. If, on the other hand, it is totally impossible for a person to be righteous before God by law, which is the principle of works, then I say he cannot live on the principle of works. But if it be true that the Christian is justified in Christ, then Christ becomes the principle of life to the Christian. The two things are bound to go together. The Galatians, like a great many Christians in the present day,
{324}
sought to be justified in Christ but to live by law, it is impossible, the principle of your righteousness must be the principle on which you live. When God created man, the question of righteousness did not arise, because man was simply what God had made him, innocent. He had not the knowledge of good and evil, so that there was no question of righteousness. But the introduction of sin raised at once the question of righteousness -- it must be so, because righteousness is the necessary opposite of sin. Then comes the question, how is man going to be righteous? what is to be the principle of his righteousness? The first thing tried was the principle of works; God gave man law, but did not tell man what His thought and end in the law was, what was the spirit of the law; but He gave the law to man, and the principle of works was the principle on which under law righteousness depended. What follows is this, that if man could have been righteous on the principle of works, or of law, he would have lived on the principle of works. But the law came at a day too late for this, because man was already under the sentence of death, and law could not relieve him of that sentence. I think the contrast of law and grace is illustrated in the parable of the Good Samaritan. The man was half dead, the priest and the Levite, the representatives of the law, could not relieve him of the pressure, and therefore they passed by on the other side. The Good Samaritan came where the man was, and relieved him of the pressure under which he lay. And so Christ has come in to relieve man of the pressure of death which was upon him, by glorifying God in death, and as raised from the dead is now righteousness for the Christian. To put it in the words of the apostle in the epistle to the Romans, "Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth". By end I understand to be meant the
{325}
purpose, the object, of the law; and thus having Christ for righteousness before God we must of necessity live by Christ.
I want to say a little more in regard to justification, because I feel that our thoughts of justification are often too limited. Many a Christian who is clear enough as to forgiveness of offences does not see justification in its fulness as the Christian's relief from the judgment of God that lies now upon man. Many a Christian would say, I am justified from my sins, I am saved in that sense, and I shall never come into judgment. But then justification goes farther than that, because Christ is risen, and the thought of grace is to relieve man from the pressure of death that is on him; and justification is not complete unless a man is relieved from that pressure. I mean this, that for the Christian it is not only a question of faith in the blood, but faith in the One that is risen, as it says, Christ "was delivered for our offences and raised again for our justification". And being the statement of Scripture, it is clear that nobody comes to justification in its completeness until he reaches by faith Christ risen. And it is an immense point to apprehend Christ risen, to see the truth that He "was raised again for our justification", that the Christian might be as free before God from the judgment of death as Christ is. The evidence that the Christian is justified not only from offences, but from the sentence of death which was upon him as the result of sin, is that his body becomes the temple of the Holy Ghost, and he passes out of death into life. He is not yet raised, but he is justified in Christ; if he were raised he would be justified in that sense in himself; but he is not yet justified in his own person, but in Christ, and the proof and result of justification is, that the Holy Ghost is given, "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us".
{326}
You will bear with my dwelling upon this, because of the importance to every Christian to get a thorough ground-work in his soul in the knowledge of justification, and then to apprehend what is unfolded to us in @Romans 5, namely, what the attitude of God is toward the believer consequent upon being justified. A very common illustration that has been used of the gospel, namely, that of a substitute, of one who suffers a penalty in the place of another in order that the latter may go free, does not seem to me to be right in principle or application, for in the gospel the first to go free is the substitute. Christ, who suffered for us, was the first to be raised from the dead, He "was raised again for our justification". No living soul of man was justified until Christ was raised from the dead. Then the believer is justified. And as I said before, he is not only justified from his offences, but he is justified from sentence of death that lay upon him, so that he can be raised up in the power of the Holy Ghost. I do not say his body is yet raised up, but the person is raised up, as we see in the case of the man at the pool of Bethesda, in @John 5.
Now I pass on to the question of deliverance from law. We saw last week that deliverance from sin and from the world is effectuated only as a glimpse is gained of another Man, the second Man, and of the Christian circle. A person is not content to take the place of death to sin except as the soul has the apprehension of another Man, of a Man that having been raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, now lives to God, as having died to sin. One is thus strengthened and encouraged to part company with sin, because he goes in faith to join the Man that is to the perfect satisfaction of God. His thought now is, I am entitled by grace to join that Man; and to join Him I must of necessity part company with the man that is here, and with the principle that
{327}
dominates him, which is sin. For sin is looked at in @Romans 6 as the dominating principle of the man that is here. And again, as to deliverance from the world, it is as I am attracted by the character of the Christian circle, the circle where Christ is all and in all, that I am led to accept the place of death to the world; I feel the incongruity of the two spheres. The Christian circle is where the affections and sensibilities of Christ are seen in exercise. The world I understand to be the sphere and scene in which the flesh lives.
This question of law is a very great hindrance to many of us, and I think it takes us a long time to get free of law. I will tell you how it works; people go to the Scriptures to find exhortations and rules; they want chapter and verse, as they say commonly, for their doctrine, and they want precepts for their conduct. That is all legality, it is the letter, and I think people are uncommonly fond of the letter; they go to Scripture in that sense to a large extent.
Now the apostle says in the passage I read, "If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor", which means that if a person after seeking to be justified in Christ, and seeing that justification is alone in Christ, then goes back to law as a rule of life, that person builds again the things which once he destroyed, and he "makes himself a transgressor" his transgression is in having left the law, for if he goes back to it he condemns himself for having left it. The passage involves the truth of which I spoke a few moments ago, that the Christian has to live on the principle on which he is righteous; you cannot divorce the two things, righteousness and life; if Christ is the righteousness of the Christian before God, then Christ is the life of the Christian. Law cannot be, Christ must be, the life of the Christian.
Now in looking at law for a moment as law, that
{328}
is, law in the letter, I must repeat that the letter did not express the end of God in the law; the mind of God in the law lay underneath, and those to whom the letter of the law was given never knew the mind of God in it; Moses "put a veil upon his face", we are told, and they were not allowed to see "the end of that which is annulled". The end does not mean, I judge, its termination, but the object and purport of God in it. The consequence was, that Israel took up all the law in detail, sacrifices and everything else; and as Peter expressed it, it was a burden which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear. The people that were under law never kept the law, it was too burdensome by far for man to keep.
Now, I think, the first thing in regard to being free from law is, that one must learn in some way or other what is the effect of law, "the letter kills". A person has to be killed by law, has to die in that sense; the apostle does not say simply that he is dead to the law, but he says, "I *through law* have died to law, to live to God". I suppose it works in this way, that law brings home to a man the truth of his own utter powerlessness. That is the lesson to be learnt; I do not care how it is learnt, in all probability by law, but it has to be learnt. If I look abroad, there are very few men in the world who think themselves powerless. I have seen men of great determination and strong will, and have thought them strong. I do not think that now. I quite admit that there are people of a certain force of character, people who seem to carry things before them; but their strength of will and determination is not morally in opposition to the course and current of things here. And then again, I have a strong suspicion that men of great determination and will, who are running in the current of the world, are helped by a power that is greater than themselves.
{329}
I am not sure to what extent men come under spiritual influence; but I have a strong impression that there is such a thing in the world as spiritual influence, not only for good but for evil, and that a man of will and determination may be carried on by spiritual influence stronger than himself. And as a matter of fact, I feel doubtful if there is such a thing really as free will with man, because where a man is dominated by the principle of sin, he is not free as to will. People talk about free will, but it is simply rubbish, because if a man is a slave to sin, which he is by nature, there is no question of free will, he is controlled by a principle which is beyond himself. For sin is not limited to man. The apostle John says, "the devil sins from the outset". Sin came into the world by man, but it did not originate with man. And if it is true that a man is by nature under the power of sin, then it is not a question of his will, but of sin that he is controlled by, a principle which he does not circumscribe. Again I say that there are spiritual influences at work, and so long as men are running in the current of sin and of the world, they are often carried by those influences a long way beyond what they intended to go. I think we should find plenty of instances of that. I believe it accounts for many dreadful things which take place in the world; dreadful ends very often had small beginnings. But people going in a certain current, have found that they were helped while they were going down the stream. Now, I believe the test of the power of will is when you attempt to go against the stream. Let a man be for God here, and then find what amount of power he has got. Let his mind recognise the rights of God, like a man waking up to the spirituality of the law, that he is to love God with all his heart and his neighbour as himself, let him begin to recognise the goodness of the law and the right and authority of God, and then
{330}
see how much power he has got. Every one of us knows very well, as the apostle says in @Romans 7, that "when the law came, sin revived and I died"; that is, when I saw and allowed that God had a will and right over me, I found I was totally powerless. And why? Because I wanted to go against the stream, against the current of sin, and then I found out that I had not an atom of power. That is the way in which the law worked, and in which it killed man, for the law killed a man in his own experience. The apostle says, "I was alive without the law once, but when the commandment came, sin revived and I died". When he was alive was the time when he thought he had power to effectuate his will. And man thinks he has still. I believe it is a mistake, for when a man is thinking he effectuates his own will, he is under the power of sin; it is sin he is effectuating, not his own will. When a man sees what is right, as we find in @Romans 7, "When I would do good", that is, when a man would recognise the rights of God, and would love God with all his heart, and his neighbour has himself, then he finds out he is totally powerless; that is, he is killed, he has no power at all in that which he knows to be right. And therefore it is a hopeless kind of thing for a man to be under law, because he cannot comply with the requirements of the law; it is impossible he could please God or be righteous before God on that ground.
But by the gospel he is brought to another great truth; he finds out that Christ is his righteousness. "Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth": he is completely justified by Christ: "By this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses". What the law could not do, Christ has done for him; that is,
{331}
the law could not relieve him of the sentence of death, it only pressed it home upon him; but he finds that in Christ he is completely relieved of the sentence of death that lay upon him: Christ is the ministration of life, just as the law was the ministration of death.
But there is another point, and that is, he learns that Christ is the spirit of the law, and he is taught it by the Spirit of God. Being justified, he receives the Spirit of God, for a man receives the Spirit before he is set free from law; and then he finds out that there is another aspect in which the law can be regarded, that instead of looking at the requirements and the letter of the law, he can see that Christ is the spirit of the law, that God had quite a different end in the law from what appeared to man, and that the thought and intent of God in the law was not the detail, not the letter, but Christ. That is a wonderful moment, for then I look at Scripture in a totally different way. I am no longer looking at it for precepts and directions in detail as to conduct, but what I read in the law is Christ; I look at it objectively as furnishing instruction, as an expression of the mind of God as to what was to be effectuated in Christ. I begin to discern the spirit instead of the letter, and when a person is brought to that point it opens out entirely a new, prospect to him; Scripture becomes a totally different book; instead of its being a book of dogmas and commandments which I do not find myself able to fulfil, it is a blessed book of instruction, a book of deepest interest, as showing to me what was ever in the purpose and thought of God. It is then that we begin to see the glory of the Lord with unveiled face; we find the truth of Christ not only in the New Testament but in every page of the Old, not only in the prophets but in the law. I dare say you remember what the Lord did, as recorded in the last chapter of Luke's
{332}
gospel, after His resurrection -- He opened the understanding of His disciples, and "beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them, in all the scriptures, the things concerning himself"; that is, He lighted up the book to them, they got an illumination which they never had before, they began to see all in a totally different light. I think many of us have come to that point. I know it in my own experience. I had no conception when I was first converted of what a wonderful book Scripture was, for I was, in a sense, converted under law, and was accustomed to pray that God would incline our hearts to keep the law, as I suppose many of us have done in the past. It was a wonderful new light to me when I came to find out that the letter was not the great thing before God, but that Christ was "the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth".
Now, I do not think anybody will get practical deliverance from law until he comes to that point. The first thing is to see how completely the believer is justified in Christ, so that he receives the gift of the Holy Ghost, to dwell in his body which is freed from the judgment of God. Then the truth is learnt, that the believer is not under law, that Scripture is to him not a question of law and commandments and precepts, but of instruction in the mind of God, from beginning to end realised in Christ. I need hardly go into detail about it, it is enough to say that the sacrifices, the feasts, and institutions in the law were typical of Christ, all fulfilled and realised in Him. He is the yea and Amen of all. I am apart from the letter of law, for Christ who is the end of it, is my righteousness; I am justified in Him, and the law is now instruction to me concerning the One in whom I am justified; that is what the law becomes to the Christian. And then, too, Christ becomes the delight of the believer's
{333}
soul. I was trying to expound last time, that there is a scene of infinite and divine rest and satisfaction into which a Man has entered to the glory of God, and that the One who has entered there is the end and purpose of God, the mind of God in the law.
There is another lesson to be learnt in connection with it. I have sought to show you how you are freed from the letter by the apprehension of the spirit, because the moment you apprehend the spirit you are free of the letter, and you are never free from the letter until you apprehend the spirit. But when I speak about the spirit, I do not mean the Holy Ghost, I mean the spirit of the law, that is, Christ. In @2 Corinthians 3, we are told that the Lord is that spirit. The apostle speaks of his ministry as "not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life", and then later down in the chapter he adds, "The Lord is that spirit", that is, the spirit of the Scriptures. Now when I apprehend Christ to be the spirit of the Scriptures, another truth comes in, that is, that I am joined to Him by the Holy Ghost. And what I understand that to mean is, that the one who is joined to Him is joined to Him in order that he may take character from Him, When a man was under law he took his character from law, he got legality from the letter. Let a man get an apprehension of Christ as the spirit of Scripture, and know that he is joined to Him, and he will soon take his character from Him. Just remember the order of these things. The first point is, the believer is justified in Christ -- He was raised again for our justification. Then the next is, that he apprehends Him as the spirit of Scripture. Then, further, that he is joined to Him by the Holy Ghost -- "He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit"; and he now gets his character from Him. I am sure that is the way in which Christ is formed in the Christian. You are bound to
{334}
get your character from what engrosses you. If law engrosses a man he will get punctilious and particular in trifles. But let him apprehend Christ as the spirit of Scripture, and then see what enlargement he will get. To me Christ as man is a perfectly blessed study. When I think of what He has been for the glory of God, resolving every question of good and evil, ever refusing the evil and choosing the good, glorifying God in the place of man's ruin, and then raised again from the dead by the Father's glory, when I ponder over Christ in that way, it is a delight to me to think that there is such an one entered in for the eternal satisfaction of God -- God has gained His end. That is a most blessed thought to every Christian. And another point is this, that the infinite love of God rests in Christ as man. It is not simply revealed in Christ, but it rests there, and we are called into His company, we are joined to Him to take our character from Him when we have learnt that we are joined to Him. That is individual, I am not talking about the church. If you are thrown intimately into contact with people in the world superior to yourself, you will very likely in a large measure derive a certain character from them. It is certain that a wife to a large extent is what her husband makes her. The Spirit of God presents to us in Scripture one object, the second Man, the One who has been raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, who has entered in to the perfect and eternal satisfaction of God; and we are joined to Him by the Spirit in order that we may take character from Him. The law killed us, the spirit quickens, that is the difference between the two. "I", says the apostle, "through the law have died to law, that I might live to God. I am crucified with Christ". That is the way in which the bond that bound him to law had been dissolved. Christ had borne the judgment of death that rested
{335}
upon him, and now he is crucified with Christ; and then he says, "nevertheless, I live" -- the same person, "and yet not I", not the same morally, "but Christ liveth in me"; that is what he has come to because Christ is in him. It is by the Spirit of life that Christ is in the Christian.
Paul had apprehended what I have said, that he was justified in Christ; he had delight in Christ, and then he found that he was joined to Christ. Now he has come to this point, "Yet not I, but Christ liveth in me". And then he goes on to say, "in that I live in the flesh", -- because he recognised that he had to fill up the remains of responsible life down here -- "In that I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me"; that is, that the Son of God was the proper object of his faith, the light of his soul, and consequently law did not regulate his conduct, but the Son of God, who loved him and gave Himself for him. If a person has to do with the law in the letter he will assuredly be legal. On the other hand, if he lives by the faith of the Son of God, who loved him and gave Himself for him, assuredly he will take a character from the love. But I doubt if this will be so until he has apprehended that Christ is the spirit of the law, that is, the spirit of the Scriptures. What can be more wonderful than that we have in the Scriptures a book the writing of which extended over a period of 1,500 or 2,000 years, maintaining all through one great personality in Jehovah, and pervaded by one great end and purpose, and that is Christ. All this testifies to one Author, and the one Author of Scripture is the Holy Ghost. "Holy men of old spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost". As I said before, it is as souls get an apprehension of this that they are delivered from the letter; they do not go to Scripture to look for precepts and commandments, because
{336}
they are not under law, they go to all the Scriptures, to the law and to the prophets, to the Old as well as to the New Testament, to get their souls fed and ministered to of Christ; they want to see and learn what God has ever had before Him from the beginning. The Man of God's purpose was ever there, in God's thought even before the responsible man. God put forward the responsible man first; but He had as His resource the Man of His purpose, and the Man of His purpose is the spirit of Scripture, the second Man, not the first man. And that is why infidels blunder so over Scripture, because they have got nothing before them but the first man, the man down here, and they have not an idea of what is the spirit of Scripture. It is a wonderful thing to have a book of which God is really the Author, which presents to us throughout the whole of it one living God, and one living object, the Son of God, in whom God was to be glorified, who was the true ark of the covenant and the mercy seat, the One that was to enter into the holiest to the eternal satisfaction of God as Man. All that has now come to pass, and I say that that Man is the proper delight and object of the Christian.
I think, beloved friends, that is the way in which practically we are taught. Most of us, I think, could testify that we learn things, not with regularity but often in a very irregular way. But I think there is a regularity in the teaching of the Spirit of God, and I have tried to show this to you.
May God give to us to see the greatness of the Scriptures, the wonderful scope and character of that blessed word of God, which does not supply precepts and commandments for the first man, but the subject of which, from beginning to end, is the second Man. That is the Man to whom the Christian is joined, he is joined to the Lord, and "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit".
{337}
DELIVERANCE FROM THE FLESH
@Romans 8: 1 - 17
We have had before us, on two former occasions, the subject of deliverance; and I can understand the question being asked, What is the great importance to the Christian of deliverance? I am not now speaking of conversion, and I do not want any one here to confound deliverance with conversion. The fact is, we are converted before we know much about deliverance. Deliverance is entered into by a Christian after he is converted, not before. I quite admit that there is a great change brought about in conversion as the effect of the light of God having entered the soul. It is totally impossible that the light of God should shine into a man's soul without producing a great effect, and that effect is conversion. But that is not the same thing as deliverance. It is when there has been the turning to God in conversion, that a person begins to prove the great reality of bondage and need of deliverance, and not, I think, until then. You may take it for granted that deliverance is not experienced until the need of it is realised. It is when the light of the gospel has really entered in and the Spirit of God has been received, that the need of deliverance is felt, and the way of it is found. But what is the end of deliverance? What is the gain of it? I will tell you; it is essential in order that you may enter into the thought and purpose of God concerning you. It is entirely out of the question that any one could enter into this apart from deliverance. If I were asked what my impression is as to the need which exists among Christians in the present day, I should say it is the need of deliverance.
{338}
The subject of deliverance has been before us on previous occasions, as I may say, partially. First I spoke of deliverance from sin and the world, the two being very intimately connected. Last time we had another aspect of deliverance, and that was, from the law. Our subject now is one which goes to the bottom of the matter, and that is deliverance from the flesh. That is what I want to bring forward at this time, if the Lord enable me. Deliverance from the flesh is the point that is reached in the passage I read in @Romans 8; and it is in order that the Christian may enter into life, for in @Romans 8 you come to this, that you are passed out of death into life. As far as I understand the structure of the epistle, I do not think the Christian reaches life as regards himself until he comes to chapter 8. In chapter 6 I see life in Christ; but I do not see life spoken of as in the Christian until chapter 8. The question of life is and must be mixed up with the question of deliverance; and until deliverance is realised, I do not think any Christian knows or can know very much about life; for he has to pass "out of death into life". I refer to verse 13 of chapter 8, where the apostle says, "If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live". That is the point where you come to life as to the believer, and then immediately consequent upon that, the Spirit of sonship is brought in. Now you get to the idea of correspondence to Christ. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God". It is the first time you get any such thought in the epistle as that you are "sons of God". It adds, "ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father". You are come now to the answer in the believer to chapter 5. In chapter 5, "the love of God is shed
{339}
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us"; and now in chapter 8 we cry, "Abba, Father"; and the idea of crying, "Abba, Father" is, that you respond to the love that has been made known to you. Depend upon it there is a good deal passes between those two points, between the thought of God's love shed abroad in the heart and the time that the Christian really understands what it is to cry, "Abba, Father". Then it is that it says, "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs of Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together". And that is the furthest point to which doctrinally the epistle brings the Christian -- the object of the epistle is gained, that is, the Christian is brought into the truth of life.
Allow me to say one word about life before I pass on. You cannot rightly talk about life apart from position; you must have a divinely ordered position in which to live. You get the position unfolded here, namely, that of sons or children of God, consequently you can now talk about life. It is curious that Paul constantly takes the opposite order to John. For instance, in @John 20, the position is first given, and then the life is brought in: the Lord says, Go tell my brethren, "I ascend to my Father, and to your Father", and afterwards He breathes on them and says, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost". Here in @Romans 8 it is the opposite order, you are in the Spirit and the Spirit is life, and by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the body, and then you come to the truth of sonship. Life for the Christian really means correspondence to Christ, and until you have got to the point of correspondence to Christ you have not got the true idea of life.
{340}
Now I come back to my present subject, the very important question of deliverance from the flesh. It will lead me to bring before you, first what is meant by the expression "flesh" in Scripture, and then what is the way of deliverance. This is found in principle in a single expression, "You are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you". Now, I think, that a believer receives the Spirit some considerable time, in a general way, before he learns that he is in the Spirit; for it is evident from chapter 5 that when we believe in God who raised up Christ from the dead, then the Spirit is given and the love of God is shed abroad by the Spirit in our hearts. But the believer may not have come to the sense that he is "in the Spirit"; though it be true of him as having received the Spirit. Let me go back a little over the epistle, because the point is so important. You get conversion fully at the close of chapter 4, when there is the apprehension that Christ "was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification"; that is, the believer is not only cleared as to the question of offences, but as to the question of death, and it is when he comes to that point that he learns the attitude in which God is toward believers, through our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, by the apprehension of what prevails in the Lord Jesus Christ, the last Adam, the believer learns what the attitude of God is toward him. And not only that, but the Holy Ghost is given to him; that is, he stands in the presence of the grace of God, and in the light as God is in the light; God is fully revealed to him, and he knows the grace of God, which is established through the Lord Jesus Christ, the last Adam.
Now remember, that so far it is the grace of God toward the believer; and you are entitled to that from the very beginning, and the learning of what
{341}
you are for God will not improve that. I quite admit it may enable you to enjoy it more; but no amount of apprehension of what you are for God will ever improve what God is towards you, because that is established and assured eternally in the Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore it cannot alter. It is not a question of what the grace of God is toward each individual believer, but of what is established in the last Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ; and that describes what the grace of God is toward the believer and toward every believer. Therefore you never can improve upon the grace of God. And then, as I said before, the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost given to us; but in that the Holy Ghost is not acting on our side but on God's side, shedding abroad God's love; He is not making us love God, but He is teaching the love of God towards us; it is God's love, not ours. I am loth to leave the point, because I feel we cannot really enter very much into the great question of what we are before God if we are not well established in the truth of what God is towards us, for that is where the grace of God is known. And the measure and description of what God is towards us is what is established in the last Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ; that as we got sin and death by the first Adam, so we get the grace of God, divine favour and everything else by the last Adam. "As through one offence towards all men to condemnation, so through one righteousness towards all men unto justification of life"; and it goes on to say, that "as sin has reigned by death, so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord". It is all established in the Lord Jesus Christ, the last Adam, the Head of all; and the Head describes the attitude in which God is toward all.
Then comes the great question of what we are
{342}
for God. And that brings in a most important truth, the truth of another Man. If I might use the expression, speaking reverently, God has changed the man. The practical difficulty for us is to change the man; and we could not do this if we did not first understand how God has changed the man. For four thousand years God was dealing with one man; but now God's ways are all displayed in another Man, and that is the great truth that chapter 6 brings in.
A person newly converted of necessity begins to be troubled by finding that he still has that in him which tends to connect him with the whole course and order of things down here, that is, sin. I do not think there ever was a converted person who was not troubled more or less by that. He did not trouble about it before, because, though it is very possible he knew something about sins, he did not know much about sin. Many a person when first converted thinks that the whole course is cleared, that it will be all plain sailing. But it is not quite such plain sailing, for the reason I have spoken of, that he finds he has got this terrible principle in him, which always tends to connect his soul with the course of things down here. Also he has to find out another painful truth, and that is, that he is weak; he might have been strong in sin, but when it comes to be a question of what pleases God, and of the expression of God's will, which the law is, then one finds he is powerless for good. Those two lessons I believe every converted person has to learn.
Now the first thing the Spirit of God brings to your attention is this, that God is not expecting improvement or strength in you, but He presents before your soul the great truth of another Man, who having been proved and tested, has entered in to His entire satisfaction. He is on that ground, He is not on the ground of an innocent man, but
{343}
"In that he died, he died unto sin once; in that he liveth, he liveth unto God". Then the Spirit of God says further, "You likewise reckon yourselves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus"; you reckon yourselves in correspondence to that Man. If I might use the expression which I did a fortnight since, that is the leverage in the soul; for so long as I have any idea that God is looking for improvement or victory in me, I shall do no good at all; nor until I apprehend the great truth that there is another Man, who has been raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. That is the second Man, and that is what made me use the expression a short time since that God has changed the man. It is no longer testing or proving or anything of the kind; that went on for four thousand years; now there is another Man before God, and all starts from Him, and the Christian is going to be in His likeness, "If we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection". It is simply a question of being conformed to Him.
And in connection with this, another truth which I have also touched upon on a previous occasion comes out in chapter 7 -- the believer is "married" to Him who is raised from the dead. The first bond, that is, law, has been dissolved by the death of Christ; and it is now another husband to whom the Christian is united, and is consequently subject, and at the same time deriving character from Him. So it is not improvement at all, but another Man.
I very much wish you to bear in mind, if the Lord enable you, what I have tried to bring before you, this great truth of another Man, because it is there you get the thought of life brought in; not subjectively in you, but life in another, life in Christ Jesus. What does it mean? I will tell you -- there is one Man living actually, "In that he died, he
{344}
died unto sin once; in that he liveth, he liveth unto God"; and living unto God is now all on the principle of resurrection. Even in regard to the saints in the millennium that will live on earth, I believe they will live on the ground of resurrection; I do not say *in* resurrection, but on the ground of resurrection; because it is the presence of Christ risen which will relieve them of death. Now the Christian properly lives on the ground of resurrection. The only possible ground on which a man could live for God is that of resurrection, for death is on man, and so it says, "Since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection from the dead" -- that is the ground of life, "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive". Thus you have come to this point, the apprehension of life; I do not say life in the Christian, we have not come to that yet, but life in one Man, as it says in verse 2 of this chapter, "The law of the Spirit of life", not "in me", but "in Christ Jesus", the One who is spoken of in chapter 6, as having died unto sin once, but living unto God. If you do not apprehend life in that way, objectively, in Christ, you do not get the idea of life at all, because the great thing that Scripture brings before you is life in another Man, and on a totally different footing; He is raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, that is the ground of life now. Christ is as Man in the Father's presence, to the Father's delight; He is everything that the heart of the Father could desire; He lives to the entire satisfaction of God. That is where life is now, in Christ Jesus, and you have to learn it as there. Many a person who has wanted to understand something about life has begun by looking at himself, and has made a fatal mistake, because he has not begun from Christ. You must learn from Christ, you must first see what has come to pass in Christ before you
{345}
can learn what is true in yourself, for the grace of God puts you in correspondence to Christ; and if you do not learn what is true in Christ you cannot learn what is true in yourself.
Now when I come to the point of life in the believer, it necessarily involves the question of flesh and the Spirit. I think anybody will understand that the flesh is a very different thought from sin. I will show you that it is so in an instant. Scripture speaks of sin as having "entered into the world", but you could not talk about the flesh having entered in. I have said before, that sin did not originate with man; it came in by man, but it existed before, "By one man sin entered into the world". As far as I have any insight into it, I think the flesh is man's natural condition, it is man's nature, the seat of what I might call his moral being; thought, feeling, will and purpose all lie in the flesh. Now you can see that that is a very different thing from sin; it has become "flesh of sin", but I do not talk about sin exactly as being man's nature. I think the nature of an unconverted man is flesh, that is often the idea of the expression in Scripture. You find a great deal in this chapter about the "mind of the flesh", that is, the thought and purpose of the flesh.
But now let me go back a moment. From the outset, from the time that a man through grace believes in Christ as raised again from the dead, that man receives the Holy Ghost, and the love of God is shed abroad in his heart; and he further learns another great lesson, that the first man is superseded, and that there is another Man raised from the dead in the presence of God, and that he is united to that other Man, married to Him, to use the figure of Scripture. Now what about the flesh? He has come to this point, that the flesh is radically bad, the character of the flesh is
{346}
discovered, and there is no hope of amendment in it; he has learnt in chapters 6 and 7 that there is a principle in him, sin, which always connects him with this scene; and he has learnt another thing too, that when it is a question of the will of God he is perfectly weak, there is no hope in the flesh at all. Mark how it is put here; it says in verse 5 of chapter 8, "They that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. For the mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of the Spirit is life and peace. Because the mind of the flesh is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God". Now that is the second great lesson in the chapter; the first is that there is life in Christ Jesus; the second that there is no good in the flesh, that the flesh is radically bad and God has condemned it, "God sending his own Son in the likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh". And you cannot mix up the flesh with the Spirit. Many people like religious stories. Religious literature all appeals to religious flesh. You may depend upon it people would never coin religious stories if they did not believe in acting on religious flesh.
The practical lesson taught us in the early part of this chapter is this, that you cannot mix up flesh and Spirit, they are totally antagonistic, and there is no help in the flesh, that it is radically bad, so bad that God had to condemn it; and we have to learn the lesson, that nothing whatever is to be hoped for from the flesh. But then comes the great point for the Christian, "You are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you". If I look to the flesh for anything, I am looking to what God has condemned, to what cannot yield anything at all for God, I am on a totally
{347}
wrong tack, I have forgotten that I am "not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in" me. That is, the Spirit of God has taken up His abode in the Christian, not simply to shed abroad the love of God in his heart, but for another purpose now, to be to him all that the flesh was as the source and spring of thought and purpose. I have sometimes said that Scripture does not recognise two natures in the Christian; the flesh is the nature in an undelivered man; when he receives the Spirit he is "not in the flesh, but in the Spirit", and the Spirit is not a nature but a person. And when he gets more light, it can be said of him that he has "put off the old man and put on the new"; and then the nature of the new man is the Christian's nature -- the new man is "created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth", that is the Christian's nature. If he should fail, and allow the flesh to come in, that does not prove to me that the flesh is his nature; it is like a foreign substance in him, it has no business to be seen, and has to be judged; but nature is what is characteristic. An unconverted man is characterised by the flesh, and there is nothing else to characterise him. With the Christian there is a new spring, and that is the Spirit. The Spirit of God has come to take the control, so that it can be said now not only that you have the Spirit, but that you are in it. Then it goes on to say, "If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin", but what then? "The Spirit is life", the flesh is entirely disowned, "the Spirit is life because of righteousness", that is, in view of righteousness; you can get no righteousness from the flesh, but righteousness has to be maintained, and so "the Spirit is life in view of righteousness".
Then we come to another point, the ultimate raising of the body; for if the Spirit of God dwells in you it is witness that you have nothing to expect
{348}
from the flesh, but you have everything to expect from the Spirit, righteousness, and the eventual raising up of your mortal body. Therefore you are not a debtor to the flesh, you will not get righteousness from the flesh -- "He that soweth to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption", that is what you will get from the flesh: "but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal life", if you want eternal life you must reap it of the Spirit -- that is how Scripture puts it. It is virtually what the Lord says in @John 4, "He that drinketh of this water", that is, the water that springs from beneath, "shall thirst again, but he that drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up unto eternal life". It is a great thing when we have really settled it in our souls that we have nothing to expect from the flesh, but everything from the Spirit that dwells in us.
Now we have come to the statement, "If you live after the flesh you shall die"; the apostle puts it in a very strong way; any person that lives after the flesh will die, all tends to that end, of the flesh he will reap corruption; "but if by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live". When I mortify the deeds of the body, then it is I am delivered from the flesh; the flesh is there, but I am no longer under the control of it; I have "put off the body of the flesh", when I come to this point that by the Spirit I "mortify the deeds of the body". The flesh can only work in the members, and when we mortify the deeds of the body, that is, the deeds to which the body is prone, then the apostle says, we shall live; you come on to other ground, it is, so to say, the condition on which you live. I venture to say this, that no Christian has any experience of life at all if he does not "mortify the deeds of the body".
{349}
I do not deny his Christianity, and that he may know something of what the grace of God is towards him; but he has no sense of life, of correspondence to Christ, save as mortifying the deeds of the body. The principle of life in Christianity is this, that you pass out of death into life, "The Spirit is life because of righteousness"; and the practical carrying out of that is, that by the Spirit you "mortify" -- you do not allow -- "the deeds of the body". They are called the deeds of the body because if the flesh works, it works in the body. Take a person that gets into a passion, it is the body that is the vehicle; the will, and the lusts of the flesh all work through the body. For my own part, I have felt that my members are my great trial. Something hasty comes to the tongue: what is it offends? The tongue, the member, What has been working there? The flesh. If the conception is there, the thing in the Christian ought to be nipped in the bud; the deeds of the body are to be mortified by the Spirit. Thus you come to this wonderful point, that now that the Spirit of God is there you are practically delivered from the dominion and control of the flesh, and the Spirit is free to do His own proper work. When the Spirit is in conflict with the flesh, He is doing the work which is necessary for the Christian, but not the work in which He delights. I put it to anybody here, if Christ has been "raised from the dead by the glory of the Father", do you not think the Spirit of God has the most supreme delight in Christ? He has, and what do you think His delight is in the Christian? To lead him in suitability to Christ, in entire correspondence with Christ; that is His proper work, not to be simply in conflict with the flesh. I think it is miserable and degrading to think that there should be that continual conflict between the flesh and Spirit to the end of the chapter. The word as
{350}
to the flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, was spoken to Christians who were very low down.
And there is another great truth, that the Christian is now formed by the place in which Christ has set him. As surely as possible, my child is formed by my house; he is formed for good or evil by the system and framework of affections by which he is surrounded. The same thing is true of the Christian -- he is set in the presence of the love of God, and is formed by the associations in which the grace of God has set him. The youngest Christian has "the love of God shed abroad in his heart", he has the power and ability to cry "Abba, Father"; but he does not know much about it till he knows deliverance. But the moment I come to that, I am formed for God by the associations and affections in which the grace of God has set me.
As I said at the beginning, why I insist so strongly on the truth of deliverance (though I am ashamed to speak of it, because I know so little about it) is because I believe it to be of all moment if you want to enter into what the thought of God is about you. It is totally impossible to enter into the divine thought that you are the companions of Christ (for that is what God has called you to), unless you are practically set free as to the state of your soul from everything to which Christ has died, sin and the world, and law and flesh. And as I have said before, the first thing that the Spirit of God sets to work to do when He is received is to bring before your soul the great truth that God has changed His man; that all the stages of probation of the first man are completely over, all has been ended in the cross of Christ; but that another Man has come in, in whom God has been completely glorified, and that the Christian is joined to Him, to take his character from Him. Then the truth of life in
{351}
Christ Jesus is apprehended, the true character of the flesh is discovered, and now the Christian is "not in the flesh but in the Spirit", and the purpose of the Spirit is to lead the Christian in correspondence to Christ. That is all on the blessed ground of sonship, and "the Spirit bears witness with our spirit that we are the children of God". We are a heavenly band.
I pray God in His great grace to make it plain to all here. All these truths we have to enter into experimentally; the mere statement of them, or the mere apprehension of them doctrinally will not suffice, will not bring deliverance to you. All has to be wrought in the soul. The soul has to learn practically and experimentally the truth of another Man, and (what is so essential if you are going to join company with that Man) that you must part company with the man that is here, the man that is dominated by sin. That is of all moment. And in that way the believer learns what the true character of the flesh is, and the righteousness of God's judgment of it, that God has "condemned sin in the flesh"; thus the whole state has been condemned, that the believer might be "not in the flesh but in the Spirit", that the Spirit might be life because of righteousness, and also be the Spirit of sonship to lead the believer, according to the grace of God, into what is true in Christ. May God give to us to understand it in His great grace, and to be led by the Spirit of God on that blessed line where we not only know the love of God, but where by the Spirit we respond to that love, that is, we cry, "Abba, Father", with the blessed consciousness by the Spirit that we are the children of God; and if suffering with Him here, if in that association, that we are "heirs of God and joint heirs of Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together".
{352}
ASSOCIATION WITH CHRIST
@Colossians 2: 20 - 23; @Colossians 3: 1 - 6
The subject that has occupied us on the three previous occasions has been "deliverance", but then deliverance has, in the thought of God for the saints, its own distinct purpose and object. And as I understand it, the end in view is that we may enter in our souls into the proper place of Christians as in association with Christ risen, and thus as one body by the Spirit here on earth. When we have reached that point, then I think all can understand that deliverance is realized. That is what led me to the passage I have read, for in the beginning of chapter 3 you get the thought of being risen with Christ, and this means that we are in association with Christ. The idea, as I understand it, is that the power of God that has operated in Christ in His resurrection has also taken effect in the saints; not in the same way, because with Him it was in literal resurrection, and in the saints it is moral; but it is the same power, and by divine power they are placed on one common platform with Christ, as risen together with Him. And I doubt if anybody understands what Christianity is if he does not apprehend that. It is all very well to bear a good name in the world six days in the week, and to be a Christian on the seventh; but that is not Christianity. Christianity is brought out in the passage I have read in Colossians; at the close of chapter 2 you pass out of one scene, and in the beginning of chapter 3 you have got another scene in view, though you may not yet be there. That is what I shall try by the grace of God to make plain: there is another scene opened to the view of the Christian. It is presented in a few words in the beginning of chapter 3, "If ye
{353}
then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth", the connecting link is where Christ is sitting, "at the right hand of God". And I make bold to say this, that until we as Christians have in faith another scene in view, we really do not understand what it is to be intelligently for Christ down here.
Of the two scenes to which I have alluded, the one is in contrast to the other; the one is an order of things in which man dogmatises, and lays down the law. The other is an order of things in which man has no place at all, but everything is completely of God, "the things above, at the right hand of God": you may depend upon it there is nothing of man there, all is of God.
I have spoken of deliverance as a subject of the last importance to us as Christians, and have referred to it in three aspects, first, deliverance from sin and the world, which are intimately connected, then deliverance from law, and finally deliverance from the flesh. I will briefly touch on the three again, to connect the whole together.
I do not think that people enter into deliverance from sin and the world until they get something positive in their souls. It is no good their saying they are dead to sin and the world if they are not dead; and I do not think they reckon themselves dead, until there is a certain power of God in the soul, and this lies in the apprehension of another Man. As we get in @Romans 6, "Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father", it is another Man, "In that he died, he died unto sin once; in that he liveth, he liveth unto God". It is perfectly evident that the man here lives to himself; that is the principle of sin. But what has come to pass in regard to another Man is, "in that he died, he died unto sin once", He had to say to sin
{354}
in bearing the judgment of it, "in that he liveth, he liveth unto God". The great point is this, that a Man, of another order, has entered in to the eternal and perfect satisfaction of God, "raised from the dead by the glory of the Father"; and it is the sense and power of that in the soul which really enables the Christian to reckon himself "dead to sin, and alive unto God in Christ Jesus". Any Christian would feel the incompatibility of sin with grace. Then in regard to the world, the world is the system of things in which the flesh lives; and I do not think persons would be content to accept death to the world if they did not apprehend that there existed another sphere, another circle, in which the character of Christ is seen. I do not say more now in regard to deliverance from sin and the world, because I am only recapitulating.
Subsequently we had before us death to the law, a very important point. The law was a bond under which the Jew was held; but God has dissolved the bond by the death of Christ. The bond does not exist for the Christian, he is not under law. It is not quite like death to sin and to the world, there is no bond there; but the law was a bond, and the point in regard to it is that God has dissolved the bond in order that another bond might be formed. You are "become dead to the law by the body of Christ", that is, in Christ that bond is dissolved, "that you might be to another, to him that is raised up from the dead, to bring forth fruit unto God". I will put it in other language for you, which may perhaps tend to simplify it. The apostle says, "In that I live in flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me"; that is my bond, he says, not law. The Christian is bound to Christ, by the sense of what Christ has done for him. The law did nothing for him except condemn; now he lives by the faith of
{355}
the Son of God, who loved him and gave Himself for him; there it is he gets deliverance from law. He walks under the influence of love, not simply the love of God but the love of Christ. Some might think they are the same thing, but they are not; there is the love of God and there is the love of Christ. You could hardly say that God loved me and gave Himself for me; God gave His Son for me, but Christ "loved me and gave himself for me". It is a Man that loved me and gave Himself for me; He is divine, but He is a Man. So, too, He "loved the church and gave himself for it". That is the second point, deliverance from law.
Then the third point came before us last time, and that is, deliverance from the flesh, which is comparatively simple, because it lies in this, that the Christian being indwelt by the Spirit is not in the flesh. He has to learn that; and as to the way deliverance is realized, he has to learn that God has in the cross judged sin in the flesh. I do not think the Christian practically understands deliverance from the flesh until he sees what was effected typically in the brazen serpent and actually in Christ; then he sees that the state of man in the flesh has been judged in order that the believer might be indwelt by the Spirit. When I once see that God has judged sin in the flesh, then I say, I am not debtor to the flesh; I am indwelt by the Spirit, for the judgment was effected in order that the Spirit might be given and might be life in the believer. It is just according to the type in Numbers, where the next thing after the brazen serpent is the digging of the well and the springing up of the water, "Spring up, O well" That is, it is the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus springing up in the Christian, and that is the way he gets, practically, deliverance from the flesh.
Of course it is easy for me to dwell on these things
{356}
in detail; but the difficulty is that all these things have to be put together in each one of our souls, because they all work together. I am quite warranted in taking them up in detail, for indeed Scripture does so; but they must all be put together in the soul of the believer, because deliverance has to be complete; he has to be practically freed from sin, and the world, and law, and the flesh; that is the divine thought. And the object and purpose on the part of God in it is that he may enter into the blessed truth of association with Christ; pass practically out of one scene into the presence of another blessed scene opened up to his view entirely outside of all that is here.
Allow me to dwell first on the two or three verses at the close of chapter 2. The apostle has completed the doctrinal part in verse 19, and then in verse 20 he comes to the hortatory part, and says, "Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though alive in the world" -- not "living" exactly, but "alive" in the world -- "are ye subject to ordinances, (Touch not, taste not, handle not, which are all to perish with the using), after the commandments and doctrines of men? which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will, worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honour to the satisfying of the flesh". Now I think any one can see there is one scene here, the world; and it is not the world of gross things, not Egypt, but it is what one may call the religious world, and in the religious world man dogmatises, the law is laid down. Even the law of God in the Old Testament was in dogmas; the apostle speaks of it in the early part of the chapter, as "the handwriting of ordinances", dogmas. But in the religious world it is after the traditions of men; man lays down and prescribes what is suitable to the religious person. You will
{357}
find it in all the great systems which exist in the present day; Christianity has got back to dogmatism. Man prepares a rubric, he lays down rules as to service, he gives directions as to the ordering of the person and even of the dress. That is the character of things that exist in the religious world, it is dogmatism; it calls for unintelligent obedience, and the end and purpose of it is the satisfaction of the flesh. I have often thought, in connection with the great religious things in the world, for whose satisfaction do they exist? Whom do they please? Suppose you have intellectual preaching, to which it is a great pleasure to man to listen, is that to please God or man? So, too, in regard to musical services; whom are they intended to please? If you had the most magnificent music which it was possible to produce upon earth, do you think for an instant that human music could please God? What has God to say to human music? There is such a thing as singing with the heart and in the Spirit, and with the understanding; but nothing can please God except what is in the Spirit. All else is for the satisfaction of the flesh. Of course you see all I have spoken of in its most gross form in Popery; but you can see plenty of it outside Popery, round us here in the world. I might take up a good many other things besides those I have mentioned, such as laying down of seasons and times and days; for they are of the same order of things. People are dogmatised; it is not intelligent subjection which is called for, but unintelligent subjection, that is, people do things, not because they see any spiritual purpose or reason in them, but because they are laid down after the commandments and traditions of men, and serve for the satisfaction of the flesh. And they are well pleased with what they do in this way; there is a sort of satisfaction in it, it is not that God is pleased, but
{358}
the flesh is satisfied, and it ends there. It has often been said that there is a strong religious tendency in the nature of man, and therefore a cultivated world cannot do without religion; but the character of worldly religion is always dogmatism, what is laid down by man, "the commandments and traditions of men": it cannot rise above this.
In regard to the Christian, the point is this: he is dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world. Christ in a sense came under the rudiments of the world, for He had His human identity, was "made of a woman, made under the law", He was presented to Jehovah, and was circumcised. But He has died out from all that order, and we are dead with Him, "If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world". A Christian has passed morally out of that scene.
Now I want to look a little at the scene opened to us at the beginning of chapter 3, though I can speak but little as to it, seeing that so little is said about it, and really it is a scene on which one finds it very difficult to touch. "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory". Now may the Lord enable me to say a word in regard to these two or three verses. It is not that I can pretend to expound them; I can only throw out a thought or two in regard to them. We have come, as I was saying at the beginning, to what I believe to be the great purpose and end of deliverance, that is, that we are risen together with Christ. How that is brought about we are told in verse 12 of chapter 2, "Buried with him in baptism, wherein
{359}
also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead". My own impression, although I would not be very positive about it, is that it should read, "*In whom* also ye are risen with him": I am not clear about connecting it with baptism, I am more inclined to connect it with Christ: "in whom", that is, it is in Christ, the Christian is risen with Him. Now we come to the exhortation founded on it, "If you are risen together with Christ". You can understand that the Christian is not yet risen; but Christ is risen, and God has wrought in the Christian in the same power by which he raised Christ, and by the same Spirit; and the way in which it is wrought in the soul is "through faith of the operation of God, that raised him from the dead". What that means is this, that I see the force and meaning of God's operation in raising Him from the dead. I begin to see something of the glory of God, what God would secure for Himself out of the wreck and ruin of everything here, and the beginning of it was the resurrection of Christ. When Christ died, everything was gone as you might say; the world was dead in trespasses and sins, Jew and Gentile alike; Christ was in death, and what was to come out of it all? The first ray of light that breaks in upon that scene of darkness is the resurrection of Christ; the power of God raises Christ from the dead; it is God working, who commanded that out of darkness light should shine, and the first ray of light is the glory of God raising Christ again from the dead, that is the real beginning of all for God. Now I apprehend what God is doing, I see the character of his operation, that the purpose and intent of God is to recover. The resurrection is really the divine power in recovery. Satan destroys, man destroys, as the Lord said to the Jews, "Destroy this temple", that was what they would do, "and in three days I will
{360}
raise it up". I see that Christ raised again from the dead is the glory of God in contrast to the destructive power of man and of Satan. I delight not only in the personal resurrection of Christ, but in the operation of God that raised Him from the dead. And I am entitled to take this ground, I am risen together with Him; God is bringing a company out of death, and Christ is first of that company, He is the first-fruits of the resurrection. God "is bringing many sons to glory", and He has taken the first-born of them out of death. And the same power which wrought in Christ has wrought in us, and the way in which it is evidenced is in faith in the operation of God, that raised him from the dead. We are of His company, risen together with Him, in association with Him, and He is "not ashamed to call us brethren". All the sons that are brought to glory are taken out of death. It is the triumph of God, His glory, that He takes a company for glory out of death.
I want next to show you the effect of it, and how it opens up to us another scene, a scene which is outside this scene. And the first point is, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God". It is interesting to see the different way in which Christ is presented to us in the different epistles. I think you will find that almost every statement in regard to Him in the epistle to the Colossians is really leading up to the divine glory of His Person. And the reason of it is that there had been a tendency among those who were affecting the Colossians to set aside the true glory of the Person of the Son. For instance, in chapter 1 we read, "who is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of every creature: for by him were all things created, that are in heaven and that are in earth". And again, "for it pleased ... that in
{361}
him should all fulness dwell", and so on. So again in verse 9 of chapter 2 it says, "For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily". When you come to chapter 3 it says, "where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God". I understand by it that that is the place which Christ has taken personally; it is not a place in which any other but Christ will ever be; you read of the saints being in heavenly places, but not at the right hand of God. It is the place which Christ has taken personally, and to me it is the declaration of the glory of His Person. Angels are the most distinguished of created beings, but "unto which of the angels said he at any time, Sit thou at my right hand until I make thy foes thy footstool"? The place that Christ has taken as Man at the right hand of God, the place of supreme honour and power, is the declaration on the part of God of who Christ is. I will give you a proof of it. The Lord told the Jews when He was before the Council that they should see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of God, and they said unto Him instantly, "Art thou then the Son of God?" They felt what it conveyed. So, too, Stephen saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God. And here you get the great truth that He sits at the right hand of God; it is the proof and declaration that He is the Son of God, in the place of supreme honour and glory. I have often thought in regard to Christ here upon earth, that the greatest proof of His deity is what He was as Man; you could not have such a man if He were not God. And here I get the declaration of His deity; that is, that He sits as Man at the right hand of God. It is a wonderful thing for the Christian, because everything is consequently changed, and he can look up there for that very reason, for the blessed truth has come out that there is actually a man sitting at the right hand of God. And then the practical bearing of it
{362}
is that that Man is the One with whom as Man the Christian is associated, in order to draw his thoughts and heart into another scene where everything is of God. Mark you this, there is nothing there but what is of God; love reigns there supreme. When you think of Christ rejected, spit upon, and crucified down here, now sitting at God's right hand, the object of all homage and honour and glory in heaven, it is a wonderful thing to think that as Christians we are placed by the grace of God in association with such an One. The practical effect of it must be that you "seek the things which are above where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God".
The next point is this: "Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth". There are "things above" and there are "things on the earth". It is a very difficult thing to attempt to describe what the things above are; but I should suppose they are most blessed things, and I take it that things above all centre round Him who is everything to us, who loved us and gave Himself for us. There is no one here tonight but knows very well what the things on earth are. You do not want to find the earth made agreeable to you, because another scene is opened up to you, where everything centres round a Man, highly exalted, proved to be divine, and where everything is of God, and love reigns supreme.
But now we have this great truth, "Ye are dead". The statement is not doctrinal but practical; you are dead, and "your life is hid with Christ in God". No one knows what the life of the Christian is, it has never yet been manifested, it is hidden in God. If you could see Christ, you would understand then what the life of the Christian is; you will never know it till Christ appears, that is, I imagine, the meaning of the expression, "Your life is hid with Christ in God". "When he is manifested
{363}
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is", and no one will be like Him until He is manifested; then we shall be like Him in order that we may see Him. But for the moment our life is hid. How does that work? I think in this way, that a Christian wants to be hid so far as the world is concerned; I do not want to be prominent here so long as my life is hid; I would like to be in the shade down here until Christ who is my life is manifested, but though in obscurity I would not be inactive, but serving the Lord in the place of obscurity.
Now we come to the third point, and that is "When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory". Christ is our life, He is the real living power in the Christian, as the apostle says, "Not I, but Christ liveth in me"; that is what obtains in the present time, our life has not yet been manifested, but Christ is our life, and when He appears we shall appear with him in glory. I think I speak the sentiments and feeling of a great many, when I say, You do not want to come out glorious in the present time. You are content to wait for the time when Christ who is our life is manifested. I do not think we want to antedate the glory. One would not care to be glorious here, knowing that all the glory is at the right hand of God. There has been nothing but the deepest shame and humiliation and ignominy down here for Christ; He has now the blessed answer to it in the place of supreme honour and glory at the right hand of God, and I think the Christian should refuse to be renowned or distinguished in a scene where Christ has only been dishonoured, and content to wait until Christ is manifested in glory.
It is a great point to me that God has opened another scene to the Christian. I might illustrate it by the position of the Lord Himself when He was
{364}
raised again from the dead; you can understand that He had clearly broken every link with this world, though morally He never had any. The potentates of the world had cast Him out, but as raised He enters the Holiest in the virtue of redemption. He had glorified God, and He was on the point of going up to heaven, but he remained here forty days for the will of God. And the Holiest is now true with regard to the Christian. We are risen together with Christ; the same power which raised Him from the dead has operated in us. We are in association with Him, and God has been pleased in His great grace to open up to us that blessed scene into which Christ has entered, and He bids us to seek the things which are above. Our souls are to be filled now with a sense of the blessed things where Christ is. As the apprehension of Christ is opened out to the believer, it is not only that we see Him as the anointed of God, who was here entirely for God's will, and was the vessel of God's pleasure, but we apprehend Him now in the glory of His Person; He is the One who sits at the right hand of God, and who is worthy to sit there, and He is declared to be what He is, the Son of God.
May God give you to see the great blessing of this truth, to see what a great end is to be gained by deliverance, what deliverance brings you to as to the practical state of your souls, that is, into the consciousness of association with Christ, according to the grace of God; that He is not ashamed to call you brethren; you are in association with Him, you have got glory in view, and the blessed scene where everything is of God, where there is righteousness and holiness and love and majesty, and all that is of God, vindicated in a Man. That is the scene which is opened up to the Christian, and opened up to him in order that he may know what it is to be according to God and for God down here
{365}
during the little moment he is on earth. May God in His great grace show it to all, in a way in which it is totally impossible for me to show it to you. I have only tried to give the idea of it; and I trust through the grace of God it may really take possession of our souls, that all may see the great gain which is to be obtained through deliverance.
