{1}
Pages 1 - 126 -- "New York Readings", 1932 (Volume 113).
"FOOD WHICH ABIDES" (1)
Epitome of First Reading
@Genesis 1 and certain verses of @John 6 were under consideration. It was pointed out that @John 3 presents a religious wreck (Nicodemus); @John 4, a moral wreck (the woman of Sychar); @John 5, a physical wreck (the man at the pool of Bethesda). Correspondingly the background of chapter 3 is a world of darkness, of chapter 4, a world of thirst, of chapter 5, a world of death, and in chapter 6 a world of hunger is in view. God meets all in Christ.
Chapter 5 contemplates figuratively that the believer is raised up by the word of Christ into the sphere of eternal life; in chapter 6, we have the food that sustains him in that sphere. The gift of the Holy Spirit underlies all this. He creates desire in the believer for food. But there must be the laying aside of all malice, guile, hypocrisies, etc., and then, "as newborn babes desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word, that by it ye may grow up to salvation", (@1 Peter 2:1,2).
@Genesis 1 corresponds: a sphere of light and life is opened up -- of course in a material sense. On the third day the earth comes into view, out of which should spring up the herb producing seed, fruit trees yielding fruit after their kind, the seed of which is in them. These were to be man's food. The idea of "seed" here is important; it is what is produced, and, of course, seed becomes itself productive. Much is eaten by saints (literature read, etc.) which is not seed-producing according to God. What is of God is continued as we produce after our own kind. Some, alas! feed on radios, novels, newspapers, etc. -- there
{2}
is no seed of God in these things. In the house of a brother in fellowship the *Saturday Evening Post* and a radio were seen lately, and the brother and his family had no conscience as to them -- an evidence that they were not saved from the elements of the world.
{3}
"FOOD WHICH ABIDES" (2)
@Genesis 41:37 - 49
J.T. The book of Genesis affords much instruction as to food. All creatures have to be sustained by the Creator, and so in chapter 1 we are told that God, having created man, cattle, fowl, etc., provided food for them. To man He gave "every herb producing seed that is on the whole earth, and every tree in which is the fruit of a tree producing seed" (verse 29); and to the cattle, fowl and creeping things He gave "every green herb for food" (verse 30). The entire provision was vegetable; the carnivora were not recognised, being notably a development after sin entered into the world.
After the fall we get the death of animals, implied in the skins by which God clothed Adam and Eve, and seen definitely in Abel's offering to God; but only after the deluge is flesh allowed as food for men. This would enhance man's dominance in the creation, and strengthen him in the heavier responsibilities now placed upon him; not only over the lower creatures, but also in regard to his own race, this domination was to be maintained. The section of @Genesis 41 - 47 now before us presents the subject of food in the most general bearing.
A.M.H. And it would indicate that the present period is the greatest day of food, corresponding with the "seven years of great plenty", (chapter 41:29). There has never been such bounty in the history of God's dealings with the world, and I suppose there never will be again. The Spirit's day would exceed all in this respect.
J.T. Food puts great moral power into the hands of him who controls it. The present time is, therefore, one of the exercise of moral power in Christ.
{4}
A.P. How do you apply "the seven years of famine" today; and in what sense do we go to Joseph for food?
A.M.H. They go along with the years of plenty which result from the Lord being exalted and the Spirit being sent down from heaven. At Pentecost three thousand souls were brought to the Lord. What an abundant pouring out of supply from heaven there was on that day! It was adequate to satisfy every living thing. Parallel with that there was the fact that man, in himself, is without supply, and that will work out in its full character when the Spirit is withdrawn.
F.L. Would the moral power of which you spoke be seen in Paul? Would the ministry of the assembly be in line with the richness and abundance administered in the day of the Spirit?
J.T. It would, I am sure. It is Christ exalted among the Gentiles, as typified in Joseph. It is through Paul's ministry that He is known thus, and in this position the food supply is in His hand, and it is administered to Israel and to all.
W.G.T. There was plenty in Egypt, but God brought it under control.
J.T. There is no control of the food in @Genesis 1 and 9. It is a question of what there was. There was, no doubt, plenty of it growing up out of the earth. Then in chapter 9:3 it is said, "Every moving thing that liveth shall be good for you". But in the chapters before us all is in control. This involves power wielded by Joseph through which his brethren are brought to light and set up in relation to himself and to each other.
W.B-w. Is it the dispensing of food under control? Is it dispensational in that sense?
J.T. Yes, it is the day of the Spirit. There was a wonderful supply at Pentecost, but then what we have here typifies all that being under the control of
{5}
Christ not only in heaven, but among the Gentiles. At Pentecost the supply was at Jerusalem, but what is before us contemplates Israel having to go down to Egypt to get the food from Joseph.
A.P. Do you connect the idea of control in chapter 3 with the tree of life?
J.T. The tree of life was prohibited there. The idea of the control of food is that it is there to be administered according to wisdom.
A.M.H. It has to come through certain channels to which God would call attention. It is delightful to think of the Lord as the One to whom all attention is drawn through the very want in the world.
J.T. One great thought stressed in this typical instruction is that universal attention is called to Christ. He is rejected by the Jews, but they and all are compelled to go to Him for the means of sustenance.
W.G.T. So that the control of food enhances His position.
J.T. It affords Him great moral power. Chapter 47 shows the result of this; not only is need met, but the Egyptians and their land were bought for Pharaoh.
F.L. Would the idea of control be that it is made available and put into the right channels?
J.T. That is the thought, and the first salient result is to bring the brethren of Joseph to light, to put them together and show their relation to him. Then all the Egyptians are brought directly under Pharaoh through it. The instruction in all this, as applied at the present time and in the future, is very evident.
A.N.W. The food is under control during the seven years of plenty as well as during the seven years of famine.
{6}
J.T. You mean that it has been gathered up and cared for; though it came up in handfuls, it was not wasted.
A.R. It was stored "in the cities".
J.T. The cities are suggestive of safe-keeping and of the means of administration locally. But, generally, the food was administered according to the wisdom of Joseph, for his position was based on the fact of his great wisdom, as able to reveal the secret of Pharaoh's dreams. The instruction brings out what Christ is, typically; because the advent of Joseph in Genesis is spiritual. As soon as Joseph was born, Jacob proposed to leave Padan-Aram. That is the idea. Joseph causes movement out of the world; and in the presence of Esau he has precedence over his mother (@Genesis 33:7); then he is specially loved by his father. So that his is a history which in its very inception is spiritual, and causes movement out of the world; accordingly he acquired immense moral power in his father's house, and in the prison; and now, as in the house of Pharaoh, he has it universally.
A.M.H. These are the lines upon which he is advanced: "Shall we find one as this, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?" There has to be care to apprehend what the Lord is giving and to gather it up; and then the administration of it has to be governed by wisdom from Himself.
J.T. It says, "In the seven years of plenty the land brought forth by handfuls. And he gathered up all the food of the seven years that was in the land of Egypt, and put the food in the cities; the food of the fields of the city, which were round about it, he laid up in it. And Joseph laid up corn as sand of the sea exceeding much, until they left off numbering, for it was without number". There was volume, but great care is shown in gathering it up and placing it in the cities.
A.M.H. The corn grown in a field should be laid
{7}
up in the nearby city. That suggests that what God effects as food in a particular place is intended to be available to that place and centred there. It is to distributed from that point. That helps us in seeing the importance of the boundary question. The Lord would have the food gathered in the place where He has produced it. He would have it gathered so that administration of it might go out in that particular area.
F.L. "He laid up in it".
J.S. So that in the seven years of plenty we have great spiritual movement, but it takes seven years of famine to bring about appreciation of it on our side.
A.M.H. You have the giving from heaven, which is so wonderfully abundant; and on the other hand, there has to be the process of appropriation with each one of us.
J.T. We should notice the care shown here; although there was such abundance, nothing was to be lost. All was garnered. If the Lord is pleased to give volume, it ought not to be treated lightly; it ought to be garnered. If it is not needed now, it will be later on. You get times of plenty and times of famine.
F.L. What would be the idea of garnering now?
J.T. I was thinking of Samuel. "Jehovah ... let none of his words fall to the ground" (@1 Samuel 3:19) Scripture says. I think there is a principle there. His words must have been of value; and if they did not fall to the ground, they must have fallen into some hearts. It is a question of whether we retain in our hearts the things ministered, or let them go.
A.F.M. In @John 6 they gathered up the fragments and filled twelve baskets.
J.T. That would show that what was left over was not treated lightly.
F.L. Referring to Samuel, when he first comes on the scene, Scripture says, "The word of Jehovah was
{8}
rare in those days" (@1 Samuel 3:1) and that when he develops, it says, "Jehovah ... let none of his words fall to the ground". This would suggest garnering.
J.T. Yes. The idea of "the faith" (@Acts 16:5) is that the hearts of the saints are receptacles for what God affords. "The faith" is that which is treasured and held in our souls by faith.
E.B. Would you say that the seven plenteous years were the result of the exaltation of Joseph?
J.T. They were determined. Everything that has come out in Christ was determined, including His death. All is a question of divine determination; here the matter was revealed to Pharaoh. Joseph came into general evidence by the wisdom that God gave him to reveal the secret. The whole mind of God began to take form as Christ became man.
A.M.H. There is not merely the fact of His exaltation, but the path of moral worth whereby He reached it. What comes down is really what has been displayed in the Lord from the manger to the cross and to the glory. He is the fruitful field whence all comes.
J.T. All came out in Christ. So we read, "There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they were written one by one, I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written", (@John 21:25). The idea is that all the fulness of Christ is now in the Spirit, and He brings it to the remembrance of the brethren from time to time. The Lord says to His disciples, "The Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you", (@John 14:26).
W.B-w. The dreams of Pharaoh suggest that what came out was determined beforehand.
J.T. The fact that the dream was doubled made it sure. The determinate counsels and foreknowledge
{9}
of God enters into everything; and then there is an idea of the immense greatness of Christ -- one here great enough to set all that out in principle, and then to make it effective. This is now brought to pass by the Spirit.
A.J.D. So that the bountiful supply that we get today is the unfolding by the Spirit of all that was in Christ down here.
A.M.H. I have been wondering with regard to the abundance of the ministry of the present day, whether we might not be forewarned as to a possible day of leanness, and hence in knowing what is ministered there should be the formation of it in our hearts, as having received it in faith.
F.L. Everything in principle was true in Christ when He was here.
A.F.M. @John 6:35 would amplify that: "I am the bread of life: he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst at any time".
A.J.D. The garnering of which you were speaking, is it brought about on the principle of fully following up?
J.T. Yes. The Lord has been very good to us; the windows of heaven have been opened, and we have perhaps more than we can contain; but it should not be neglected nor treated lightly. There may be need for it later on, if not now.
J.S. Hence the need of being enlarged in heart and mind to contain what God gives. There is no other place in which to store the divine bounty, is there?
J.T. It ought to be in the hearts of the saints that is the idea. The receptacle is to be great enough to contain all that there is.
A.M.H. The idea of cities suggests something ordered and organised. I was thinking of the value of the assembly in that way, that it is not merely a
{10}
collection of individuals who have received something in their hearts, but there is a much larger receptacle produced by recognising the commandments of the Lord and taking account, collectively, of what He approves, so that you get a company to whom the Lord would commit more than to any individual.
A.P. Joseph was put over Pharaoh's house. It says, "Thou shalt be over my house, and according to thy commandment shall all my people regulate themselves".
A.M.H. If we gave more heed to His word in detail, as to regulating ourselves in the assembly of God, the Lord would entrust more to us.
J.T. At our care meetings the brothers together rightly talk things over, but there is not power there to dispense, all is tentative; but as you get the saints together in assembly (under the control of the Lord, regulated by His word) you have the idea of a city. The feature of administration is present, and is exercised without partiality and without hypocrisy. Deborah says, "Let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might", (@Judges 5:31). Normally, this appears in the assembly.
H.S.D. So that an assembly in a locality would be the means of supply which we can draw upon for our food.
J.T. The city here corresponds with the idea of the assembly. A city is an ordered place, as has been remarked. In civil matters, as soon as you get the municipal council, mayor, etc., functioning, you have far more power than you could have with the same number of persons unorganised.
A.P. When you come from the field to within the boundary of a city you know it.
J.T. You are over the line. The "it" here involves its boundary. As soon as you get over the line you have a sphere where there is authority and order distinct from the field. There is far more
{11}
power in a few saints in the light of the assembly than there could be in the same number simply as units. Spiritually, the assembly is the most highly organised thing conceivable.
W.G.T. What is the field?
J.T. The fields would be the areas influenced by the cities.
J.S. They are productive areas.
J.T. They are thus the saints viewed individually; that is to say, we bear fruit severally. The aggregate is seen in the assembly, so that it is under control; and I think, therefore, that gift, however great it may be, even an apostle, is under control. @Ephesians 4:8) says that Christ "has given gifts to men", but @1 Corinthians 12:28 says, "God has set certain in the assembly", this would imply obligation to the saints on their part, as we see at Antioch.
A.M.H. The assembly in that way makes room for the body. The idea of the city, as typical of the assembly, is to protect and preserve so that we may cultivate family relations and affections.
J.T. We all ought to appreciate the assembly as an ordered sphere. It is a protection, and the less individual we are in that respect the better.
F.L. We used to hear it said by those who were designated evangelists, that they were free, and responsible only to the Lord. I fully agree with what you were saying, that every gift, no matter how great, while subject to the Lord is also responsible to the assembly.
J.T. That is worked out in the most striking way at Antioch. The greatest gift that the church has had was Paul; he went out with Barnabas and ministered most successfully, and then they came back, having fulfilled the work they had undertaken. They returned to Antioch, and "they stayed no little time with the disciples", (@Acts 14:28). And Peter
{12}
and John, the greatest in the Pentecostal church, laboured most effectively, as seen in @Acts 3 and 4, but they came to their own company; then we read, "And with great power did the apostles (not Peter and John only) give witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus", (@Acts 4:33).
W.G.T. So that a brother who has gift should not move around if his local brethren are not free about him.
J.T. It is a question of right judgment. If I have a judgment I ought to be able to give a reason for it. A jury, so as to render a true verdict, must obtain from the judge the law governing the case in question. If I have a judgment I ought to be able to furnish the law governing it.
A.R. Does the idea of cities apply peculiarly to Paul's ministry?
J.T. I think so. So that you get two things in that respect -- elders were chosen in each assembly, and elders were established in each city. The Spirit of God is concerned with rule and order, and so you have the two ideas.
W.B-w. What is the difference between the two?
J.T. In cities where you have subdivisions of the assemblies the need for eldership is more apparent. The ministry of an elder in a city, even though there may be a dozen subdivisions, refers to all the saints in that city.
A.F.M. You get here the word 'overseers'. "Let Pharaoh do this: let him appoint overseers over the land" (verse 34). That would be akin to eldership. The garnering was not done promiscuously.
J.T. We see that during the seven years of plenty Joseph valued every bit of food there was and garnered it; and then the years of famine brought out the advantage that would centre in Joseph. But we read, "And all the land of Egypt suffered from the dearth. And the people cried to Pharaoh for bread"
{13}
(verse 55). This seems to be a slight on Joseph. There was not the recognition of the constitution of the dispensation -- that Joseph was over it.
Ques.. Does that suggest that there must be the full recognition of headship?
J.T. Rather lordship. It is a question of authority. The people cried to Pharaoh. Now Pharaoh had already ordered that everything should be regulated by Joseph; that was a change of affairs, but apparently it had not taken effect. People are often loose in their prayers; they speak to God about things when they should speak to Christ about them; that is to say, we need to be intelligent as to the economy of Christianity. As the people cried to Pharaoh for bread, he said, "Go to Joseph" (verse 55). That is an important word.
F.L. Would you say that in matters of administration the voice of God would be, Go to Christ?
J.T. That is the point. I think that gives distinctiveness to the economy of the dispensation. Administration is in the hands of the Lord, so that we should understand that the Lord is the One to whom to go in regard to spiritual matters.
W.B-w. The Lord said, "Ye believe on God, believe also on me", (@John 14:1). They had believed on God, but the One who was there in humiliation was going to be in the supreme place. It ought to encourage our hearts to believe also on Him.
A.R. In his first letter to the Corinthians, the apostle seems to be constantly impressing upon them the authority of Christ.
J.T. Exactly. This phase of the food question is calculated to afford great moral power to Christ. We shall find in our experience, that as soon as we begin to realise the need of food, Christ gets a greater place of moral power over our souls. Therefore Pharaoh said, "Go to Joseph; what he says to you, that do" (verse 55). It is really a repetition of what
{14}
was already ordained, but now the people are feeling the pinch of the dearth, and are more amenable to impressions. This is the point where Christ begins to acquire power over our souls, as you feel you are wholly dependent on Him. You get no food if you do not go to Him.
A.F.M. The Egyptians learned that lesson. They refer to Joseph all through afterwards. It is a good example for ourselves. I was wondering whether we sometimes do not go to the Lord for things instead of going to God. Is not that also true? In material things, for instance, we rightly refer to God; whereas in administrative things we refer to Christ.
J.T. I think so. The end is: "Let us find favour in the eyes of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's bondmen", (@Genesis 47:25). This shows typically, that as we own Christ in the place of administration He brings us into entire subjection to God.
F.L. The whole universe of God will live in and through Christ -- wonderful thought!
J.T. That is the meaning given to the name "Zaphnathpaaneah" -- 'Saviour of the world' or 'Sustainer of life'.
W.B-w. When Joseph's brethren went down to Egypt he commanded that their sacks be filled, and the second time he added, "As much as they can carry" (@Genesis 44:1); and their money was put in their sacks on both occasions.
J.T. In that, there is indicated the liberality of the dispensation. You not only get food, and as much as you can carry, but your money is given back to you. There is a word to be noted in chapter 42:1: "Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt". He saw what existed. Then he says to his sons, "Why do ye look one upon another?" That is a great hindrance in obtaining spiritual food -- looking one on another.
Ques. What is the suggestion in that?
{15}
J.T. There is a lot of that kind of thing going on. The brethren are looking at one another, and talking about one another instead of going for the food. "Why do ye look one upon another?" Jacob knew where the grain was, and says, "Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt; go down thither and buy grain for us from thence, in order that we may live, and not die", (@Genesis 42:2). We may be looking one on another while the saints are starving.
A.M.H. It is a question of going down. The food is easily got if we go down, instead of looking one upon another. If we go down, we reach ground upon which the Lord can own us.
G.McP. That is what they were doing at Corinth, comparing themselves one with another.
J.T. Exactly; and there was very little food there.
W.G.T. Would Jacob represent the experiences of a man of God?
J.T. I think so. He knew what existed. He had family and felt the need of his family, so he says, "Go down thither and buy grain ... in order that we may live, and not die. And Joseph's ten brethren went down". They obeyed the word of their father. All these circumstances culminate in true brethren being brought to light. "A brother is born for adversity", (@Proverbs 17:17). Christ, typically, comes to light in a new way in chapter 45.
F.L. However far they went down, Joseph had gone further -- even into the pit. I was thinking of Christ. "But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth?" (@Ephesians 4:9).
J.E.H. In that connection we are exhorted to, "Let this mind be in you", (@Philippians 2:5). Will you enlarge on the thought of brethren being brought to light?
J.T. The need of our souls forces us to Christ.
{16}
What we are considering indicates the wonderful way in which God makes things work out, creating need in our souls in famine, so that we may seek the Lord. Joseph had his brethren in mind from the very outset; and after the spirit of a son and a brother is seen in Judah's touching appeal, it is then that Joseph cries, "Put every man out from me!" (@Genesis 45:1) and makes himself known to his brethren. This shows that they with Judah had judged their sin against Joseph.
F.L. It would be interesting to distinguish between light and food.
J.T. Jacob had light as to the food, but then he and his house could not live on that. Light indicates to you things as they are; you see all things clearly, but you have to move if you are to enjoy what light indicates as available.
W.B-w. Jacob says, "That we may live, and not die". The sustenance of life is to be had by going down.
A.B.P. We get provision for a new crop in chapter 47:23 -- seed is given to the Egyptians with which to sow the land.
J.T. As all the Egyptians are secured for Pharaoh they are henceforth to be profitable to him.
A.B.P. Applying this now, it would be that what has been ministered is to spring up in the hearts of the saints.
J.T. "And it shall come to pass in the increase that ye shall give the fifth to Pharaoh, and the four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones" chapter 47:24. Figuratively the saints are now set up under God and Christ with a means of fruitfulness in which God has part with them. Here a fifth part goes to Pharaoh and the other four parts are for the people. There is an order of things brought about in which God is supreme and
{17}
His people continue in life before Him. They have got the means of sustenance. The land was to be held for Pharaoh who was to share with them the produce of it. Spiritually, it is a happy state of things, brought into effect through the administration of Christ. Their bodies, cattle, and land are yielded to Pharaoh, corresponding with the teaching of the epistle to the Romans. There, we are said to be bondmen to God, and to yield obedience unto righteousness; and we have our fruit unto holiness.
W.B-w. In chapter 47:21 the idea of cities is continued: "And as for the people, he removed them into the cities, from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end of it". The idea of the city continues right through.
J.T. "Only the land of the priests he did not buy; for the priests had an assigned portion from Pharaoh, and ate their assigned portion which Pharaoh had given them; so they did not sell their land" (verse 22). There is a place where the priests are specially cared for. In this chapter there is set up an order of things which grew out of the years of plenty and the years of famine; it is in a people who have gone through the unexampled experience depicted. Typically it shows how God takes occasion through our need to come into our souls through Christ, and to acquire a dominant place with us. We are to yield ourselves to Him as alive from among the dead, and our members as instruments of righteousness to God.
A.F.M. @Romans 12 further enters into this: Our bodies are presented a living sacrifice, and we prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
J.T. We are thus brought into the divine economy where God reaps from us the fruit of the Spirit. We are in happy fixity and security. We are in the kingdom of God, which is "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", (@Romans 14:17).
{18}
"FOOD WHICH ABIDES" (3)
@Exodus 12:1 - 20; @Exodus 16:13 - 26
J.T. At our last reading we had before us the subject of food as it appears under the administration of Joseph in Egypt, and saw that he was a type of Christ, with all the food under his hand. This gave him great moral power, resulting in his brethren being brought to light in relation to him, and all the people of Egypt being brought into complete subjection under him, so much so that they go to him for seed with which to sow their land -- typically, the full result of the present administration of Christ.
In Exodus we have *specific* foods; not food simply to sustain 'the life of the world' (see footnote, @Genesis 41:45) as under Joseph, but food in the power of which we go out of the world according to God; and then food to sustain us as in it but not of it. It should be noted that in Exodus there is no scarcity; there is not even the suggestion of it; so that the head of an Israelitish house had simply to take his lamb. He would take it as having it, showing the individual wealth concentrated in believers as they go out of Egypt. They have what is needed. Each householder is directed to take a lamb, as if it were his own.
J.S. How would you link the food as presented in Genesis with that in Exodus?
J.T. The first feature of food in Genesis is creatorial provision, available to the creature, whether it be man or cattle, etc. It is there, but it is for them to find it. The second provision is in view of government, magisterial authority being committed to Noah. He is evidently provided with the food needed for the new responsibility imposed. The next is under Joseph. It is food in the hands of a man, to
{19}
be administered. It is an administration, pointing to the present position of Christ as exalted. It is Christ as wisdom, having the whole supply of food under Him. The name given to Joseph apparently signified that he was a sustainer of the life of the world, and it was universal in its result. In Exodus we are on narrower ground; it is a question of a redeemed people in relation to God, leaving Egypt, figuratively this world, and finding food suitable to build up and sustain a constitution in view of this, and of the consequent position in the wilderness.
A.F.M. Would you tell us what the prime thought of food is? It is introduced in @Genesis 1, but evidently is a marked feature with angels, and is called "the corn of the heavens" and "the bread of the mighty", (@Psalm 78:24,25).
J.T. All creatures are dependent on food. Manna was said to be angels¬ food. How they digest it or how it is assimilated, we do not know. The angels are spirits, hence their food cannot properly be material as ours is. We have, therefore, to find the link in a moral sense; it is a question of dependence on the word of God.
J.S. As the Lord says: "Man shall not live by bread alone".
J.T. He lifts it up from the material to the spiritual -- "Every word which goes out through God's mouth", (@Matthew 4:4).
W.B-w. Is there limitation in Exodus?
J.T. Yes, that is readily discerned. We are on narrower, but not on lower ground, having privilege in view. It is a question of food for a people in express relation to God. In @Genesis 1 the food of man and that of the creatures is not very different; that is to say, we are on the lowest ground there in regard to food. But when we come to @Genesis 9, added to vegetable provision, we have "everything that liveth" given to man for food; that is a slight
{20}
elevation. But under Joseph it is a question of food being in the hands of one person; that is to say, God ordering things creatorially so as to enhance the place of Christ by putting moral power in His hands. Men are obliged to come to Him. His position has in view the preservation of the world, very much like @John 6:51, in that sense; it is "for the life of the world".
J.S. Is there a certain moral elevation reached in Genesis in the exaltation of Christ typically, in the light of which we move out of the world as the children of Israel did in Exodus?
J.T. Yes. In Exodus you come to mediatorial service: Moses is expressly the mediator who is to effect redemption. It is, therefore, a people in redemption and the food suitable for them; that is to say, for us.
A.R. Is there any significance in the thought of the assembly being introduced in Exodus? Has it the limited thought in view?
J.T. Exactly; the word appearing here is very significant. It has quite a prominent place in the chapter, showing that not only are a redeemed people in view, but a people intelligent in the mind of God; this enters into the idea of an assembly.
A.F.M. Would this subject of food, which is before us, have in view the doing of the will of God? We have the expression in @Matthew 6:10: "Thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth".
J.T. Yes, I think so. It is a people going out of Egypt and having suitable food by which to go out, and to find later, in the manna, a food that would sustain them in the wilderness. The passover goes into Canaan. I think the main thought in it is reduction in the flesh and the exaltation of Christ in our hearts; that is to say, the passover lamb is preserved in wholeness. There is no breaking up of the framework: "Neither shall ye break a bone
{21}
thereof", (@Exodus 12:46). What is meant is that the believer in going out of the world has a whole Christ before him; and He is to increase, whereas the believer is to decrease. The unleavened bread is to reduce the flesh, and as we "celebrate the feast" (@1 Corinthians 5:7) Christ should come increasingly before our minds, and the flesh correspondingly becomes less and less.
B.T.F. Would you say eating of the lamb signified the appropriation of the death of Christ in the way redemption?
J.T. Yes, in that whole way. "Not a bone of him shall be broken", (@John 19:36). Of course, in Exodus it is only a figure. In Matthew and Mark, in instituting His supper, the Lord said, "This is my body", (@Matthew 26:26; @Mark 14:22). His body is to be eaten, not His flesh as in @John 6. It is a whole thought.
A.N.W. In that connection, is there a suggestion of the household being adjusted to the lamb?
J.T. It brings forward a very interesting point, and that is the question of capacity for eating, both in regard to the passover and to the manna.
J.S. Would the general thought be a lamb for a house?
J.T. Yes. The exception would be if it were too big for the house, then the neighbour would be brought in to share. The head of the house was responsible to consider the eating capacity. The age of the lamb is given here, as also the size of the omer in chapter 16. We are told that the omer was the tenth part of an ephah, and that it was for each person in Israel. There was no provision made for children, as such; each person had it; that is to say, it was the mind of God for them. It is the measure suitable for a heavenly man in the wilderness. An omer full of manna was laid up before the testimony. Typical of, "A man's measure, that is, the angel's", (@Revelation 21:17).
{22}
J.S. Would the eating of the passover help the believer to leave the world?
J.T. I think that is in view. You have the great object before you; one definite thought in mind -- Christ Himself. Then the unleavened bread would reduce the flesh to nothing, so that there should be no inflation with us, as is prevalent in Christendom today; the present monstrosity that we see there is due to man in the flesh being nominally connected with Christ.
A.J.D. You spoke of the apprehension of a whole Christ. Would you open that up a little?
J.T. It is a very important point, because most young believers in leaving the world are very indefinite as to an object. Young people are usually very vague in their perception of things. The gospel not only meets the believer's need, but provides an object for his affections. It is "God's glad tidings, ... concerning his Son (come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead) Jesus Christ our Lord", (@Romans 1:1-4). Now that presents to us the Person of Christ, viewed so to speak, in His entirety.
A.J.D. Is it the apprehension of Him as having gone through death?
J.T. Yes. You are in your house eating before leaving Egypt, and have that one idea before you. Notice that it says, "The assembly of Israel shall kill it". There may have been thousands of lambs but there was only one idea. It is not, they shall kill them, but, it. There was but one passover.
W.B-w. It is roasted with fire.
J.T. Well, that is additional to death. The lamb is slain; its blood is shed -- this is the testimony. Its life is taken. But fire is an additional thought, to bring in not only the actual death of Christ, but the forsaking of God; it is the entire judgment of God
{23}
against sin. Fire is the strongest figure you can have in this respect.
J.S. And the bitter herbs, what would they teach?
J.T. They would prefigure self-judgment: the bitterness that comes into the soul as to why all this should be borne by Christ -- the righteous One. It is the bitterness that faith as judging sin, realised in partaking of the passover, corresponding to the bitter waters of Marah in the wilderness, which later the Israelites drank.
A.R.S. Would you say this food enables you to leave the world? I suppose the idea is that as you find it superior to the leeks and onions of Egypt, you desire them no more. Besides, we are given notice to leave the world.
J.T. Yes, they were driven out. But God had told Israel to move out. The best notice is that which God gives you. At first the Egyptians were reluctant to let them go, but the judgment of God caused them to hasten the Israelites out. God allows the world to bring pressure on us, but the real point is that God orders us out. This chapter is divine ordering in regard of Israel going out, and there is really no option. We are obliged to go out if subject to God. The Roman believers are said to have "obeyed from the heart the form of teaching" (@Romans 6:17) into which they were instructed.
C.B. Feeding upon Christ as bearing the judgment God for us would cause us to leave the world.
J.T. Yes. I think what transpired in the houses of Israel was most interesting. There was only one passover, although thousands partook of it. The same thoughts, conversation, doings, table furnishings, and the same blood on the lintel outside marked every house. Typically it was to promote affection for Christ and practical unity among the people of God.
W.B-w. Why is the negative instruction so
{24}
particularly given: "Eat none of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roast with fire"?
J.T. It is to emphasise that the judgment of God had fallen on the lamb. Christ our passover is sacrificed for us, so that we are to keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
J.S. Would it emphasise judgment more because it was eaten at night?
J.T. Yes, darkness surrounded them, which was in keeping with conditions outside; but there was light inside Israel's houses. The manna began in the morning.
A.J.D. What was in the mind of God in verse 46: "Neither shall ye break a bone thereof"? Was it to maintain the whole thought?
J.T. Yes. You get a cognate thought in Joseph directing that his bones should be carried up. It underlies the great subject of resurrection. The bones suggest the person; the one who is buried comes out. There is complete identification; the whole person is, so to speak, included in his bones. They are the framework of the body; but what God may clothe the person with is another thing. "It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body", (@1 Corinthians 15:44).
C.A.M. They carried those bones all the way through the wilderness.
J.T. Yes. It was by faith Joseph gave commandment concerning them.
C.A.M. Would this suggest the Lord's having eaten the passover with the disciples and inaugurating the memorial of Himself? Joseph's bones would be a reminder of himself.
J.T. Just so. In Matthew and Mark the disciples suggest the passover to the Lord; and it is for Him to eat: "For thee to eat", (@Matthew 26:17). But in @Luke 22:8 He suggests it to them: "That we may eat". In Matthew and Mark it is His body
{25}
that is to be eaten. In Luke, in connection with the Supper, there is nothing said about eating; it is the breaking of bread as a memorial, but Matthew and Mark would bring in the idea of food, in the Lord's supper. It is one Christ.
A.F.M. In @John 19:36 there is no institution of the Lord's supper but His loving His own to the end, is emphasised, and that "not a bone of him shall be broken".
A.J.D. It is a question of the Person remaining.
J.T. That is it. Whether it be Jesus here on earth or Jesus in resurrection, it is the same Person. There is no change in regard of the Person or His love.
W.B-w. @John 1 refers to the Lamb of God. God draws attention to His Son. Would that be on the line of what you have been pointing out?
J.T. Yes, the allusion includes this chapter. There are different words used for 'lamb' in the New Testament original. One means 'diminutive', which is used in Revelation and @John 21:15. The lamb in Revelation is a smaller idea than the lamb in @John 1. The lamb here is a year old. It is not a diminutive thought as in Revelation, where it is the sufferer in outward weakness.
J.S. Eating here would appear to be a necessity prior to the people moving out.
J.T. It was the beginning of their history proper. We begin our history spiritually as we leave the world. "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months".
A.F.M. I would like to ask how it is that you get the assembly of Israel addressed in chapter 12, when in fact, they were not redeemed as yet?
J.T. I think it is a tribute to the work of God, to what God had been doing in His people in Egypt, to what had gone on in their previous experiences. So that they were now ready for the collective
{26}
thought. It is not simply that they were one family, but were one in intelligence. There are two words here: the word 'assembly' which means a moral whole, involving a sense of responsibility, one idea corresponding with the lamb; and then 'congregation', including every member of it. The word 'assembly' is, therefore, more instructive here because it shows the formation that had gone on. It led up to this: The people were not only regarding themselves as children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but they were ready for the idea of the assembly, which involves intelligent collective responsibility.
A.J.D. Would the apprehension of a whole Christ lead to that?
J.T. I think it corresponds with it and to @1 Corinthians 10:17, "We being many, are one loaf, one body".
A.N.W. When you speak of a whole Christ being before the young soul, do you mean anything more than that the Person is there?
J.T. I mean that He becomes as a known person, a definite object for the believer. At the outset our apprehension of Christ is very meagre, and usually in relation to the gain accruing to us from Him.
A.N.W. So you would look with exercise on a person speaking of the forgiveness of sins without any thought that it is in Christ we have forgiveness.
J.S. In Christ as having been slain; and would not that have a gathering effect? There was to be no settling down; all in our chapter is preparatory to, and in view of moving on. They went out arrayed.
J.T. They go out five in a rank; that is to say, they are learning the idea of moving together.
T.H. Why is the lamb kept from the tenth to the fourteenth day?
J.T. It is a slain Christ that is before us here. The lamb was four days in the house, and so would have become endeared to the family. The family
{27}
would see typically, the perfections of Christ in the lamb, and so would come to love the one who was to be sacrificed. This enters, therefore, into the Lord's supper beautifully, for it was instituted at the passover supper.
J.S. So that affection for Christ would bring you into it.
J.T. That is what is presented. The demonstration of the plagues would have a formative effect in Israel, because they came in for special protection in Goshen. Each plague would impress them with the care of Jehovah for them and increase their affection for Him; so when the lamb was brought into the house, it became an object of interest to all there. Jehovah, of course, is invisible, but the lamb brought into the house is, typically, what you can see and handle. As John says, "That which we contemplated, and our hands handled", (@1 John 1:1). The idea is that the Person becomes endeared to you by coming into close touch with you.
W.B-w. Do you mean that the young believer understands Christ risen, as a whole Christ?
J.T. That is a later experience entered into at the other side of the Red Sea. This is the death of Christ for us; the Red Sea is the death and resurrection of Christ, and so the enemies are destroyed. It is not our resurrection, however, but His. The passage of the Jordan is typical of our resurrection with Him.
J.S. What is presented, therefore, in the passover and the Red Sea is to the end that we should know Jesus as our Saviour on the one hand, and on the other, the complete overthrow of the world as we move out of it.
J.T. They synchronise. You are moving out after an Object and the world goes down in your faith as you are moving out, and loses power over your soul.
{28}
W.G.T. Does this, primarily, refer to the household more than to the individual?
J.T. It refers to the household; a lamb for a house, not for a person. The omer of manna is for a person.
W.B-w. The bones being mentioned might involve preaching of the resurrection, although the young believer might not apprehend it.
J.T. There could be no effective preaching without resurrection. The resurrection of Christ is the backbone of the preaching. You must bring that in. You cannot have clearance and victory over the enemy without resurrection.
J.S. There is neither singing nor preaching without resurrection.
J.T. There is no spiritual buoyancy at all without resurrection.
W.B-w. A young believer might not apprehend it.
J.T. That is right, but normally he has a conception of Christ in the passover. I think it is most touching that the lamb was in the house four days; it means that I become attached to Christ to some extent; then that Person had to die, which touches my feelings and affections. In appropriating Christ thus as food, I add the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
A.J.D. An appreciation of Christ would help us to apprehend the overthrow of the world.
J.T. Well, you go on to that. The overthrow of the world is in the Red Sea. That is where Pharaoh's hosts went down, and Israel saw them dead on the shore. You see the break-up of the world in that way. It is in apprehending Christ risen that you have victory.
W.G.T. Only the first-born is slain. I suppose that is the best the world has.
J.T. That was the last plague, and it caused
{29}
Pharaoh to loosen his hold; but his pursuit of Israel proved his unchanged malignity, and hence his final overthrow. All this affords most valuable instruction for us.
A.N.W. Would you say a little more about the passover and the Supper?
J.T. You get it clearly established in Matthew and Mark because the whole idea goes through into the church. "Take, eat: this is my body", (@Matthew 26:26). It means that I am to build up a constitution for the assembly.
A.F.M. You arrive at the "one body" through His body.
J.T. That is it. "We, being many, are one body", (@Romans 12:5). This is represented in the loaf at the Lord's supper.
B.T.F. You have the lamb killed, the blood shed, and the roasting by fire before you eat it: how would those figures apply?
J.T. The killing and blood-shedding is penal, the penalty attached to man. Blood-shedding is the life given up, the penalty for sin, but I think the fire applied after that is excess, and no doubt alludes to the forsaking of God. The primary judgment of God was: "In the day that thou eatest of it thou shalt certainly die", (@Genesis 2:17); but we learn later that death for the unbeliever implies eternal separation from God in the lake of fire. And, corresponding with this, I believe the roasting with fire here would allude to the excess of judgment that Christ underwent.
B.T.F. Would you say a word about the eating of it? Would fire make the lamb ready so that it could be eaten?
J.T. Yes, it makes it food. It was not to be eaten raw or boiled with water. It is to keep the excess judgment by fire before us. Roast with fire is the severest process that you can get, and that is
{30}
to be kept before us. It is figurative of the judgment of God, endured by Christ.
W.G.T. It is more severe than boiling?
J.T. Boiling is indirect action of fire, but roasting is the direct and severest action of it.
A.A.T. Should these thoughts be in our mind at the Supper?
J.T. In a preliminary way as in @1 Corinthians 5. The Lord's supper belongs to the wilderness. In 1 Corinthians the passover is separated from it. Keeping the feast of unleavened bread, is the moral process that we go through every day of the week whereas, the Supper is partaken on the first day of the week. It is as keeping the feast of unleavened bread that we are fit for the Lord's supper.
C.A.M. Matthew and Mark emphasise the fire feature. Would that be in accord with their way of emphasising the passover?
J.T. No doubt. Neither John nor Luke gives you the forsaking. John and Luke would be an antitype of the boiling, so at the Lord's supper it is not the forsaking or the judgment side that is before us, as it is during the week, as already said, but what is before us when we come together in assembly on the Lord's day is the Supper as a memorial. I think it is more the boiling character of Christ's death. It is Christ as having gone into death for us because He loved us. All you need in regard to love is adequate testimony to it, but if you are in the enjoyment of love you do not need any testimony at all. If a person loves me, and I am conscious of it, I do not need to look for any testimony. The love itself is enough.
A.L. So it is not a commandment now to eat the passover, but more an exhortation.
J.T. "Let us celebrate the feast ... with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth", (@1 Corinthians 5: 8). Let us do it. It is not any less than a command. Of
{31}
course, the whole of 1 Corinthians is a command, and not optional.
C.A.M. The Lord's supper in 1 Corinthians is according to Luke's presentation of it. Do you think it would help us if we get that viewpoint -- that the judgment side hardly comes into the first day of the week?
J.T. I think it is more the boiling feature, as we said. Death is there, of course; the Lord speaks of laying down His life for His friends; a friend does not want more than that. We do not want, of course, to make little of anything that the Lord has endured, but it is not pleasing to Him for us to be casting about for evidence of His love when we are enjoying it; and eternity, for us, will be the enjoying of His love!
A.F.M. Would Adam's sleep be illustrative of His laying down His life for us?
J.T. There was no penalty attached to that; nor does sleep suggest any suffering. It is called a "deep sleep", (@Genesis 2:6). There was no boiling in Egypt. It is the judgment of God we are dealing with here. The Lord's supper develops out of this, and it is not so much the judgment as His love. We are supposed to know His love if we come together to remember Him.
A.R.S. Where does it speak of the boiling?
J.T. In the consecration of the priests; (@Leviticus 8:31). As we come into the priestly family, we understand that feature of the offerings.
A.A.T. Eating the lamb roast with fire, is that something we partake of during the week, or on the Lord's day?
J.T. It is continuous. As having to do with the world, we need the feast of unleavened bread (@1 Corinthians 5:8); whereas, the Lord's supper is @1 Corinthians 11, where there is nothing said about His entering into judgment. The Lord, in instituting the Supper said,
{32}
"This is my body which is given for you"; and, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you", (@Luke 22:19,20). Neither Luke nor John have the forsaking. It is Luke that gives us the memorial. Matthew and Mark do not separate the Lord's supper from the passover.
A.R.S. Is that why we do not read @Psalm 22 these late years at the morning meeting? It used to be much read.
J.T. One does not want to minimise the sufferings of Christ. Nor would one who loves Him do so in the least degree, or put them in the background, but we are dealing with the Lord's supper which presents the love of Christ, and all that we need is adequate testimony to that love. If we are in the enjoyment of it, we do not need any testimony. The thing itself is testimony. One who knows it says: "He hath brought me to the house of wine, And his banner over me is love". (@Song of Songs 2:4) Love is the greatest thing of all and is its own testimony.
A.R.S. Where would you use the suffering side of @Psalm 22 now?
J.T. Well, I would use it in the gospel, showing how, in His sufferings, the Lord bore the full weight of God's wrath on account of human guilt. You could not well present the subject without that Psalm, but it is remarkable how little you get about the forsaking in the New Testament. You do not get it alluded to once, except by the Lord Himself on the cross. (Far be it from me that I should belittle the awfulness of the sufferings our Lord endured in the forsaking of God; I am speaking only of how the truth is presented. ) I believe fire emphasises the judgment of God. As going out of the world, I accept the awful judgment of God on sin and on me as a sinner, as seen in Christ's suffering. The eating of this food
{33}
builds me up in relation to the sufferings of Christ because of human guilt.
A.J.D. Does this thought bring in the bitter herbs?
J.T. Yes. I feel it is my own judgment that Christ bore.
B.T.F. Where does atonement come in? In chapter 12 you have the blood, and God says, "When I see the blood, I will pass over you".
J.T. Atonement is in the shed blood of Christ. The roasting with fire alludes to the fullness of the judgment. You get it enlarged on in @Leviticus 16 where the blood of the sin offering is taken inside the veil, and the bullock and goat are burned outside the camp. That is fully seen in the forsaking of God.
W.B-w. The roast lamb was eaten in one night. The unleavened bread was eaten during seven days.
J.T. "That night" is a condensed idea with which you begin: "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed", (@1 Corinthians 5:7). That is one thought; but it is killed between the two evenings. The first evening would be somewhat brighter than the second; in the second you are going into the darkness of the night. God is dealing with sin, so that it is eaten in the night. None of it was carried over till the morning; what remained was burned with fire, emphasising the great idea of our entering into the judgment of God. It is a compressed thought. The difficulty is that we do not appropriate Christ as seen in the type here; on this account we have generally but a shallow estimate of what sin is to God. The food in the passover builds up a constitution in us enabling us to judge sin as before Him.
A.J.D. This might represent the three hours of darkness?
J.T. It all enters into the type; but then the "seven days" would allude to the whole period of the believer's experience here. Corinthians deals with it in that way: "Let us celebrate the
{34}
feast", (@1 Corinthians 5:8). We are never to cease while down here.
A.F.M. For us the passover is one event, not to be repeated.
J.T. Yes; "Our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed".
J.E.H. Why the beginning of months? "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months".
J.T. I think the allusion is to spiritual history. Israel were beginning their history properly in eating the passover. For us it is the apprehension of Christ as having "died for our sins, according to the scripture", (@1 Corinthians 15:3).
R.W.S. What about the head and legs and inwards? The passage reads: "Ye shall eat none of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roast with fire; its head with its legs and with its inwards".
J.T. I think it emphasises what we are saying, that it is a whole Christ; the head and legs and inwards representing intelligence, strength and inward feelings and affections -- all for God. All was devoted in death, as undergoing the judgment of God. It is Christ Himself, as manifested here on earth.
R.W.S. Do you use whole in reference to a complete thought?
J.T. Yes. To convey the complete thought of Christ, because very few have such a thought of Him, and so are defective in the assembly. They have not apprehended Christ in a complete way, and hence do not know the assembly as His body. The two ideas are there -- Christ and the assembly.
A.J.D. Does the thought of His Person underlie the expression, "the Lord Jesus", (@1 Corinthians 11: 23)?
J.T. It does; an affectionate reference, There is no subject more important for young believers than
{35}
this: how are we to go out of the world? We go out as sustained with this food.
W.G.T. It says, "And on the first day ye shall have a holy convocation, and on the seventh day a holy convocation", Are these convocations in view of holiness?
J.T. Evidently. It refers to a period -- seven days. The number seven is a remarkable one, being the highest prime single number. As governing time it suggests a complete period, and alludes to the whole life of a Christian, or to the whole dispensation. Thus the keeping of the feast of unleavened bread is continued till the Lord returns.
B.T.F. You were remarking earlier that the lamb was kept four days. Would those days represent an important factor; in the affections of the household being drawn out to the lamb?
J.T. I think so. The head and the legs and the inwards of the lamb would come under review in the four days; that is, Christ becomes endeared to us, as going into death. The woman in the house of Simon the leper was in keeping with what we are talking about. The house of Simon the leper would denote a place where sin had been, but where it is no longer; the idea of the leper is, however, attached to Simon. The Lord was in his house, and the woman anointed His head, as He was going into death; she valued His Head. It had come under her notice. He said, "She ... anointed my body" (@Matthew 14:8), showing that He Himself was before her in a full way. He was everything to her, and He was going into death for her. I believe she would understand what was involved in the passover. Eating this food builds up a constitution against sinning. The Lord said to the man in @John 5:14, "Sin no more"; and to the man in @John 8:11, "Go, and sin no more". As we eat this food we do not allow the activity of sin in us.
{36}
A.F.M. What we have been speaking about is so contrary to what obtains in Christendom! A person gets forgiveness and connects himself with some religious system that holds him to this world; whereas, we are forgiven in order to leave the world.
J.T. This necessarily involves suffering, but "he that has suffered in the flesh has done with sin, no longer to live the rest of his time in the flesh to men's lusts, but to God's will", (@1 Peter 4:1,2).
W.G.T. Leaven is a corrupting principle, which is always ready to work in us.
J.T. Hence the unleavened bread is of great help to us since it brings the flesh down. You will find here that Israel were forced to eat unleavened cakes, because they could not wait to put leaven in the dough. God helped them thus to keep the feast.
C.A.M. What despicable hearts we have! It was on the occasion of this feast the disciples were striving as to which should be greatest (see @Luke 22:24).
H.S.D. What about the manner in which they ate it? It says, "And thus shall ye eat it: your loins shall be girded, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste; it is Jehovah's passover".
J.T. It indicated that they were about to take a journey. The average Christian today never thinks of that -- having the loins girded, sandals on the feet, and a staff in hand; whereas, as soon as one is converted that should be the attitude, as going out of the world. You are not going to live where He is not. Like Ruth, you say, "Whither thou goest I will go ... where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried", (@Ruth 1:16).
A.R. The wilderness is not your objective either. Moses said to his father-in-law, "We are journeying to the place of which Jehovah said, I will give it unto
{37}
you: come with us, and we will do thee good", (@Numbers 10:29).
J.T. The idea of journeying characterises the wilderness, and we enter Canaan purely by attraction.
R.D.G. You were referring to the idea of the evening being continuous. Do you mean that our feelings become more intense?
J.T. They do. "The two evenings" are interpreted to mean the dusk and then the dark. It is the end of the day; we reach the density of night gradually. The lamb was killed "between the two evenings", and was to be eaten under the density of night outside, which spoke of the judgment of God, because the judgment was going on all around them in Egypt, and would have entered their houses were it not for the blood.
R.D.G. Is it right to expect that at no time during the week would our feelings be so intense as when partaking of the Supper?
J.T. That is right, but you do not eat the Supper in the darkness of night, but in the day. It belongs to the first day of the week.
A.N.W. So that the passover, for us, fits into @1 Corinthians 5, not into chapter 11.
A.R.S. Is that the reason why we do not break bread at night? I have heard it advanced that we ought to break bread in the evening because the Supper was instituted at night.
J.T. Luke is very accurate as to order; instead of evening, he says hour (see chapter 22:14). This covers current custom among the saints.
W.B-w. The believer ought to be glad to leave a sphere where judgment applies, and comes into a sphere which is free of judgment.
J.T. It is very comforting that God helps us to leave the world. He helped Lot; indeed, the angels
{38}
urged him out, which emphasises the grace of God. With a company of Christians walking in the will of God and gathered together under the direction of the Lord, you have an atmosphere in which heaven is complacent! It is really another world; the world outside is under judgment; whereas, the assembly is entirely clear of it, having passed "out of death into life", (@John 5:24)
{39}
THE MANNA AND THE PASSOVER
@Exodus 16:13 - 36; @Leviticus 24:5 - 9
J.T. It is to be observed that the manna was peculiarly for the wilderness, and that one food does not set aside another. The passover continues; it was eaten in Egypt, in the wilderness, and in the land, but the manna was not eaten in Egypt nor in the land -- it belonged expressly to the wilderness.
A.F.M. Would you tell us what the wilderness is?
J.T. The wilderness is what the world has become to the believer as delivered out of it morally.
A.F.M. We do not take a physical journey, as the Israelites did, but a moral one.
J.T. That is the idea. We are delivered, in a moral sense, out of the world; it has changed its character for us. The world of man's lust and glory is now a barren scene through which we pass.
A.P. Do we need to have the Spirit in order that the world may become a wilderness to us?
J.T. The Spirit is given consequent on redemption which latter is seen in the passover lamb and in the passage of the Red Sea. The Holy Spirit is given typically in chapter 17. He sustains us in the position into which the light of the gospel introduces us.
A.P. The Lord was anointed before He went into the wilderness, and then He "was led by the Spirit in the wilderness forty days, tempted of the devil", (@Luke 4:1). Would that have a bearing on the people of God as anointed in the wilderness?
J.T. The Lord entered the wilderness on Deuteronomic ground, not on that of Exodus. He quoted Deuteronomy in repelling Satan.
A.P. Was the wilderness actually a wilderness to them before they received the Spirit, typically?
J.T. It was. It is called the wilderness from the
{40}
outset but it is noticeable that here they *turned toward it*: "And it came to pass, when Aaron spoke to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, that they turned toward the wilderness", (@Exodus 16:10). That indicated an acceptance of it. Hitherto they would desire to go back into Egypt, but now they are definitely turned toward the wilderness.
A.F.M. They get encouragement in the appearing of the glory of the Lord.
J.T. Yes. Looking in the wilderness direction you get a view of the glory. It is brought about by Aaron's word to them, and is a definite point reached -- they see the glory. It is well worth being set for the wilderness if the glory appears there.
A.J.D. Consequent upon that is the fact that God led them and sustained them in it.
J.T. That is the connection here. He had said, "I will rain bread from heaven for you" (@Exodus 16:4); but Aaron's word seems to have touched them in order that such a provision should be valued, for they turned toward the wilderness and got the actual appearance of the glory. Then we get the initiatory giving of the manna: "In the morning the dew lay round the camp. And when the dew that lay round it was gone up, behold, on the face of the wilderness there was something fine, granular, fine as hoar-frost, on the ground".
T.A. You get the two things here: the daily manna, and the hidden manna. An omer full of manna was deposited before Jehovah.
J.T. I suppose we value the hidden manna in the measure in which we understand the daily manna. As having eaten of it daily you understand why it is laid up before Jehovah, and why the principle is carried into the New Testament, for we are given to eat of the "hidden manna",. (@Revelation 2:17).
T.A. Do you think that Christ will be treasured as the hidden Manna, throughout eternity by the saints?
{41}
J.T. That is what He was here, the reference in @Revelation 2 would indicate.
A.F.M. Does the wilderness suggest two things: that there is no *way*, and no *resource* there? Hence the provision would be in the pillar of cloud by day the pillar of fire by night, and the daily manna.
J.T. Exactly. They turned toward the wilderness, and then "on the face of the wilderness there was something fine, granular, fine as hoar-frost". You see the glory, but also this wonderful thing. It is well worth turning wilderness-wise to see the glory; then you see the *face* of it covered with bread from heaven.
A.R.S. You see the glory of the Lord in the wilderness, and you get food from heaven.
J.T. These are the two great features. So that while it is a foreign land through which we pass, in the manna there is that which belongs to our home. It is food from heaven. It is not indigenous to the wilderness.
W.B-w. What is the point in verses 6 and 7? It says, "In the evening, then shall ye know that Jehovah has brought you out from the land of Egypt; and in the morning, then shall ye see the glory of Jehovah".
J.T. The evening would remind you of the past experience; the morning is the glory, and that is what they saw as they turned toward the wilderness.
J.S. Turning toward the wilderness is like an act of faith on their part.
J.T. I think so. It points to the peculiar touch in Aaron's address.
J.S. They saw the glory of Jehovah and the face of the wilderness covered. Would that be evidence to us of divine presence and divine provision?
J.T. That is what I thought. Therefore, we are not lonely in the wilderness if we have the glory before us and the face of the wilderness is covered
{42}
with what belongs to heaven. While the place itself is strange, for us to go through is made possible by the glory and by the face of the wilderness being covered every morning by the manna.
A.J.D. In verse 12 it says, "Between the two evenings ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God". What is the distinction between flesh of the evening and bread of the morning?
J.T. The quails were to remind them of their unbelief. God would provide abundantly for them, even to satisfying their natural taste by the quails, which were similar to the fleshpots they had sat by in Egypt.
C.B. The manna is enough to sustain us in the wilderness if we gather it up.
J.T. Quite. But it must be gathered. I was thinking of the quails that they ate in the evening -- it is remarkable that God allows them the satisfaction of their natural appetite at this point. It illustrates His consideration of young believers; God is very considerate of them. Lusting for flesh brought judgment on Israel later, as seen in @Numbers 11:32,33) "And the people rose up all that day, and the whole night, and all the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered little gathered ten homers; and they spread them abroad for themselves round about the camp. The flesh was yet between their teeth, before it was chewed, when the wrath of Jehovah was kindled against the people, and Jehovah smote the people with a very great plague". In the instance before us, it did not bring judgment upon them, for God was acting in grace to encourage them. If you have learned that God is good, even in ministering to you according to your natural tastes as young believers, it is only to encourage you to go in for the food He has provided. He is not going to give you quails every evening.
{43}
W.B-w. "And ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God", (@Exodus 16:12). They would put confidence in Him as Jehovah.
J.T. That was the point to be reached. If we have confidence, we will accept the food that He supplies. Quails would not remind them of heaven but of Egypt. What a thing it was to be reminded of heaven every morning by the manna! It covered the face of the wilderness. And then we are told what it was like: "Fine, granular, fine as hoar-frost, on the ground". It was pleasing to the eye and could be viewed in detail.
T.A. What is the significance of its falling on the dew?
J.T. The dew would be the preparatory effect of God's grace. The goodness of God in supplying the quails would touch their hearts. If God has helped us in natural things our hearts should be touched. Dew is that which refreshes the earth. God would refresh us in some way so as to prepare us for this heavenly food.
B.T.F. Would you say that the quails represent earthly blessing? Are they figurative of spiritual blessing too?
J.T. They were God's creatures, of course; and God could command them as He commanded His creatures in the plagues of Egypt. He has rights in creation, and uses His creatures to express His sympathy and care for us. The quails were an *earthly* provision; but as accepted from God they convey the sense of grace and care which softens and refreshes one.
A.N.W. It says of them that they came *up* in contrast to the manna which came *down*.
Ques.. How is the face of the wilderness covered for us?
J.T. It is contained in that expression, "The life ... of Jesus", (@2 Corinthians. 4:10). The manna was on
{44}
every shrub and leaf of the wilderness. The manna enters into every legitimate circumstance in which we may be found down here. It is a question of how the Lord Himself acted in every human circumstance.
A.R.S. The manna had to be gathered early in the morning, not at night or whenever one felt inclined to gather it.
J.T. Showing that the believer is taught at the beginning of the wilderness that things are never optional in the kingdom of God.
A.F.M. You refer to the manna as being like the life of Jesus. The Israelites said, "What is it?" They did not know what it was; but *we* are not raising that question, are we?
J.T. No; we know what it is now. To them it was a very extraordinary thing; and no mere scientist can tell what it was either. For us it is a spiritual thing, outside of the natural man's range.
T.A. Would the gospels tell us what it is?
J.T. Yes. It is Christ here as presented in the gospels; but in everyday circumstances, not exactly in the exercise of His ministry.
A.R.S. When the Lord was on earth men could not discern Him. They saw in Him only the carpenter's son; we see in that life the Manna from heaven.
J.T. The life of Jesus is still unknown, save to faith. Man in the flesh cannot understand it. When the Lord raised the inquiry, "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" (@Matthew 16:13), nobody knew. It is the intelligent believer only who knows what the manna means.
A.F.M. They were to "go out and gather the daily *need* [the footnote renders it 'word' or 'thing'] on its day", (@Exodus 16: 4).
J.T. It is *rained* from heaven; that is plenty of it, but it has to be gathered. Each one has to gather it, as it says, "And the people shall go out and gather the daily need on its day". And then, "That I may
{45}
prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or not". One has to notice these words and go *out* and gather! The chapter should stir us up from lethargy. If we are to get this manna we have to be energetic, not only in getting up in the morning but in going out. Nature is negated by this. Then they were forbidden to keep it until the morning; if kept over it bred worms, except on the sixth day, when they were to gather twice as much. This subject of the manna brings in the idea of the sabbath. We need to be spiritual to understand that the sabbath is allied with this subject of manna; it is another apprehension of Christ. I must not allow the manna to deprive me of Him as the sabbath of God; I must rest in Him. So that, while there is energy in going out to gather, there is also rest in Christ, not for the flesh, but in a spiritual sense, as the Lord said, "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and I will give you rest", (@Matthew 11:28).
A.F.M. This should stir up an exercise with us as to whether we really feel the need of such food day by day. No doubt 'word' (footnote @Exodus 16:4) suggests Scripture to us as the daily word.
Ques. What does the manna being "rained" suggest?
J.T. Bountifulness -- there was plenty of it.
F.H.L. It was a matter of life and death for them.
J.T. They were not self-supporting, but were entirely shut up to God -- that is the lesson for us to learn; but then, *what* a God! When we get to the end of the wilderness and look back from Pisgah "over the surface of the waste" (@Numbers 21:20), we shall know what God has been to us. The omer of manna laid up in the ark is, typically, to remind us eternally of that.
W.B-w. According to verse 4 He proves them.
J.T. "That I may prove them, whether they will
{46}
walk in my law, or not". He had not formulated the law as yet but was preparing them for it.
T.A. Do you mean preparing us for the covenant?
J.T. Preparing the *young believer* subjectively. One feature of this chapter is to show that the young believer cannot regard the things of God as optional. His position is that of having come into the kingdom of God. Moses represents the Lord as in Romans and Corinthians. They "believed in Jehovah, and in Moses his bondman", (@Exodus 14:31).
J.S. Not the principles of Egypt but God's law was to prevail in the wilderness.
B.T.F. The exercising of your own will would not be in the spirit of the manna. The manna represents Christ as food, as having come to do the Father's will.
J.T. Quite. It is as in the path of the will of God that this kind of food comes to support us. Manna is said to be angels¬ food; they do the will of God in heaven. "Thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth", (@Matthew 6:10). Every creature must be sustained, for none are self-sustaining; divine Persons only possess that qualification. Christ as doing the will of God here becomes manna for us.
A.P. Do you mean that no creature will be self-sustaining even eternally?
J.T. No creature could be self-sustaining however great that creature may be.
A.R. The Lord says, "I have food to eat which ye do not know". "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me", (@John 4:32,34).
J.T. That is akin to what we are considering, as showing how He was sustained.
A.N.W. Did the Lord have the manna in mind when He said to Satan, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God", (@Luke 4:4)?
J.T. He was Himself the Manna, but that would lead up to the thought. Manna is what Christ Himself was as here doing the will of God -- so that
{47}
the wilderness is covered with it. The word 'hoar' would mean that it was visible in purity.
A.F.M. You have spoken of Christ as our Sabbath. How would you apply the sixth day, on which day they gathered twice as much?
J.T. It would involve increased spiritual energy, I think; which would lead to desire for the sabbath. This is the first mention of the sabbath after @Genesis 2, and henceforth it has a great place in Scripture.
J.S. Does the sixth day here refer to excessive energy?
J.T. Six goes beyond human weakness (five). This passage helps us as to the meaning of the numeral -- that there is a double energy on this day. You find it, as a principle, running through Scripture. But the sabbath is not energy, but rest. Many of us make a show in activity, but in such a case Christ is not before us that we can rest in Him. Rest has an equalising effect -- all the members of the body renewing their living energy, which promotes regular growth.
T.A. Do we not have a sense in our souls on the Lord's day as identified with the Lord's supper, of being out of the wilderness?
J.T. The Lord's day with its privileges enjoyed leads us out of the wilderness. The Lord's supper is partaken in the wilderness; through it we are led into the land. As it says, "We who have believed enter into the rest", (@Hebrews 4:3).
A.N.W. Apparently there was more done on the sixth day in @Genesis 1 than on the other days.
J.T. I think that is right. The work of the sixth day was the greatest, for it includes the creation of man. You will find the idea of the sabbath running through the types: @Leviticus 23, which treats of the feasts of Jehovah, begins with a sabbath in the mind of God, which He intended to reach, So we read:
{48}
"There remains then a sabbatism to the people of God", (@Hebrews 4:9).
A.P. There is the idea of completion in it; the work of creation was finished in six days.
J.T. @Exodus 31:17 says, "In six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed".
H.S.D. Would you say a word about the man gathering not only for himself but for his tent? He is an energetic man.
J.T. It says, "This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded: Gather of it every man according to what he can eat, an omer a poll, according to the number of your persons: ye shall take every man for those that are in his tent". That is a feature of household responsibility, corresponding with the passover; only here it is "an omer a poll" -- each one in the family had the same measure. Uniform capacity is contemplated, which lays the basis for general conformity to Christ -- "The measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", (@Ephesians 4:13).
F.H.L. Gathering the manna was, clearly, not optional.
J.T. There is no other food for us as in the wilderness. As soon as we accept this we shall be exercised about getting it.
A.R. The manna had various characteristics: It was "fine, granular", and then later on it says that it was "like coriander-seed, white; and the taste of it was like cake with honey". It was unique, and it fed them for forty years. These features stand out, do they not?
J.T. They do; the fineness and granular character of it point to the infinite perfection of detail in the life of Jesus. And it had the taste of cake with honey. This points to the substantial character and sweetness of Christ's life as food for us. After some period of Israel's use of it the taste is said to be different.
{49}
A.F.M. "The taste of it was as the taste of oil cakes", or 'fresh oil' (@Numbers 11:8 and footnote).
J.T. This is said after the record of how they ground it in hand-mills and made cakes of it. It should not lose its sweetness with us. They sought to alter it, to make it more palatable to the natural taste whereas, typically, it is a spiritual thing. In this sense, from the description given in our chapter, it is all that could be desired.
A.F.M. It could not be improved upon.
A.J.D. In @Numbers 21:5 they say, "Our soul loathes this light bread".
J.T. Which shows how important it is to maintain the right spiritual taste, or we shall turn to other things.
B.T.F. Would you say that the manna would meet every spiritual desire?
J.T. As we apprehend it to be Christ that is quite evident. In going through the gospels you see how you can live on it -- on the wonderful thoughts, affections, and other features of Christ seen in His daily life here. As apprehending Him in the adverse circumstances of His life here we understand what the manna is. "The old corn of the land" (@Joshua 5:11) is Christ as He now is in the congenial circumstances of heaven; but the manna is what He was in the adverse ones on earth.
A.F.M. So you would recommend us to read the gospels?
J.T. That is the thing to do if you are to get the manna.
J.S. We may read the gospels but if we have not left the world morally we cannot get the good of the manna. In Christendom they endeavour to connect Christ with the world, but you cannot do that. There was no manna in Egypt.
J.T. No. Neither was there a smaller measure than an omer for a child, because God has
{50}
brought Christ into this world, and He is the standard; there is no other standard for man. If I have children, that is the standard for them. Every child in the house is to be regarded as a potential man.
A.P. Yes. And so we should not keep them dwarfed, but keep the idea of a man before them.
A.J.D. Does that dispense with the exercise of having meetings for children?
J.T. No; there are other scriptures that cover that; you keep Christ as the standard for men before them. As it says, "A *man* has been born into the world", (@John 16:21).
A.P. You call attention to the little children in @1 John 2:20 as having an "unction from the holy one".
J.T. That is potential; that verse goes on to say, "Ye know all things". It is not that they knew literally, but in principle. We are enjoined to be as new born babes in regard to our desire but not in regard to our growth. Normally a child has a regular appetite for food.
A.P.T. The life of Jesus should be brought before our young people. Tell them about Jesus here, and so inculcate that life into their moral fibre.
J.T. So that before He is presented in testimony properly, He is thirty. That is the divine thought. The Holy Spirit comes down on Him then, not that He was not seen before in relation to God in sonship, but it is a question of what God would present to men. What there was from the Lord's conception and birth until He was thirty, who can say? Volumes could not contain what that life was for God! It is infinitely beyond us. But it underlies what God presents to men in Christ as man: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", (@Matthew 3:17). That is the way He is introduced; He is the true omer of manna, as God's portion for every man.
{51}
W.B-w. Whether a child is able to appropriate the whole omer or not, is not the point; no less a measure will do.
J.T. That is the idea, you present the full thought.
W.B-w. It is a whole omer for every child in the household.
J.T. And if he does not eat it, it simply is not there. There was no lack, but there was nothing left over. That is the principle of it. "He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little wanted nothing". There was plenty on the ground, but of *what was gathered* there was nothing beyond the eating capacity of those who gathered. This can be quite understood spiritually.
Ques.. What is the difference between the bread here and the bread in @John 6?
J.T. The bread in @John 6 is for eternal life; that to say, it is Christ as having come down from heaven and having died -- His flesh as separated from His blood. It is a dead Christ in @John 6. The bread here is Christ as He was living on earth. Therefore it is a question of your seeing how He would move and act in any circumstance in which you are.
A.N.W. So if you have not partaken of the passover, you cannot feed on the manna. You cannot value the life of Jesus if you do not appropriate His death.
J.T. The passover necessarily precedes the manna. It is not to support man as in the flesh.
A.P. Do we not get both the passover and the manna in @John 6:53? "Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves"; I thought that referred to the passover, but then further on it says, "He also who eats me shall live also on account of me" (verse 57).
J.T. I think not. You do not get the manna, except by way of contrast, in @John 6. That chapter
{52}
has eternal life in view. You enter Canaan, the land to which eternal life belongs, on the line of @John 6.
W.G.T. Why does the Lord use the word "true bread" in @John 6:32?
J.T. It is contrast with the manna.
J.S. "Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and died", @John 6:49.
J.T. They ate and died, but the Lord goes on to say, "This is the bread that comes down out of heaven, that one may eat of it and *not* die" (verse 50). That is what the Lord had in mind.
T.A. Is eating a continuous thing?
J.T. There are two tenses used, past and present: "Unless ye *shall have eaten* the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves. *He that eats* my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal, and I will raise him up at the last day", (@John 6:53,54). There has first to be definite appropriation; then the eating is continued and so is characteristic, one thus characterised has eternal life.
A.R. "And it came to pass on the sixth day, that they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one; and all the princes of the assembly came and told Moses. And he said to them, This is what Jehovah has said: To-morrow is the rest, the holy sabbath, of Jehovah".
J.T. The princes who informed Moses are persons of authority. This confirms what we have been saying -- that there was the excessive energy on the sixth day that led on to the sabbath. The passage goes on to say, "And Moses said, Eat it today; for today is sabbath to Jehovah; today ye shall not find it in the field". Now you come to the sabbath actually: Moses is speaking on the seventh day, "To-day is Sabbath"; that is to say, the chapter brings us on to the actual, positive thing -- what Christ is as our Sabbath.
{53}
A.P. In verse 23 it says, "Bake what ye will bake". It is not exactly the omer, and seems to be optional.
J.T. Well, it is optional, but it was all based on what they had. It would allude to what they gathered -- two omers for a person to be utilised as they thought best, which I think is recognition of our spiritual intelligence and liberty. You are prepared for the Sabbath -- you have your mind on it, and there is plenty of latitude. You have arrived at rest in Christ.
W.B-w. What about those who did not respect it?
J.T. They were exposed; the flesh, as allowed, will always disregard the authority and order of God. This is seen also in verse 20.
A.J.D. What would be the features of those who are in the gain of the sabbath?
J.T. They are restful.
J.S. They would enjoy the accumulative results of the six days, spiritually. They would enjoy Christ, as having reached, in this way, the holy sabbath of Jehovah.
J T. Yes, all the cooking and all the baking has been done so that on the sabbath there is nothing to do, you are free to enter into what God has in Christ for you -- free to keep your sabbath.
A.R. What about @Leviticus 24?
J.T. There it is another kind of food. The shewbread was a characteristic food of the priests. It is not Christ as He was here in adverse circumstances, but administratively. The twelve loaves denote food for those in administrative service, the priests. It is not now something on the face of the wilderness but inside the tabernacle -- "a bread of remembrance" laid in two rows, with frankincense on them, "upon the pure table before Jehovah". Of
{54}
course, the priests had other food, as the earlier part of Leviticus shows.
A.F.M. Do not the twelve loaves illustrate the twelve tribes?
J.T. They represent the principle of administration; first seen properly in Christ, and then carried out in the twelve apostles, and later to be seen in the twelve tribes of Israel, all culminating in the heavenly city. What is important, I think, is the means of manipulation in the number. How it is under God's hand so as to be manipulated according to His wisdom. In Exodus it is the "bread of the presence" (footnote, chapter 25:30), the number of loaves is unmentioned; there it is the thing as a whole on the table before Jehovah. In connection with it were certain golden vessels, the pure table being thus furnished.
J.S. Here there are two rows of six each.
J.T. You can divide twelve by twelve, six, four, three, or two. It is the most divisible of the numbers up to itself, and that means, I think, that God has those represented in it under His hand. The loaves were before Jehovah, and the frankincense was upon each row. They are said to be "a bread of remembrance, an offering by fire to Jehovah".
W.B-w. "Fine wheaten flour" -- that is something different from the manna; it is like the meat offering.
J.T. It is not now a question of what Christ was externally in the wilderness, but the *kind* of man He was in His inner nature. The number of loaves and the fact that baking had taken place indicate that the saints are in view. The priests feed on what is seen here as an offering by fire to God. They are identified with and feed on Christ as seen in holy administrative order in the saints.
A.J.D. It is the evidence of life under God's eye.
{55}
J.T. I think so. It is the kind of humanity evidenced in Christ and seen in the saints in the power of the Spirit now.
A.N.W. Your thought is that this food is for the constitution of the priests manward rather than Godward?
J.T. The number twelve would imply that administrative service is contemplated; but God has His part in the bread, for it is said to be an offering to Him.
J.S. What would the measure two tenths set forth?
J.T. I suppose it is the thought of responsibility carried on in testimony. All is according to divine requirement, as is seen also in the two rows of cakes. They were to be arranged by Aaron on each sabbath. The restfulness of the day would enhance the service. There is suggested a restful entering into the divine administrative thoughts effective in Christ and in the saints. The responsibility of providing the loaves seems to be with Moses, although Aaron arranged them before Jehovah. Christ Himself is therefore before us as Lord and Priest; but what is done is "on the part of the children of Israel". The offering is from their side. But the cakes, as laid before Jehovah during the whole week, become the food of Aaron and his sons. The passage says, "They shall eat it in a holy place; for it is most holy unto him of Jehovah's offering by fire". The commandment as to the twelve loaves is said to be "an everlasting statute", which shows that this service is among the great fixed requirements of God.
A.J.D. Why is it put as "a bread of remembrance"?
J.T. I suppose it would refer to what Christ was here, kept up in the economy of Christianity, and later in Israel. The 'bread of the presence' in Exodus -- the number of cakes not being given -- would
{56}
point to Christ Himself; here the saints are in view as carrying on what was seen in Him.
W.B-w. You get also the names of the twelve tribes on the shoulders of the high priest and on the breastplate. What is the difference?
J.T. It is a cognate idea. Christ sustains us before God in that way; and then the external position of the tribes corresponds with their names on the breastplate. Here the twelve cakes represent the saints, but as a memorial of Christ before God.
T.A. This food was to be eaten by the priests in the holy place.
J.T. It is in the assembly; the everyday experience of the believer is not contemplated.
A.P. Is the thought of "the twelve" representative of food in @John 6? The chapter begins with the Lord administering food, and closes with the twelve disciples.
J.T. That is good. There you get almost the only formal recognition of the twelve in John's gospel. Earlier in the chapter twelve baskets of fragments are mentioned. The appreciation of Christ by the disciples is indicated by Peter's reply to His inquiry. The continuation of the Lord's administrative service would be seen in them, and thus there is a link in @John 11 with the passage before us. The association of the idea of twelve in the gospels, with the feeding of the multitudes has an instructive bearing on the subject before us.
{57}
CLEAN AND UNCLEAN ANIMALS
@Leviticus 11:1 - 40
J.T. It will be readily observed that chapter 11 refers to what may or may not be eaten in our ordinary circumstances; whereas, the section in chapter 24 contemplates the holy place, and the food eaten there is prescribed. Chapter 11 is addressed to all Israel; that is to say, the people of God viewed in their ordinary circumstances; chapter 24 contemplates the same people, but in the position of priests whose privilege it is to serve in the tabernacle.
H.S.D. Is that why so much is said in chapter 11 about what may *not* be eaten?
J.T. Yes; such instructions would have no force with those serving in the tabernacle, for the unclean things would not be there. Chapter 11 contemplates persons typified by the creatures named therein; they would be found promiscuously in our daily vocations, hence we are called upon to discriminate in our intercourse with people so as to avoid association with such as are unclean amongst them.
A.F.M. In this chapter Jehovah addressed Moses *and* Aaron. Generally He spoke to Moses only; in this instance He connects Aaron with him. Would it have in view our spiritual judgment as a result of getting these directions from the priestly side?
J.T. Yes. Where they are both spoken to, it is typically, a question of the authority of the Lord Jesus over us, and of His priesthood. The need for discrimination with us is in view, the need of having our "senses exercised for distinguishing both good and evil", (@Hebrews 5:14).
B.T.F. The eating spoken of here was for the sustaining of their bodies.
{58}
J.T. That is the thought in eating; we eat for sustenance, not merely for pleasure.
B.T.F. The thought would be that what we eat forms us.
J.T. I think so; hence we must not eat anything unclean. It resolves itself into the manner of our relations with persons whom we meet promiscuously in the world. We have to see whether they chew the cud and divide the hoof; that is to say, whether they not only hear the word of God and believe it, but *assimilate* it, and then whether their walk is according to it. We have to seek out such people, and not to associate in any receptive way with others.
A.P. Are you applying the four classes of animals in @Leviticus 11 to persons?
J.T. I think they are types of persons. You have the land animals, the fish, the fowl, and the creeping things. These are the four heads under which we may consider this subject.
A.N.W. I suppose the animals in the sheet before Peter, represented persons.
J.T. Clearly so, it was Cornelius and those with him. Peter was to regard them as clean.
A.J.D. Would the creatures in our chapter be representative of the classes of people with which we have to do?
J.T. Yes. God has, in the creation, furnished a language whereby He can address us, and in these typical books He uses these symbols to convey to us what is in His mind. What we may learn here is that in our everyday vocations we meet with all sorts of people, and must form a judgment as to them, for we are not to fall in with them indiscriminately and fraternise with them as if there were no difference, as if God had put no difference between His people and those who are not His people -- between the clean and the unclean.
J.E.H. How can we tell whether some of those
{59}
whom we meet in our daily callings might not be the Lord's people?
J.T. It is a question of whether they chew the cud and divide the hoof -- whether, as professedly believing the word of God, they assimilate it.
J.E.H. In some cases, the animals here spoken of divide the hoof but they do not chew the cud.
J.T. When you come to the fish, the fowl, and the creeping things, the idea of chewing the cud and dividing the hoof is necessarily dropped. We have to begin with the idea that no one can be clean save as he, according to the figure, chews the cud and divides hoof.
A.R.S. What does dividing the hoof stand for?
J.T. Discrimination in walk. We are called upon to follow in Jesus¬ steps, which some undertake to do without chewing the cud. Peter helps as to this, he says, "As newborn babes desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word, that by it ye may grow up to salvation"; then he says, "For Christ also hath suffered for you, leaving you a model that ye should follow in his steps", (@1 Peter 2:2,21). It is not simply to follow His way in a general sense, but you have to pick out the *steps*.
A.F.M. An animal that divides the hoof makes a distinct mark as it walks on the earth; whereas, an animal with paws makes little or no impression as it moves about.
J.T. When you apply that distinction spiritually, it has great significance: A Christian, properly speaking, does not go everywhere!
A.P. Would you say that the children of the elect lady who were found *walking* in truth (@2 John 1:1) could be considered as dividing the hoof?
J.T. Exactly.
A.N.W. Peter in @Acts 10 seems to have failed in being too discriminating. He was hesitant to recognise the work of God among the Gentiles, and was
{60}
told not to make common what God had cleansed. We are not careful enough sometimes to discriminate as to those that are clean.
J.T. In the palace of the high priest, Peter was not so careful; he sat down and warmed himself with the enemies of the Lord, and denied Him there.
W.B-w. In chapter 10:10, it says, "That ye may put difference between the holy and the unholy, and between unclean and clean". Is that the principle on which this chapter is developed?
J.T. The idea of the priesthood necessarily underlies all this instruction.
W.B-w. Why does it follow the death of Nadab and Abihu?
J.T. It comes in here after the general instruction to the priests. Chapters 1 to 10, in furnishing instruction as to the offerings, culminate in priesthood. The priests are seen as under a charge: being responsible for the law. In drawing near to God with our offerings we merge into priesthood, and so are competent to make a difference between the unclean and the clean. The priesthood broke down (chapter 10), but this did not set aside the need for discrimination; so that in chapter 11 all the people are viewed as responsible for it.
W.B-w. Where would Eleazar and Ithamar come in?
J.T. The instruction here is to Moses and Aaron. Aaron's sons are not mentioned; the priesthood had failed in them. Therefore; if saints viewed in that capacity fail so seriously, it is all the more urgent that the saints *as a whole* should see to it that the word of God is assimilated by them. It has first to be assimilated, and then there must needs be a walk in correspondence with it.
A.F.M. The question might be raised with regard to Nadab and Abihu, as to their being influenced by natural things such as wine or strong drink when in
{61}
the tent of meeting. Their senses were not regulated by what was spiritual, hence the "strange fire" (chapter 10:2).
J.T. Quite so. It should serve as a warning to us.
A.L. "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated", (@2 Corinthians 6:17). Would that correspond with the cloven hoof?
J.T. It would indeed. @Psalm 1 helps as to that. The land animals point to persons in distinction or prominence; the fish to swarms of men in their natural element, as in the large cities in which we dwell. The fowl would represent men viewed with ability to be independent, whether in the way of good or evil. An unclean bird would prefigure a person who has much wealth or a liberal education by means of which he soars above the heads of others, in pride and independence of God. The *clean* cattle are not designated; the unclean only are named, for the reason that we are so apt to be drawn away by persons of distinction, irrespective of their condition. The names of those unclean are therefore given, in order that we may discern them. The same remarks apply to the fowl: Those mentioned are not only unclean, but "an abomination shall they be".
A.P. What would the crawling things mean?
J.T. Well, there is more said about these than the other classes named; they would apply to persons who live on the earth, but have no power to rise above it, and are on this account especially abominable. "Every winged crawling thing that goeth upon all four shall be an abomination unto you"; that is, it represents one grovelling on the earth. Then the passage goes on to say, "Yet these shall ye eat of every winged crawling thing that goeth upon all four: those which have legs above their feet with which to leap upon the earth". These typify Christians who can rise above the earth, who have the power by the Spirit, like the man who had
{62}
been lame (@Acts 3), to walk and leap and praise God.
B.T.F. What would be the instruction here in regard to the earth; could it be viewed as evil?
J.T. Our calling is heavenly, and hence to grovel on the earth makes us unclean. The exhortation is: "Have your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth", (@Colossians 3:2). James, in speaking of our having bitter emulation and strife in our hearts, says "This is not the wisdom which comes down from above, but *earthly*, natural, devilish" (@James 3:15), which shows the significance of the earth in a moral sense. It is not the earth in the sense of that which produces vegetation, etc., but as the sphere in which men live and seek to enjoy themselves without God.
A.R. You were saying that @Psalm 1 furnishes an example of one who keeps himself from the defilement spoken of here. Will you give us a word on the opening verses; it says, "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the wicked, and standeth not in the way of sinners, and sitteth not in the seat of scorners; but his delight is in Jehovah's law, and in his law doth he meditate day and night".
J.T. The foundation of the book of Psalms is the godly man. In @Psalm 1 we have moral greatness; in @Psalm 2, official greatness; the latter is founded on the former, and both are seen in Christ. Eating what is clean builds up a constitution through which God can work out His thoughts in us. Separation is not only turning away from what is evil; we must be sustained in it, and this implies eating what is clean. The type here shows that there is *plenty* of clean food.
J.S. You have a very discriminating man in @Psalm 1.
J.T. Yes; note, "walketh not", "standeth not", "sitteth not".
A.F.M. You get in the Psalm the two thoughts
{63}
we have been dwelling upon -- *separation*  in verse 1, and *mediation* in verse 2; that is to say, the cloven hoof, and the chewing of the cud.
T.A. It says of John the baptist, "And, looking at Jesus as he *walked*", (@John 1:36).
A.B.P. Is the reference to the first of the four classes of clean animals suggested to us when the Lord says, "My mother and my brethren are those who *hear* the word of God and *do* it", (@Luke 8:21)?
J.T. Yes. They chew the cud and divide the hoof. It is remarkable that we have so much about "winged crawling" things, and yet some of them are clean; that is, they have the power to rise above the earth; suggestive of saints who can leave their ordinary affairs and come to a meeting like this for instance, and enjoy it! The winged crawling things and the crawling things would typify the masses of mankind. God has cleansed some of these crawling things, relatively a few. Some of the distinguished animals and birds in creation are violent and destructive, and so prefigure men who are so characterised. The lower creatures represent more the seething character of sin by which men make themselves abominable (verse 43).
A.McN. Would you say that spiritual energy is conveyed in leaping?
J.T. That is it. Spiritual energy as seen in the man of @Acts 3:8 "And leaping up he stood and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking and leaping, and praising God".
W.G.T. These energetic features in the healed man would show us that he was a different kind of man now.
J.S. How would you connect what we are now considering with the manna?
J.T. The manna is Christ. There was no question of discrimination with it; the Israelites had simply to gather it, as it lay on the ground in its whiteness like
{64}
hoar-frost. It is Christ as He was in His daily life here on earth; not Christ as He now is in heaven. The clean food of our chapter is found among the people of God. You meet those who are His and those who are not, and also worldly Christians. Indeed, you meet all kinds of people in your everyday life, so that you are called upon to discriminate as to those whom you commune with -- whom you appropriate, so to speak, for eating implies that.
J.S. Would you discriminate between your associations and what you eat? Here it is a question of what you eat.
J.T. It is, but I think the idea is that you seek the company and fellowship of "clean" people.
A.F.M. By not discriminating when amongst men, one becomes like the men prefigured by these unclean things; we are to be completely separated from what is unclean, and associated with what is clean.
C.A.M. As was remarked, the man in @Acts 3 is a very striking example of this: His feet and ankle bones were adjusted so that he could leap; Peter and John were in the good of their priestly privilege to go into the temple; and he entered with them.
J.T. Spiritually, the man left the earth -- to which in his helplessness he had been bound -- and entered into fellowship, for he *held* Peter and John, as with them he would find clean food.
W.B-w. He was like the locusts in verse 22.
J.T. There are four different kinds of locusts mentioned here: it says, "These shall ye eat of them; the *arbeh* after its kind, and the *solam* after its kind, and the *hargol* after its kind, and the *hargab* after its kind" (verse 22 and footnote). There being *four* kinds, I think, helps -- they are differentiated, but convey a general idea. They represent a class; i.e., believers that are available to us. "The locusts have no king, yet they go forth all of them by bands",
{65}
(@Proverbs 30:27). Their use as food by John the baptist is significant.
A.F.M. Would you say something about the fish in waters, seas, and rivers? The word "abomination" is introduced in connection with those that have not fins and scales.
J.T. The order here is not the same as in @Genesis 1; there you have fish and fowl together on the fifth day. Here you have land animals first, because, I think, verses 3 - 8 refer to men viewed in a more dignified way. The fish are next in order; they picture men, not in dignity, but promiscuously in their natural element, "the waters".
J.S. Probably, men viewed in adverse circumstances.
J.T. Yes; and so the clean ones are marked as able to go forward in spite of such circumstances. They have fins and scales. "These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatever hath fins and scales in waters, in seas and in rivers, these shall ye eat". These are persons who have power to go against the current. They are not controlled by surrounding influences. We are not, for the moment taken out of the world, but kept from the evil in it (compare @1 Corinthians 5:10).
A.N.W. It is not sufficient merely to repel; but we have the power to propel -- to make progress.
J.T. Yes, repel with the scales, and propel with the fins.
J.T.Jr. Like the man in @John 9 who went against the stream.
W.B-w. Eating is equivalent to having fellowship with, is it not?
J.T. @Acts 10:13 is the best illustration you can get. Peter was hungry on the housetop, and the sheet came to him: "And there was a voice to him, Rise, slay and *eat*". The allusion was to men, to the Gentiles.
{66}
A.P. The children of Israel were not to join Moab, but were to go straight through to the land.
J.T. Yes, but they fell into sin with the Moabites, because they did not observe these instructions.
T.A. "Wherefore come out from the midst of them and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and I will receive you", (@2 Corinthians 6:17).
J.T. The same idea of "touch not" is dwelt upon here. The "touch not what is unclean" idea appears seven times in the chapter.
A.P. There is the thought, not only of coming out from the midst of them, but also the going through adverse conditions, as indicated in the fish with fins and scales.
J.T. Yes; otherwise, "Ye should go out of the world", as the apostle says; (@1 Corinthians 5:10). Referring again to the crawling things, it says, "And these shall be unclean unto you among the crawling things which crawl on the earth: the mole, and the field-mouse, and the lizard, after its kind; and the groaning lizard, and the great red lizard, and the climbing lizard, and the chomet, and the chameleon". These two verses are as instructive as any in the chapter as to the subject in hand; none of the animals mentioned could be called vicious, but they crawl on the earth. Take the mole, the field mouse, and the lizard: they *appear* harmless, but you find they do great damage -- the mole and the field mouse especially.
T.A. @Jude 4 says: "For certain men have got in unnoticed".
J.T. Just so. The mouse is tame, as we say, but it possesses great voracity and fecundity, and so may do enormous damage to crops, etc. Moles work underground -- suggesting undermining operations.
{67}
W.G.T. Would they suggest features such as all of us are liable to exhibit?
J.T. You may inquire, 'What good are they all?' Well, they are part of a language through which God can speak to us. Through these creatures truth is impressed upon us in the most practical way. People marked by the characteristics of the mole and the mouse interfere disastrously with the growth and fruitfulness of the saints, and so are unfit for our companionship or fellowship.
Rem. Would the chameleon speak of instability, or changeability?
J.T. It would represent a nominal Christian who takes colour from the company in which he is found -- whether worldly, in which event he is a worldling, or Christian, when he becomes a Christian.
Rem. There are several kinds of lizards.
J.T. Yes, the chameleon is of that family. Each species of "the lizard, after its kind", is unclean. There is "the groaning lizard", descriptive of many of those about us -- groaning people.
C.A.M. Such are a very depressing kind of people.
J.T. Yes, they are not "filled with joy and the Holy Spirit", (@Acts 13:52). We are exhorted to "be filled with the Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and chanting with your heart to the Lord", (@Ephesians 5:18,19). That is the opposite of groaning.
H.S.D. I was thinking about Paul and Silas in prison. They had good reason to groan, but instead, "in praying, were praising God with singing", (@Acts 16:25).
A.N.W. If groaning is to be allowed, it should be *within* ourselves. "We also ourselves groan in ourselves", (@Romans 8:23).
J.T. Groaning is right, of course, in that sense. The Lord groaned more than once, as the gospels
{68}
show; but *this* groaning is characteristic of discontented people.
A.F.M. Then there is "the great red lizard" and "the climbing lizard". One would be suggestive of display, and the other of ambition, as among the people of God.
J.T. They are very convenient figures here. As you say, the great red lizard is like one very conspicuous, and who *would* be so. Ahimaaz said, "Let me run", (@2 Samuel 18:23). He *would* excel as a runner.
J.S. What a contrast we have between the climbing lizard and the mole! The latter is seldom seen but is very destructive of the roots of vegetation.
A.J.D. Would the climbing lizard be like Diotrephes?
J.T. Just so. "Diotrephes, who loves to have the first place among them", (@3 John 9). The devil knows that this element is in every one of us. He thought that of the Lord, when he set Him upon the edge of the temple. He evilly thought the Lord was such a one as himself. But the Spirit of God says: "Who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in the likeness of men" (@Philippians 2:6,7); He was entirely the opposite of all this depicted by the lizard!
B.T.F. You were speaking of creation as being a language by which God speaks to us. Had you any particular scripture in mind as to that? We have: "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse showeth the work of his hands", (@Psalm 19:1).
J.T. @Romans 1:20 helps: "For from the world's creation the invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made, both his eternal power and divinity, so as to render them inexcusable". If you go through scripture, you will find an immense
{69}
variety of things in creation, employed by God to convey divine thoughts.
B.T.F. There are many things which speak of that which is good, and then there are those that speak of that which is evil.
J.T. That is the thought. Take Noah's ark, for example, if one who rightly understood God's creation had surveyed the creatures therein, he would have found portrayed in every one of them some divine thought. If Solomon could have gone into the ark, think of what he would have said! He spoke of all the living creatures, including these creeping things. No doubt there will be great intelligence as to the creation in the millennium, for Solomon is a type of Christ in relation to it. The fulness of life in every respect will then be seen. The prophets show that ferocious creatures will then become harmless, and carnivorous ones will then live on vegetable food.
T.A. Do we not see wisdom in Adam when he "gave names to all cattle, and to fowl of the heavens, and to every beast of the field", (@Genesis 2:20)?
J.T. Yes. God did not change any one of those names; Adam evidently named them correctly.
A.P. It is very interesting, in the light of our chapter, to view men in that discriminative way.
J.T.Jr. The Lord called Herod a fox (@Luke 13:32), because he possessed the craftiness of one.
J.T. Besides the care enjoined in eating, the *touching* of what is unclean is also forbidden in the chapter. It says of the swine, "Their carcase shall ye not touch"; and beasts that have paws, that go upon all four, are unclean, and "whoever toucheth their carcase shall be unclean until the even". It is not only a question here of eating, but of touching. I am affected by any association in which I am, and in which unclean persons are, even though I may not wish to be so.
{70}
C.A.M. We always take character from the lowest company we keep.
A.A.T. What is the difference between eating and touching?
J.T. Eating is a deliberate act, but you might touch an object without wishing to. There are those who say, 'Well, I know that the association in which I am has unconverted people in it, and is marked by worldliness, but then I hold myself aloof as much as I can'. However, you are in their fellowship and you cannot escape the consequence of being defiled by it.
A.F.M. One might touch what is unclean and be defiled, but when something unclean touches you, how would you regard that?
J.T. Well, it should impress us with the seriousness of being in proximity to these unclean things, and so prompt us to keep out of their way.
G.McP. "Whoever toucheth them when they are dead". What would be the force of that?
J.T. It would refer to men in whom there is no pulsation Godward. I think it is death in a moral sense.
A.R. "And every earthen vessel into which any of them falleth -- whatever is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it".
J.T. There again it is not a question of the will, but of being in a position where you are affected by what is unclean; so the point is, not to be in that position; as it says, "Hold aloof from every form of wickedness", (@1 Thessalonians 5:22).
W.B-w. What is the force of being "unclean until the even"?
J.T. I think it is in the sense of penalty. You will observe in this chapter that there is nothing said about the process of cleansing. It is rather that you suffer penalty in your soul. You have to wait, as a
{71}
matter of discipline, a certain period before you are restored.
J.S. You have lost communion for that day.
J.T. Yes. You have to wait until evening, no matter what exercise you may go through. There is a penalty attaching to the contamination, and you cannot get rid of it *at once*.
W.B-w. Is there a possibility of going through each day clean?
J.T. Yes, in the sense that we have it here. The Lord went through every day entirely undefiled.
A.J.D. What do you mean by, 'The sense that we have it here'?
J.T. That of penalty -- the governmental consequences from which you cannot escape. You may say 'I affiliated with this and that one, and I got damaged in my soul, and I judged it'; but then you suffer nevertheless, and cannot avoid being unclean "until the even". However, I am not overlooking what is set forth in the red heifer of @Numbers 19 where you get provision for cleansing, which you do get here; although that chapter contemplates longer periods of uncleanness.
A.F.M. @Numbers 19:12 speaks of the *third* and the *seventh* day.
W.B-w. Why is "a spring or a well, a quantity of water" clean?
J.T. It alludes to the energy of the Spirit, especially in a collective sense. There is that, although in this world, which is impervious to the evil or defilement of it. We may have to deal with defiling things in caring for the Lord's interests, but if in the power of the Spirit, we are not defiled by them. The assembly is *not* "unclean until the even". @Acts 5 is an example of this.
W.B-w. What about the carcase falling upon the sowing-seed?
{72}
J.T. The seed for sowing is not unclean by an unclean thing falling upon it, unless water has been put on it. The inference is that if one is baptised and comes in contact with these unclean things, then he is unclean, for he has taken up a new position of responsibility (see @Romans 6:4). Verses 32 - 40 afford most important instruction as to the bearing of this subject on servants and service. All the instruction given is imperative because of what God is to us, as He says: "For I am Jehovah your God; and ye shall hallow yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I am holy; and ye shall not make yourselves unclean through any manner of crawling thing which creepeth on the earth" (verse 44).
{73}
FOOD AS PRESENTED TO GOD
@Numbers 28:1 - 31; 29:1 - 16
J.T. It seemed to me that in considering this great subject of food, we should bring in *God's part*. These chapters treat of food, not for the saints but for God. "Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, my offering, my bread for my offerings by fire of sweet odour to me, shall ye take heed to present to me at their set time". It is imperative.
A.F.M. It is readily understood that *we* require food but in what sense does God require it?
J.T. That He should regard the offerings of His people as food for Himself is very touching. The manna was said to be angels¬ food; God, we know, is a Spirit, and the angels are spirits, so we have to understand that what is alluded to must be spiritual.
H.S.D. It would not be a question of support, but rather of what ministers to the *pleasure* of God.
J.T. It is noticeable throughout Numbers that the oblation has particular prominence; much is said of fine flour mingled with oil, and of wine. Attention is thus called to the joy God has in Christ as Man serving Him here in the power of the Spirit.
B.T.F. Would you say that the expressions "my offering" and "my bread" suggest the saints ministering to God's delight and pleasure?
J.T. That is evidently what is in view. Throughout the two chapters it is the bearing of the offerings as food for God that is in view.
W.B-w. In @Malachi 3:8 it says, "Will a man rob God?" We must consider for Him.
J.T. How much have we thought of God's part? The Spirit is given, typically, according to chapter 21, which implies that the saints have ability to meet divine requirements. So that God is not taxing us
{74}
beyond our means in asking for the bread of His offerings. In chapter 26 we have the inheritance, and in chapter 27 the daughters of Zelophehad are introduced as those who valued the inheritance. It is in that light that God looks for something from us -- from us as having the spiritual means to furnish it.
A.F.M. In verse 2 of our chapter Jehovah says, "My offering, my bread for my offerings ... shall ye take heed to present to me at their set time". There is a large number of offerings before us in these chapters, but offerings to be presented at their "set time". Would you say a little as to how these chapters open out?
J.T. Well, we have the whole year covered, from the first of the year to the fifteenth of the seventh month. It is not what we call the solar year, but rather the spiritual year; or we might call it the agricultural year. Now, the farmer does not reckon the year as the merchant does: the farmer reckons it from the time he sows his seed until he reaps his crop and gathers it in. The feast of tabernacles corresponds to this ingathering. The agricultural year is really what counts, because it is a question of what comes from the land; every kind of life, excepting aquatic life, depends upon that: it says, "Moreover the earth is every way profitable: the king himself is dependent upon the field", (@Ecclesiastes 5:9).
A.N.W. The seventh month is the greatest of all.
J.T. Amongst other things introduced therein, it is the time of ingathering which takes place at the end of that month.
J.S. The farmer reckons by seasons.
J.T. That was how God ordered things after the flood: "Henceforth, all the days of the earth seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease", (@Genesis 8:22). It is, substantially, how we would reckon
{75}
if we were tilling the soil; and after all, from it most of the wealth comes.
A.P. Is there the suggestion then that the greater part of the solar year is held for God?
J.T. Well, the point is what you get out of the ground, and what God gets through that increase from us.
A.P. Scripture speaks of "redeeming the time", (@Ephesians 5:16). The solar year represents the time.
J.T. It would be a question of actual time, of making the most of every moment that we have. I think the distinction as to the year is important, because that is how Scripture deals with it. The agricultural year is a question of sowing and reaping.
J.S. How do you apply that spiritually?
J.T. Simply speaking, it is a matter of God getting something out of us. We get in Luke's gospel that the fig tree rendered the ground useless. The ground, figuratively, is the source of supply for God.
C.A.M. How much of what is done in our bodies is going to be shown as "good" at the judgment seat of Christ (@2 Corinthians 5:10)?
J.T. The sheaf of the first fruits presented to Jehovah is Christ (@1 Corinthians 15:23); one sheaf was offered (@Leviticus 23:9 - 14), but as having a great harvest in view. The extended thought of this embraces the fifteenth day of the seventh month.
W.B-w. The man in @Deuteronomy 26 had the first fruit in his basket. Is he representative of one who labours and brings in a good crop?
J.T. Yes; it says, "That thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the ground, which thou shalt bring of thy land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee", (@Deuteronomy 26:2). He brought the *first* of all the fruit of the ground and presented it to Jehovah.
B.T.F. Would you say that Paul brings in the thought of the crop? "I have planted; Apollos watered; but God has given the increase", (@1 Corinthians 3:6).
{76}
So I suppose God looks for increase from the saints.
J.T. That is what is before us. What are the crops going to yield *this* year? Is the reaping to be in proportion to the sowing?
A.R.S. Is the idea of fruit the same as food, in connection with God? We are to bring forth fruit unto God.
J.T. Fruit is, of course, a more general thought, but it includes what we are speaking of. God looks for a crop. The Lord said, "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit", (@John 12:24). The "much fruit" refers to the seventh month, the end of the agricultural year, and implies all that the Lord is and has in resurrection; but these two chapters show what is directly for God in the way of food. The farmer does not use all his harvest for himself; he disposes of it commercially, and uses it as food for his cattle; but God is not occupied with that here, but rather with what is for Himself. He says, "*My* offering, *my* bread for *my* offerings by fire"; and then He goes on to specify the daily, weekly, and monthly offerings. We should also note the stress laid on the meat offering and the drink offering -- all for a sweet odour, an offering by fire to Jehovah.
J.E.H. Has every believer a field?
J.T. Yes, and so the word is: "Prepare thy work without, and put thy field in order, and afterwards build thy house", (@Proverbs 24:27). The offerings required in our chapters contemplate a source of supply divinely given.
A.N.W. In @Deuteronomy 23 there is the vineyard and the standing corn which are available to my neighbour, but God only takes what is offered Him.
J.T. That is the idea in verse 1 of our chapter; the word rendered "offering" is derived from the verb *to present*. It is 'corban' (see footnote to
{77}
@Leviticus 1:2). Not only is it in the field -- for according to @Genesis 1 the food supply comes out of the earth -- but it is there as a provision of the Creator, and in marvellous volume. In @Genesis 41 it is gathered under the hand of a man, having *administration* in view, but when you come to the passover it is a specific creature -- a lamb. So God specifies what He requires, but it is presented to Him. Not only is it there for Him to receive, but as expressing love in His people it is presented as their gift.
A.P. What is the difference between this and the tithes?
J.T. The tithes went mainly to Levi (see @Deuteronomy 26:12) and through the Levites to God; it was the same in principle, only the gift as rendered to the Levites was offered by them to God. These chapters contemplate the wealth of the saints, and that God is before them throughout the whole year, and that their giving to Him is direct.
A.F.M. The daily offering of verse 3 is called "a continual burnt-offering", and forms a basis for the other offerings that follow; so that, whatever may be offered on the sabbath or the beginning of the month, etc., this offering is always maintained. This is very suggestive. Will you say a little about it?
J.T. It is evidently to maintain the saints on a high spiritual level. Their "days" are thus filled out by suitable response to God. The believer is to have the same measure of response in the evening as in the morning. The daily offerings would thus preserve us from spiritual diminution. In the feast of tabernacles you get provision made for diminution in the sacrifices, but you do not want that. It refers to the millennium, for which God is obliged to provide. There is a gradual decline from thirteen bullocks on the first of the seven days to seven bullocks on the seventh day. This provision is mentioned here only. If we are to prevent this
{78}
lessening of what is offered, we must maintain the daily morning and evening sacrifices.
J.E.H. Why is there provision made for that diminution?
J.T. It refers to the reduction of spiritual power in the millennium, but if applied to ourselves, it would be to God in grace making allowance, so that a saint should not drop out even if diminishing in spiritual power.
A.J.D. Does it go below the seventh bullock?
J.T. No; thus what is due to God is maintained, only in a reduced measure. A state that He can own is maintained, as prefigured in the *seven* bullocks. It is only in the *bullocks* that the diminution is seen. The other offerings are the same on each day.
A.N.W. Would it not show that the millennium, wonderful and great as it is, is not the best?
J.T. It is not on the same level as the church in which there is no provision made for spiritual decline.
A.F.M. Does the number of bullocks refer to spiritual wealth, and the lessening of it to loss of energy in devotedness?
J.T. The thirteen bullocks contemplate a very large affair. The millennium will begin with great spiritual power, but it will be susceptible to depreciation, and steadily so; God takes account of this and intimates that it will not go below seven which is perfection in itself; all above that number is excess.
A.P. Is your thought that there is increase in chapter 28:14, as seen in the larger measure of wine?
J.T. The wine is in proportion to the offering, whatever the offering may be. What you get in chapter 28 is perfect proportion. But there is increase in the offerings required in this chapter; the worship of the church is in view, typically.
J.S. As sustained by the Spirit?
J.T. Quite. You could not get wine, in a spiritual
{79}
sense, apart from the Spirit; accompanying these offerings, the drink offerings are to gladden the heart of God.
C.A.M. In @Philippians 2:17 there is a reference to the drink offering. In Paul's service and their faith God would have joy.
J.T. There the apostle contemplated being "poured out as a libation on the sacrifice and ministration of your faith".
C.A.M. So that while they gained by the sacrifice, I suppose the drink offering was for God.
J.T. The drink offering is always for God. And it is not grape juice, but fermented wine, being that "which cheers God and man", (@Judges 9:13).
A.F.M. Why do you say it is not grape juice?
J.T. Because the idea is of stimulation -- causing joy. God graciously uses such a figure to denote what the spiritual sacrifices and worship of the saints are to Him..
A.N.W. I suppose the cup of the Lord's supper is intended to stimulate spiritually.
J.T. I think it is -- not that the ingredient is prominent in the Lord's supper. There is no doubt that it was wine that was used, but the emphasis in the Lord's supper is not on the ingredient but on the one vessel; the *cup* is what our attention is called to.
A.P. Is it your thought that the cup is greater than millennial joy?
J.T. Yes. The love of God is expressed in it, and unity in the enjoyment of the love. Then in the bread we have the one body. In the millennium it is a nation in Israel, and wine in the passover would convey the idea of earthly joy in this connection. In the celebration of the passover at the time of our Lord there were several cups drunk, according to the records we have. The idea would be that it was an earthly joy in which God had part, and in which
{80}
Christ had part also. So He will drink it in a new way in the kingdom of God.
A.R. In chapter 28 the feast of weeks contemplates excess, does it not? There is increase in relation to the assembly. Is that the idea?
J.T. Yes, the feast of weeks ends chapter 28. It is the highest level reached; it is the assembly, as I understand. It is "on the day of the firstfruits, when ye present a new oblation".
A.N.W. Does the proportion of the wine indicate that the greater the spiritual capacity to offer, the greater the joy?
J.T. That is what I thought. God looks for balance in His people, especially in their worship.
A.N.W. Sometimes the youngest and smallest appear to be bubbling over with joy, but this may be out of accord with their stature.
J.T. God is "the God of measure" (@2 Corinthians 10:13) and that particularly enters into His worship. With regard to this daily offering, the saints should be preserved on a normal spiritual level; the wear and tear of the day should not rob you of your spiritual power. The evening is to correspond with the morning. That is a sort of basis of the whole instruction here. What may be observed with many is that if there be an extra meeting during the week, the prayer meeting before and the reading meeting after, are apt to suffer. That is out of keeping with the teaching of this chapter. No sacrifice is to be withheld because of another.
A.F.M. It is noticeable in these instructions that the wine is in proportion to the oil, and the measure of fine flour is also prescribed which is mingled with the oil.
J.T. Quite. The mingling of the fine flour with oil is very instructive here: it is not an anointing with oil, but is typical of the beautiful humanity of Christ as before God. It is not dough or a cake as
{81}
elsewhere, but "fine flour", prefiguring the pure, holy humanity of Christ, apprehended in the saints in their worship before God.
A.F.M. Is that kind of humanity true of us as in Christ, or only of the Lord Himself?
J.T. Primarily it is Christ Himself, but as offering we are in accord with it.
W.B-w. But I must first bring what I have grown in the field.
J.T. Yes. What you bring you have first to acquire. It is a question of your spiritual stature, the apprehension you have of Christ by the Spirit.
H.S.D. Why is it beaten oil?
J.T. I suppose it would mean the Holy Spirit in the sense in which He was here in Christ; He is, of course, a divine Person, and operates in that character. He came on Christ as Man who carried on His service in His power, offering Himself, as it is said, "by the eternal Spirit ... to God", (@Hebrews 9:14). It is the Spirit who was on Christ that believers receive. Romans develops the truth of the Spirit as in Christians.
C.A.M. Daniel would be a striking example for us, that we should all pray morning and evening. God answered Daniel's prayer "about the time of the evening oblation", (@Daniel 9:21).
J.T. In chapter 2 of Daniel, when under great pressure, Daniel and his companions had recourse to prayer and Daniel got the needed answer. But think of the exercise they went through -- death staring them in the face and the only escape was to get the secret! You get, in their exercise, the idea of beaten oil. Think, too, of the Lord Jesus in the agonies of Gethsemane and the cross! The word 'Gethsemane' signifies the oil press. The pressure our Lord endured is beyond all telling. It is the Spirit who was upon Christ here, "sent from heaven" (@1 Peter 1:12), that we have received.
{82}
A.P.T. Paul and Silas in the prison at Philippi, "in praying, were praising God with singing" (@Acts 16:25) at midnight. Is that like the evening oblation?
J.T. What power was there! You get the idea of the beaten oil in that remarkable circumstance also.
A.A.T. Are we conscious of making this offering to God or does it appear in one's daily life?
J.T. I think it is formal service to God. God looks upon us as "intelligent persons", (@1 Corinthians 10:15). The truth as in @Romans 12:1 makes us intelligent; the exhortation is: "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service". There is a link here with our chapter in the word 'present'. Your intelligence is called into action with regard to your service Godward, so that you know what you are doing. Priesthood is marked by this, and Romans lays the basis for it.
A.A.T. The Samaritan woman gratified the heart of Christ in a certain way, for when the disciples came on the scene, He said to them, "I have food to eat which ye do not know", (@John 4:32).
J.T. He found food in the service rendered, for it involved doing the will of Him who sent Him. And He also had food in the manifest result of this service in the woman. In that same scripture you have the agricultural year brought in: "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields for they are already white to harvest", (@John 4:35). It was now a question of reapers.
A.R. What is the thought of the burnt offering throughout the whole chapter -- that thought seems to lead?
J.T. The burnt offering was wholly for God. It went up to Him as a sweet savour. We can understand, therefore, its prominence in these chapters.
J.E.H. Say a word about it being called "burnt offering".
{83}
J.T. It is the first offering mentioned in Leviticus, and shows what Christ was as entirely for God in His death. This is the greatest aspect of His self-sacrificing love. The antitype of this is John's gospel.
A.J.D. "Who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God", (@Hebrews 9:14). Is that the burnt offering?
J.T. Yes.
J.E.H. Could the burnt offering be viewed apart from sin-bearing?
J.T. Yes, but they are linked together; the fat of the sin offering was always burnt on the altar of the burnt offering. The burnt offering is one side of the offering of Christ, as entirely for God. "On this account the Father loves me, because I lay down my life that I may take it again", (@John 10:17).
A.R. Is that the idea of this chapter -- taking account of the saints as entirely for God?
J.T. That side is prominent throughout these chapters. Of course, you have the sin offering also, but the great thought throughout these chapters is what is for God. @Numbers 15:2 has the land in view: "When ye come into the land". We have means whereby to offer to God in this way for Numbers opens up the truth of the Spirit to us.
G.McP. Simeon speaks by the Spirit; (@Luke 2).
J.T. Just so. Simeon had means. I think he represents the believer as in the very centre of divine things; he is introduced to us as "a man *in Jerusalem*", (@Luke 2:25). It is a question of *where* he lived. It was revealed to him that he should not see death until he had seen the Lord's Christ; he went by the Spirit into the temple, and presented, as it were, the child Jesus.
W.B-w. Is that the meat offering, or burnt offering?
J.T. It was what Christ was for God. He had the Child in his arms and spoke of Him as God's Salvation.
{84}
A.J.D. He went a long way in his apprehension.
A.R. It says, "He received him into his arms, and *blessed God*", (@Luke 2:28). That is, apparently, the first thing he did.
J.T. Yes, he was a worshipper with the Child in his arms.
A.F.M. What distinctions have these daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly presentations?
J.T. The daily offerings are fundamental, in view of our practical state, and keep us regularly in spiritual exercise; so that there is no undulating history in our souls. Young believers are apt to be up and down -- bright in the morning, when they leave for business, and jaded spiritually when they come home in the evening, with very little wealth left. The daily offering here is to prevent that, and to maintain the steady spiritual experience, so that there is ability to offer to God.
A.P. The daily exercises cannot be neglected if there is to be the weekly and the monthly.
J.T. They must be maintained, otherwise, when you come to the sabbath, you are in a low state.
A.N.W. Would you say a word about these lambs, as typical of Christ, having a place in our hearts?
J.T. They are *yearlings*, so that spiritual maturity and freshness are in view.
A.N.W. Possibly this depression with young believers, to which you refer, is self-occupation. These lambs suggest that I have an object worthy of my interest and my affections.
J.T.Jr. That which Abraham provided "in the heat of the day" for the "three men" (@Genesis 18), might fit in with what we have here; he was a man of substance, and ministered refreshment.
J.T. Yes; that would be a taxing time of day. We all know how heat, in this sense, affects us, as tending to rob us of energy. Abraham was awake
{85}
and energetic, but Sarah did not fully render her part, as far as Scripture goes: she was told to make cakes but it does not say she *brought* them. The passage shows that Abraham was marked by spiritual power, in the heat of the day he entertained and served God.
A.P.T. Does not Paul's ministry tax us, as illustrated in Eutychus? He fell from the third story to the bottom. In this case it was at midnight.
J.T. Yes; there are many such. I believe quite a number of our brethren who are here tonight do not thoroughly understand what we are speaking about. There may be some present who have never read @Numbers 28. I remember being at a reading in Ezekiel, and a brother present said he had never read that book at all! How could he intelligently follow that reading?
A.P. Your thought is that the daily experience underlies the weekly and monthly offerings.
J.T. You cannot have the sabbath offerings; or those that follow, otherwise.
C.A.M. I think the simplest believer would understand what a great thing it is to start and close the day with God; and so, while learning what the character of the world is, go through it with God.
J.T. As to the occasion with Paul at Troas: there were many visiting brothers there who were spiritual men, and, I have no doubt, that is what the reference to "many lights in the upper room" (@Acts 20:8) means. We may assume that the apostle was not ministering *milk* in that address but *strong meat* It was a question of what *Paul* had to say. Peter, later in speaking of Paul's writings, says, "Some things are hard to be understood", (@2 Peter 3:16). I speak of this to urge the saints to go in for the things that belong to full growth.
E.V.C. Do you mean that many who attend
{86}
meetings for ministry are not in the spirit of what is being advanced?
J.T. Yes. I believe the apostle at Troas was presenting the truth according to his administration in its full bearing, but Eutychus was not equal to it.
J.E.H. Would Eutychus be illustrative of a believer who was not able to follow the presentation of the truth?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. One may go to sleep even in the presence of such ministry as Paul's!
A.N.W. Though Eutychus did not get much of the discourse, he would never forget the reviving effect of the apostle's embrace.
J.T. Well, that is a question of grace overcoming, but that does not excuse or forgive his fall. Paul had to descend from his elevated position to resuscitate the young man, instead of continuing in such ministry to the brethren.
A.R. There is great concern as to getting suitable ministry for young people, even in a meeting like this.
J.T. I think the young people ought to read their bibles so as to *know* the scriptures. The main difficulty with all of us is want of exercise; we ought to read our bibles more prayerfully.
W.G.T. Is the passover to bring the whole position before us?
J.T. Yes; it begins the year. The Pentecost following completes the first part of the instruction. The fifteenth day of the seventh mouth is the feast of tabernacles. That is the feast of ingathering, after the harvest is gathered in, so that you have the whole of God's ways before you in these two chapters; not what accrues to us from His ways, but what accrues to Him, which is a greater thing. That is what these chapters teach, and they come in after the truth of the Holy Spirit, as set forth in
{87}
chapter 21, with Balaam's prophecies following, and then the inheritance given.
J.S. In @Revelation 22 which speaks of the tree of life, is the thought of the agricultural year dropped?
J.T. Yes; it is the solar year there, one month being equal to another. There is no idea of seed-sowing there; @Genesis 1 provides for that kind of year, for the sun determines it. In these types God is dealing with the agricultural year; that is, He is concerned about what results for Himself from His sowing.
A.P. Does the thought of seven refer more to the church than the number twelve?
J.T. Both are found in the church. Seven is spiritual completeness; twelve is administrative completeness.
A.R. In connection with the feast of weeks, it says, "On the day of the firstfruits, when ye present a new oblation to Jehovah". What is this "new oblation"?
J.T. It refers to the two wave loaves, which @Leviticus 23 enlarges upon. The day of the firstfruits includes Christ's resurrection, but the first oblation was the sheaf cut down and waved before Jehovah. The new oblation is the two wave loaves. They are not dwelt upon here, but simply referred to. It is the wealth for God that attended them that is alluded to.
W.B-w. It is noticeable that "the drink offering of strong drink" is to be poured out in the sanctuary. Would that refer to spiritual strength?
J.T. It refers to spiritual energy before God. It conveys the idea of stimulation; God graciously uses the type of strong drink to show what the worship of His people is to Him, and that it is in a holy setting as offered in the sanctuary.
{88}
J.S. Is there more entering into the seventh month than any other?
J.T. It is the most important of months, because it yields the most; the first, tenth, and fifteenth days of it are very prominent.
C.A.M. John's gospel seems to deal with the agricultural or spiritual year; and the Revelation corresponds with Genesis, as you were saying -- the full year. When it comes to the gospel of John, it would be a spiritual condition, applying now.
J.T. Yes. We have the feast of tabernacles in @John 7, but it is superseded by the Spirit here, given to believers by Jesus glorified.
A.N.W. The Lord has the harvest in mind in @John 4:35 -- He says, "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest".
J.T. That links on with the seventh month. "Others have laboured, and ye have entered into their labours", (@John 4:38). The Lord contemplated the result for God of previous sowing.
A.N.W. He had His own death in mind.
J.T. There is no fruit from men without that, as we learn in @John 12:24.
J.S. Would the woman in @John 4 suggest the thought of the barley harvest? "Do not ye say, that there are yet four months and the harvest comes? Behold, I say to you, Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest", (verse 35).
J.T. I think the barley harvest, being the first harvest, is Christ; the wheat harvest is always the saints. You have it here in @Numbers 28:26, "And on the day of the firstfruits". That would include the resurrection of Christ, and then the "new oblation" came fifty days after that, which would be the church. The "four months", probably
{89}
allude to the harvest in Israel, but there was an earlier one suggested in the Samaritan woman.
J.S. In @John 6 we have the five barley loaves, do we not?
J.T. That is right. It is in John you get the specific cereal mentioned. The book of Ruth explains the barley harvest; we begin with that.
W.B-w. "He that reaps ... gathers fruit unto life eternal", (@John 4:36).
J.T. The early result for God seen in John's gospel involving the agricultural or spiritual year is very interesting. The solar year refers to what is in the heavens. The heavenly bodies were set for times and seasons. The Revelation deals with the times and seasons. It is God bringing in the end of things, and that must include the movements of Christ, as there in heaven.
W.B-w. The solar year would be more the ways of God.
J.T. Yes; God's ways in government, I think. The sun in the heavens was to rule and regulate, and that would refer to Christ. His movements determine everything with regard to the government of the world and the universe. The moon is the church as set in relation to Christ in this connection. The stars refer to individuals.
J.S. The seasons, therefore, would be a means to an end.
J.T. Yes; and inclusive of God's judgment of the wicked, so that the Revelation is not only the ingathering, but the wine press (i.e., the judgment of God). The Revelation goes beyond the seventh month; it includes the whole year. We see all judgment is in the hands of the Son of man. The Father has given Him authority to execute judgment because He is the Son of Man.
{90}
FOOD FOR CROSSING THE JORDAN
@Joshua 1:10,11; 5:10 - 12
F.L. What was the thought in preparing victuals when, as yet, they were eating manna?
J.T. I suppose the intelligence of the people is contemplated. It is left to themselves as to what they should prepare. It is *victuals*. "Command the people, saying, Prepare yourselves victuals, for in three days ye shall pass over this Jordan".
A.F.M. Do you think there is any particular emphasis laid on the word 'victuals'?
J.T. Well, I suppose it has in view the strain that the crossing of the Jordan suggests, and the consequent need of food for sustenance.
A.F.M. I think the word refers to what is obtained through hunting, like venison. It is rather *strong meat*, would you not say?
J.T. Very good.
W.G.T. There was need for change of food here; is that the thought?
J.T. Well, obviously, something additional to the manna was needed. In the introduction of the manna, there was the idea of preparation: "Cook what ye will cook", (@Exodus 16:23). It was left to them on the sixth day to cook and prepare, as if a certain liberty is allowed under such circumstances, which God, I think, would always accord to us. While He would assert His will amongst us from the outset of our relations with Himself, He would indicate liberty -- for we are not in bondage but are "set free in freedom", (@Galatians 5:1).
A.N.W. Would there be anything in the epistle to the Colossians that would help us? Is this not coming very near to the line in Colossians?
{91}
J.T. Colossians is the section of the New Testament that corresponds exactly. The significance of the teaching of Colossians is *entering*, not *having entered*, but the process of entering; for this certainly is a feature of the process of entering the land, and the food here would point to strong meat.
A.F.M. Would that be @Colossians 1, where the greatness of the Person of Christ is brought before us for contemplation?
J.T. Exactly. Colossians is certainly strong meat. It is not milk. The apostle could not bring forward the same strength of meat in his ministry to the Corinthians as he did in his letter to the Colossians; so that, undoubtedly, his letter to the Colossians would help us as to the significance of these victuals here, because it is a question of *going over*.
T.A. Up to this point the manna was sufficient.
J.T. It was. We have the three prominent foods brought together in chapter 5 -- the passover, the manna, and the old corn. They were brought together there, but this is additional; therefore we are left to ourselves as to facing this great exercise of crossing the Jordan, as to whether we have sustenance. Light will not suffice; mere knowledge will not suffice; we need more than these to cross the Jordan.
F.L. Would you illustrate what you mean by "freedom"? You said it indicates that there is a certain liberty.
J.T. In @Exodus 16, where the manna is introduced, we have specific directions as to it; but then, on the sixth day, the day before the sabbath, they were to cook what they would cook and prepare what they would prepare; that is, it was left to themselves.
F.L. How would you apply that now?
J.T. I think it is a liberty that belongs to us as in the knowledge of God. He has no pleasure in
{92}
legal or slavish fear; perfect love casts that out. I think it would impart to us the thought that He would have us in liberty with Himself from the outset. The book of Acts is largely a question of what the disciples did; not what they were told to do; that is to say, God allowed them the liberty that belongs to the children of wisdom.
F.L. Would not that liberty be accorded because of the presence of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Just so, and because of a certain formation which I think is ever present where the Holy Spirit is (i.e., under normal circumstances). God has called us to liberty.
H.S.D. Would you say that this food has conflict in view?
J.T. Well, it has, but the point here is not exactly the conflict but the passage of the Jordan: "In three days ye shall pass over this Jordan".
H.S.D. It was the officers who said that, the military men.
J.T. Well, they were going on to conflict, but it is the passage of the Jordan that is before them.
W.B-w. It is a question of strength in going over. In @Colossians 1:11 it is, "Strengthened with all power according to the might of his glory unto all endurance and longsuffering with joy".
J.T. That is what I was thinking. It implies a renouncing of all fleshly feelings, hopes, and desires; and we have to be strong constitutionally to renounce the fondest hopes we might have, so as to enter into our heavenly part. Death is in the way; the Jordan is at its height and makes demands on our courage. That is the thought here.
A.P. Does it imply the seeing of the ark; chapter 3? After that it says, "And go after it", (verse 3), which implies faith, does it not?
J.T. Yes; and then the actual entrance into Jordan itself, because it was not until the feet of
{93}
the priests who bore the ark touched them that the waters went back. The waters are all there in view, as it were; so it requires courage, and that calls for a strong constitution. For this undertaking you cannot be a spiritual weakling as the man in @Romans 14. Such a man cannot go over Jordan, he has to acquire strength; but he is received among the brethren, although a weak brother.
B.T.F. Would you say that the Lord makes it easier for the believer to cross Jordan now?
J.T. The point in these chapters is not to show that it is easy. It is an extraordinary transaction -- "For ye have not passed this way heretofore", (@Joshua 3:4). It is a Colossian saint who is fit for this.
A.J.D. What aspect of death does the Jordan represent?
J.T. Well it is the end of life after the flesh, the end of all that attaches to us in flesh and blood condition. It is death in the hands of the enemy; but we have to apprehend that Christ has been into it and has annulled death.
A.R. It says in @Psalm 114 3 that "the sea saw it and fled, the Jordan turned back". I suppose it is that idea.
A.F.M. We have mentioned here, "For in three days ye shall pass over this Jordan". The food would afford the means of developing a spiritual constitution in view of passing over. Is that the thought of the three days?
J.T. I think the three days would indicate that thought -- the idea of preparation. It is "*this* Jordan"; that is to say, the Jordan God had brought them up to, for Jordan was then overflowing its banks.
A.P. We are liable to attempt to go over in our minds, so that the thought in the victuals is that they develop the spiritual constitution to enable us to go over.
J.T. That is right. You go over as a *man* should
{94}
go; you are not a weakling. It implies that you are able to renounce all fleshly hopes and aspirations -- to "have your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth", (@Colossians 3:2). God has another world, another place for you!
C.A.M. In @Romans 6:6 it says, "Our old man has been crucified with him"; this crossing of death would be beyond the first man, the man of flesh and blood.
J.T. It is the end of flesh and blood condition and that is a feature that has to be noticed because it requires moral strength in the soul, for the renouncing of all those things that one has lived on naturally, and to face the thing that Satan has wielded over man. He had the power of death; in fact, in @Hebrews 2:14 it says he has it still: "That through death he might annul him who has the might of death"; that is in the present tense, so that it makes it a very solemn matter -- that we have to do with the thing that Satan has to say to. And then the question is, whether I apprehend Christ as having overcome, as having annulled "him who has the might of death", and as having annulled death itself.
F.L. I was wondering whether the three days being a well-known set period of time, would indicate that a weak brother would be built up constitutionally -- that such a brother would not be left behind, but that there would be time in which he could be formed and prepared.
J.T. Well, he certainly would have an opportunity, but I think we have to see that the crossing of the Jordan is a spiritual matter. It is a much deeper matter than the passage of the Red Sea. It is wholly a spiritual matter and involves a renouncing of all that one may be in the flesh.
A.P. The victuals here suggest that we feed on some aspect of the death of Christ.
{95}
J.T. I think they do. The food would be Christ in some sense.
A.J.D. Is the question of eternal life in view in this chapter in connection with food?
J.T. Yes. That is in the land.
C.A.M. "But solid food belongs to full-grown men, who, on account of habit, have their senses exercised for distinguishing both good and evil", (@Hebrews 5:14). Here the people have grown up spiritually.
J.T. That helps as to this word 'victuals'. God indicates that you ought to know by this time what is needed.
A.R.S. Is there anything similar in the account of Elijah's going to Horeb? Victuals were prepared for him, and he was told to eat because the journey would be very long.
J.T. That would point to a low state of soul; he was fleeing the land of Canaan in which he was called to service. Under such circumstances God has to do the preparing, but here they are preparing to enter the land and a normal condition is contemplated. Each went over in his own strength: the twelve men (representative of all) each took a stone and carrying it over set it down at Gilgal; that required strength.
A.R.S. A remark was made as to "victuals" being the result of hunting. They had been eating "angels¬ food" before. There is a difference.
J.T. They did not have to hunt for the manna. It was on the face of the wilderness. Here the suggestion would be of strong meat. We are to roast what we get in hunting. Hunting is for something of which you have actual need, not for sport as is naturally done.
W.B-w. Do you get this in connection with the Lord's supper?
J.T. The Lord's supper involves food, and whilst it does not go so far as this, it leads towards it.
{96}
What is to be noticed in chapter 5 is that they have the passover at Gilgal and the heavenly food the following day; that is actually in the land. In the passover; which would be a sort of remembrance, a link is maintained with Egypt and the wilderness, but the heavenly food does not come in until after that, the next day; but "victuals" here is neither the one nor the other; it is not the manna, the passover, nor the heavenly food. It is not specified; it is therefore something that you have to acquire yourself.
T.A. Do you get the heavenly food in @John 20:17: "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father"?
J.T. That implies the "old corn". We want to get the idea of the "victuals" here.
J.E.H. I wondered whether the quality of the food not being specified would in any way suggest the tremendous exercise that this would involve us in, so that we might be prepared for all that lies before us.
J.T. I think it suggests just that. The Jordan had been before them all the time. It had long been spoken of, you may depend, and it was a question of being ready for it. It is literally, death. It is to teach us to number our days. "So teach us to number our, days, that we may acquire a wise heart", (@Psalm 90:12). It is a very important thing to be ready for death in a literal sense; we ought not to be taken by surprise. So with regard to the *spiritual* feature of entering the land when we come to it, we ought to be ready for that. It is a spiritual matter and we require spiritual strength for it.
B.T.F. They had been told that it was a land flowing with milk and honey. Do you think that referred to the food that would be required?
J.T. I do not think so. That is Messiah's food, milk and honey. "Butter and honey shall he eat" (@Isaiah. 7:15) -- a remarkable kind of food that does
{97}
not require death in the creatures that supply it; but all food of animal sacrifices requires death.
F.L. The disciples had been warned again and again that death was what the Lord was going on to, but they were utterly unprepared for it.
J.T. They had opportunity of following the Ark as the Lord entered on the way to go to Jerusalem. They were amazed as they followed although He had not only told them that He would suffer death, but had *taught* them as to it, which is a stronger thing.
A.P. He began to *show* them that He must suffer; see @Matthew 16:21.
J.T. Exactly. So that they ought to have been ready, but when they came to Gethsemane and the cross they were not ready. It is a good thing for all of us, but especially for those who are older, to be ready for dissolution. The article of death is a very real thing. I think the very experience and exercise of being prepared for death helps us to enter into Canaan in a spiritual way *now*; because we thus learn how to give up all that attaches to us in flesh and blood condition.
B.T.F. Would the sweetness of the heavenly portion that lies before us be an encouragement in going over the Jordan?
J.T. "Seek the things which are above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God: have your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth; for ye have died; and your life is hid with the Christ in God", (@Colossians 3:1 - 3). That certainly is an inducement. Nevertheless this food is a very important thing, no matter how much light and hope we have we need this food.
A.P. Tell us about the strength necessary to take the stones over the Jordan. How would this connect with the New Testament?
J.T. I think the mind is directed to Colossians. Romans would lay the basis for this -- there it speaks
{98}
of persons who "are led by the Spirit of God", not only led by the Ark: "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God", (@Romans 8:14). @Romans 8 contemplates the land, and Moses looking in. He sees the whole scene; "that goodly mountain, and Lebanon". The light of it was in the camp of Israel, and, in principle, was for all.
J.S. Typically, Moses would view the children of Israel going through the Jordan in the Spirit, not in the flesh.
J.T. That is the idea. It began when they, typically, recognised the Spirit (@Numbers 21); that is the beginning of this movement. They came to Shittim, the place of acacia wood, which, I think, suggests the strength acquired in wilderness experience. They were attacked there, and failed, but that only proves how little they had gained. God answered Balak, through Balaam, "from Shittim unto Gilgal", (@Micah. 6:5). This is said to allude to "the righteousness of Jehovah", and no doubt points to the power of God seen in the passage of the Jordan.
J.S. How do you view Joshua at this juncture?
J.T. Typically he is Christ as the spiritual Leader of the saints, and that goes back to @Exodus 17, where the Holy Spirit is first typically seen. Christ is seen in Joshua as leading in *conflict*.
W.G.T. As we get in @Colossians 1, Christ as Head?
J.T. It is military -- seen fully in Ephesians.
J.S. Would you view this collectively -- they went through as a company?
J.T. It is @Colossians 2:12,13. The lodging place here (chapter 3:1) is important; it is not in the land, but is used when entering the land. The lodging place is not finality.
These "victuals" are needed so that we might have strength to renounce all that attaches to us in the flesh, for the sake of entering into the promised land, the place of God's love.
{99}
A.L. Was it not the fact of the ark having gone into the Jordan that gave them strength?
J.T. They had to follow two thousand cubits behind; and the ark stood in the midst of the Jordan, and a man from each tribe took a stone and carried it over. I am free and able to use my strength. I am not overcome by the thought of death all around me but I see that it is abolished. It is a question of life in unity. The believer is seen here as quickened with Christ.
C.A.M. If a man in the face of actual dissolution is able to say that he has followed the Ark of the Covenant into the land of promise, he is a spiritual man.
J.T. It would be characteristic, because the ark had been moving before on this principle. Every time the camp moved, the ark went before them, and the people had thus the opportunity to learn how to follow the ark and to know its power. There was the testimony of the scattering of the enemies; (@Numbers 10:35). If I am accustomed to that, I am characteristically a follower of the Ark, and when I come to this spiritual crisis I am ready for it.
A.F.M. There is our side as having the victuals, but does not the priesthood of Christ enter into it?
J.T. I am sure it does. Hebrews helps us as to that. "For such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens", (@Hebrews 7:26). He saves us to the uttermost, and that involves the land. We get His support all the way. But then we are occupied with the food that belongs to this particular juncture of our spiritual history. As to the land, we begin with @Romans 8. @Romans 14 shows us a weakling, but we do not want to be weaklings. Provision is made for them, but if all in the assembly are weaklings how is the testimony to be supported?
{100}
Rem. We are told to be strong and of good courage.
J.T. Quite so. The idea of a weakling is banished from the mind in this chapter. What would he do in the presence of the enemy? "How wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" (@Jeremiah 12:5).
W.G.T. Would you bring Rahab in here on the side of strength?
J.T. She represents an element of *the work of God* that enters into all this, although already in the land. She is the link next after Egypt in @Hebrews 11:29,31. "By faith they passed through the Red Sea as through dry land; of which the Egyptians having made trial were swallowed up". "By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish along with the unbelieving, having received the spies in peace". She shows in what she says to the spies, that she is true to the work of God; also she has flax, and is moving on new principles. She sends the spies out *another* way.
A.P.T. Do you think that if the believer crosses Jordan characteristically, say on the first day of the week, he would not fear dissolution?
J.T. The acceptance of @Romans 6 and @Colossians 2 prepares one for the assembly, for passing over to the divine side; thus actual death will not be feared.
W.B-w. Do you think that everyone who partakes of the Supper crosses Jordan?
J.T. I do not. Everyone in the kingdom does not enter into the land of Canaan immediately. The weakling in @Romans 14 is provided for in the kingdom, but he is not fit for the army. Crossing Jordan is a question of spiritual power.
W.B-w. You acquire spiritual power to cross the Jordan by the kind of food already mentioned.
J.T. It is a supreme exercise, and I think that is the force of the word 'victuals'.
W.G.T. You need good visibility.
{101}
J.T. That does enter into it, because the ark was a good distance ahead.
B.T.F. I knew a lady, a believer, who was dying, and the day before she died she said, 'Only think that tomorrow I will see the Lord Jesus'. Evidently she had eaten the food referred to here. Paul says, "Having the desire for departure and being with Christ, for it is very much better", (@Philippians 1:23).
J.T. The effect of the food is seen when we reach the article of death. This formidable barrier was between the people and Canaan. How were they to get over? That ought to have been an exercise to every Israelite. Take Caleb: he must have been living on food that made him powerful. He said, "I am still this day strong, as in the day that Moses sent me", (@Joshua 14:11).
F.L. I think there is nothing more stressed amongst us than the need for the acceptance of death; nevertheless, I think it remains true with a great many that the actuality of the thing has not been faced.
J.T. I am sure of that. The Lord would impress on us that we should be prepared and know what is needed for this supreme test.
B.T.F. Was it not the mount of Transfiguration that helped Peter when he was about to put off his "tabernacle"?
J.T. That was evidently much in his mind.
G.L. Did Mary acquire this courage more than her sister Martha?
J.T. I suppose she did. I think all the brethren at Bethany were prepared. The Lord came to Bethany six days before the passover, and they were ready for the great occasion.
A.N.W. Mary had His death in mind. The Lord says "Suffer her to have kept this for the day of my preparation for burial", (@John 12:7).
J.T. I think @John 11 furnishes food for us in this
{102}
respect. In a sense it agrees with Colossians; whereas, @John 20 goes on to Ephesians -- on to ascension. @John 11 furnishes food for the believer in view of taking his place with Christ as in @John 12, so that you have to think of all that passed in the Lord's ways -- how deliberate He was! And then as he arrives at Bethany, what thoughts develop! -- first with Martha, and then with Mary, and then the actual raising of Lazarus. All that is food, I am sure. The man in @John 9 begins the instruction that ends in @John 12. He comes into the light of the Son of God whose glory shines in chapter 11.
C.A.M. That is very interesting -- their preparation for the passing of the Ark over Jordan.
J.T. Mary had that before her when she anointed the Lord. He says, "Suffer her to have kept this for the day of my preparation for burial".
Ques. What would you think about Stephen in @Acts 7, in connection with going over?
J.T. He followed the Ark through death. How supremely superior he was to the article of death! The Israelites go over in the unity of life, as seen in type in the twelve stones set down at Gilgal.
A.J.D. The Lord showed Peter that he should put off his tabernacle; he would be prepared through this food.
A.R. Is the idea in this that we contemplate the Person of Christ in some way; that we discover Him in a way that we have never seen before?
J.T. Yes; you are impressed with the necessity of the moment. "Prepare *yourselves* victuals, for in three days ye shall pass over this Jordan".
W.G.T. What do the officers represent?
J.T. They represent the order of God; that marks Colossians.
A.P-t. Why are the three days given?
{103}
J.T. They afford opportunity for preparation. *Three* indicates time for *full* exercise; seven is completion.
J.S. I suppose the "ark of the covenant of Jehovah" would now have such a place in their hearts and minds as to be an object for them to follow right into the land.
J.T. I think so. It is well to bear in mind what is said in @Numbers 10: "The ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them". So it is not a new thing in that sense, but they had never crossed the Jordan before. They had "not passed this way heretofore", (@Joshua 3:4).
A.F.M. After Shittim they removed and came to the Jordan, and lodged there before they passed over. Would you refer to that?
J.T. Well, I think this lodging place is important. You are getting nearer and nearer so that when the actual crossing takes place you are fully prepared for it.
T.A. Would @2 Corinthians 5:1 come in in that connection? "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens"?
J.T. Just so.
A.R. It says in @Joshua 3:11, "Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth is going over before you into the Jordan"; but in @Numbers 10 the ark is not called that. We discover something in Christ here that we have never seen before?
J.T. I think that is right. You have a clearer view of the Ark. It is "the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth", and Rahab understood that. Jehovah "is God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath",(@Joshua 2:11). That is the general view here.
{104}
W.B-w. There were two lodging places -- one before, and one after. Chapter 4:3 says, "Take up hence out of the midst of the Jordan, from the place where the priests¬ feet stood firm, twelve stones, and carry them over with you, and lay them down in the lodging-place where ye shall lodge this night". That is different from the lodging place in chapter 3.
J.T. Yes; it is on the other bank of the river. Chapter 3:1 is: "And they removed from Shittim, and came to the Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over". That is the first lodging place. A lodging place is not finality, but is a comfort in the deep exercise and pressure spiritually as we enter into this position. After the passage of the Jordan they were to have another one, which was Gilgal. The second lodging place is reached before they actually go up to the land, so that Colossians, properly, is entering. These two lodging places cover the position. The stones were to be set up in the second lodging place.
W.B-w. The second lodging place is resurrection -- "raised with Christ", (@Colossians 3:1).
J.T. Yes; we are set down in unity of life -- the unity of life as out of death; we are quickened together with Christ.
W.B-w. In the second, you have the whole extent of the land before you.
J.T. We are set down in the unity of life as seen in the twelve stones in the second lodging place, and we are to give an account of these twelve stones; the children will ask later, "What mean ye by these stones", (chapter 4:6).
A.P. What would the carrying up of the stones represent?
J.T. The stones represent *all* the saints as in this new position.
{105}
A.P. Does it go as far as @Ephesians 3:20: "According to the power which works in us"?
J.T. Well, it is the same power, only @Ephesians 2:6 is: "Has raised us up together, and has made us sit down", which is beyond this second lodging place; in @Colossians 2:13 we are "quickened together with him". It does not go beyond that -- that we are set up in unity of life, before entering into the full heavenly position.
F.L. What is the import of the twelve stones being set up in the midst of the Jordan?
J.T. That is the act of *Joshua*. It is to remind us that Christ has been in death, and that we have been in death with Him and have come out.
F.L. We look into Jordan and see that Christ has been there and that He has brought us out of it.
J.T. Yes; He keeps that before us. "He showed to them his hands and his side", (@John 20:20). He had been into death, and they had come out with Him.
A.R. Is that the idea of the encampment on the other side of Jordan? Would it lead to the contemplation of the fact that there is a new man before you -- another kind of man?
J.T. Yes; and you are in another world -- quickened with Christ. We are quickened together in holy affections. It is unity of life.
W.B-w. How do you fit in the three days in chapter 3 with the three days in chapter 1?
J.T. Well, that is another thing. The officers went through the camp, in this instance, and commanded the people: "When ye see the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then remove from your place, and go after it; yet there shall be a distance between you and it?" (chapter 3:3,4). This is the second three days in relation to the ark, and it is a question of clearness of vision; but with the first three days it is
{106}
a question of the strength you are acquiring by victuals. Chapter 5:10 - 12 is the termination of this phase of food. "And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and held the passover on the fourteenth day of the month, at even, in the plains of Jericho. And they ate of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened loaves, and roasted corn on that same day. And the manna ceased on the morrow, when they had eaten of the old corn of the land; and there was no more manna for the children of Israel; and they ate of the produce of the land of Canaan that year". Now we are fully in the land.
A.P.T. In chapter 3:16 it says, "And the people went over opposite to Jericho". What would you say about that?
J.T. Jericho, I suppose, would be the stronghold of the enemy. They were not afraid, but went over in full vigour and courage.
T.A. What about the "old corn of the land"?
J.T. Well, now we come to the climax of food -- you cannot get beyond the old corn. It is our final portion. It is Christ *as He is in heaven*, and that is something that is very little known. "He was transfigured before them" (@Matthew 17:2) points to a change in Christ -- what He is up there.
A.L. Why is it "old corn of the land"?
J.T. It is the 'store-corn' (footnote to chapter 5:11); there was *plenty*, so that they did not need to wait for the new crop.
A.F.M. Should we start with the fact that this is a circumcised people, and that Gilgal was named *after* their circumcision?
J.T. Yes; it is of moment to understand the whole setting. The passover here is a memorial. Of course, it is the same passover, but we must bear in mind the stipulations in Deuteronomy in considering the passover as seen here; that is to say we have to
{107}
regard the difference between roasting and cooking. Cooking is more general, and in @Deuteronomy 16, which gives you instructions for the passover in view of the land, the word is 'cook'. The idea of judgment is not so pronounced as it was in Egypt. This is preparatory to the eating of the old corn of the land, heavenly food. There is self-judgment here and the rolling away of the reproach of Egypt. Now you are free to enjoy Christ as He is *in heaven*. He is not a suffering Christ now. The passover is a suffering Christ; the manna is Christ here in adversity; but the old corn is Christ where He is in His own sphere.
A.P. This is the only place where the old corn of the land is formally referred to.
J.S. The passover and the manna are a means to an end.
J.T. They are provisional food. The old corn points to our eternal portion.
A.F.M. Would you find old corn of the land in @John 6:57, as well as in @John 20? "He also who eats me shall live also on account of me".
J.T. Yes; it contemplates His ascending to *where He was before*.
A.J.D. Why do you say that very few understand what the old corn of the land is?
J.T. Few understand Christ where He is and as He is *now* The corn of the land is indigenous. "And such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones" (@1 Corinthians 15:48), corresponds with this.
W.G.T. "So that we henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer", (@2 Corinthians 5:16).
J.T. Exactly; Christ as He is now. This is our eternal portion, but we can enter upon it now in the power of the Spirit.
{108}
A.A.T. Do we feed upon this food individually or collectively?
J.T. It is collective. I think that entering into the heavenly place is collective. No one ever goes there by himself. You may say that Elijah went there, but such instances are simply a question of God's sovereign prerogatives -- what *He* does; but @Ephesians 2:6 is that "God has raised us up *together*, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies"; that is, with one another. And therefore the importance of the second lodging place here, because it is where we enjoy the unity of life. It is the living side of things enjoyed amongst us as risen with Christ on the principle of faith. The more you get on in your soul, the more you feel you cannot do without the brethren. You would not wish to be in heaven without the brethren. This is in view in Colossians and Ephesians; the unity of life is there. You do not want to go without them.
F.L. What we get in @Joshua 5 could never be understood individually.
C.A.M. Mary took the message to others.
J.T. Yes: "Go to my *brethren* and say to them" (@John 20:17) -- that is the idea. He will have brethren *there*.
A.P.T. Is that seen on the mount of Transfiguration?
J.T. Well, He took three up with Him. I think the mount of Transfiguration enters into this matter of the old corn. Transfiguration is *metamorphosis* It points to what Christ is in heaven. In Him it is the result of what He is inherently. The word is applied to ourselves in @2 Corinthians 3:18: "But we all, looking on the glory of the Lord with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". It is a complete change of condition.
{109}
FOOD RECOVERED BY GIDEON
@Judges 6:1 - 24; 7:13,14
J.T. We have, hitherto, been engaged in a more positive way with the different kinds of food that are supplied; but now it is a question of the supply being cut off. There are times of plenty and times of famine. Here, it is not exactly famine, but the destruction of the food supply.
A.F.M. This would be governmental -- the result of the children of Israel having committed evil against Jehovah.
J.T. That is what I thought. We may see the difficulties under which food is supplied in these circumstances. Gideon, I think, represents the energy that would overcome these conditions.
H.S.D. What would the Midianites represent, spiritually?
J.T. Some natural influence; they were related to Israel, and, I think, denote influence of that kind -- influence arising from natural links, and of a very extensive sort, too. It says, "And they encamped against them, and destroyed the produce of the land, until thou come to Gazah, and they left no sustenance in Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass. For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came as locusts for multitude; both they and their camels were without number". We should notice the relation in which these people stood to Israel, being descended from Abraham, as Israel was, but by another mother.
H.S.D. And Amalek, too, was linked with them. Was he a relation also?
J.T. Amalekites are mentioned in @Genesis 14, and then Amalek comes in afterwards in the line of Esau. It is a question as to whether you can trace them
{110}
exactly to Abraham, but they are the first enemies that Israel met after Egypt; and they are among the last that they will have to do with in their history -- a sort of perpetual kind of enemy, always ready to fall in with others when they attack. You will always find that when any others attack, Amalek is ready to join in.
A.A.T. I notice that the shortage of food did not originate with Midian, but was due rather to Israel's bad state, as verse 1 shows.
J.T. What God allows governmentally, is one thing, but the enemy and opposition was there.
A.A.T. But at the back of that, the people themselves were in bad state, were they not?
J.T. Quite. That is what we are told in verse 7. The prophet here is unnamed; because what was needed, under such circumstances, was the prophetic word. It was not a question of the one through whom it came.
A.P. There must be a difference between a famine, and a lack of food caused by the enemy.
J.T. Yes, there is a great difference. The first is the direct hand of God; the other is indirect. The earth yielded its increase, as far as we can see; but the Midianites came up in hordes, and instead of destroying the Israelites, they "destroyed the produce of the land".
A.P. Is there any difference between the cause of famine, and that of the enemy's cutting off the food supply?
J.T. Not much. God might have sent a famine for the same reason, as He sometimes did. Solomon in his prayer (@1 Kings 8) contemplates both -- the direct action of God, and the indirect; and so also when God proposed to David as to whether He should cause a famine, or whether David should flee before his enemies, or whether there should be pestilence; David accepted the latter, saying, "Let us fall, I
{111}
pray thee, into the hand of Jehovah; for his mercies are great; but let me not fall into the hand of man", (@2 Samuel 24:14).
A.P. Would it not be more humbling to be dealt with indirectly by enemies such as Midian or Amalek?
J.T. I think so. David preferred the direct action of God. "Let us fall ... into the hand of Jehovah; ... but let me not fall into the hand of man".
H.S.D. Thus he was not in the hands of the enemy.
A.F.N. What was the character of Israel's sin here?
J.T. They had not hearkened to God's voice. And I think there must have been some recognition of social relations. Brethren suffer much from natural links and natural influences, so that God often allows you to feel that such are depriving you of your spiritual food.
J.T. So that the thing we indulge in becomes our scourge.
B.T.F. Speaking of natural influences, had you any particular one in your mind?
J.T. We are all prone to reflect unduly what is natural -- i.e., our natural relations; and if we do, they become our scourge. The solemn thing is that, in such a case, we are so dulled that we do not discern of what we have been robbed. Natural influence might keep one away from the meeting, for instance, and one allows it again, and presently one has no taste for the meeting. We fail to realise what we have robbed ourselves of; but it was the natural influence that begot this sad condition of soul.
C.A.M. Peter speaks of the things that war against the soul; and there is the element of war against the Spirit, too. This would be a thing that would war against the soul in some insidious way.
J.T. Is it a question of something that would take away your spiritual food, some natural influence that would rob you.
{112}
A.P.T. Joseph's brethren say of him, "Come and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites", (@Genesis 37:27). They would get rid of what was of God, on natural lines, but as expressing their hatred.
A.A.T. The prodigal in @Luke 15 became impoverished in the far country, and would have fed upon the husks; then he turned to God. These people seem to have turned to God when in a similar condition.
J.T. Thus the divine intervention is seen in verse 7: "And it came to pass when the children of Israel cried to Jehovah because of Midian; that Jehovah sent a prophet to the children of Israel".
W.G.T. They made dens in the mountains to escape these things, we are told.
J.T. They felt their weakness, but that did not deliver them.
A.F.M. The seven years of their oppression would refer to a complete period imposed of God, at which point they cry to Him in self-judgment, would you think?
J.T. I think so; the seven years of suffering and their crying to Jehovah would denote that.
T.A. Are these conditions analogous to those of our own day, in which the man of faith would shine as providing food?
J.T. Yes. It is a question as to how this enemy is to be overcome. Gideon represents the man who overcomes in such a situation. It says of Joash that "his son Gideon threshed wheat in the winepress, to secure it from the Midianites". Attention is called to the very great difficulty under which he laboured to secure the wheat of the Midianites.
A.F.M. He had sown and secured the crop.
J.T. Yes; he had the wheat. The principle of the oppression of the Midianites was, that they would come up in immense hordes, and overwhelm Israel
{113}
by their presence, and force them back into hiding places.
A.P. Does Gideon represent the element that had been listening to the prophet?
J.T. He represents a movement to prevent the enemy attaining his end. He is against the Midianites.
A.R.S. He found a way to secure food.
J.T. He had the right principle before him.
A.R.S. He valued the food, and found a way to preserve it.
J.T. His hand was against the enemy. You will notice that it is not simply the threshing of wheat, and so valuing the food, but he secured it from the Midianites.
A.R.S. Have you any thought about the wine press?
J.T. I think it refers to the pressure Gideon himself was under. A wine press would be smaller than a threshing floor.
A.F.M. Is there any significance in the fact that it was wheat he was threshing?
J.T. I think so. Probably it was twice as valuable as barley.
T.A. Is wheat typical of Christ personally?
J.T. Well, not exactly. I think barley is that, inasmuch as it was the first crop of the season, being sown very early. The cake of barley bread that Gideon heard of was not exactly Christ personally, but the apprehension of Christ that Gideon would have. It was baked, being a cake. It "tumbled into" the camp of the Midianites -- an extraordinary sort of movement, but a very effective one, indicating that Midian would be overthrown by the very thing they were seeking to get and carry away.
A.F.M. Would the wheat have reference to the saints as a heavenly company?
{114}
J.T. It refers to the saints. It comes in later than barley. Ruth continued from the barley harvest to the wheat harvest; (@Ruth 2:23).
A.F.M. Gideon was evidently superior to natural influence, as indicated in the Midianites, for he had wheat and was threshing it; which might refer to believers in their heavenly position.
J.T. I think what you get out of that is this: he was going in for the best kind of cereal, the most valuable; that is, if a man is going to secure food from the enemy, he thinks especially of the best. You want food that relates to the church. You want to secure the heavenly calling, at all costs.
B.T.F. That order enters into it -- barley first, and wheat afterwards; Christ in resurrection and then the saints.
W.B-w. Would the barley bread refer to Paul's ministry? The barley cake tumbled in; it was irregular in movement, but brought about great results.
J.T. It is something obtained by exercise; it is not objective but subjective truth. If you take the Creed, or well-known Thirty-nine Articles of Religion, these do not answer to the cake at all. Generally they represent something that may be taken in by the natural mind, but that which is baked does not typify what can be taken in in that way. It is the truth held in faith, for the fire has been applied to it.
A.R. Would the wheat suggest labouring in the light of Pentecost?
J.T. I think Gideon's service indicates that he was considering for quality.
A.N.W. The word to Gideon is: "Jehovah is with thee"; but he is not content that Jehovah is with him -- he is concerned that Jehovah be with the people. He says, "If Jehovah be with us"; he has a large view.
{115}
J.T. Although he is working in small quarters and apparently alone, he is evidently working with the people of God in his mind.
A.P.T. Gideon has a very small view of himself; he says, "I am the least in my father's house". It is good to have a large apprehension of what the saints are to God, and a small apprehension of oneself. He also says, "My thousand is the poorest in Manasseh".
W.B-w. I was wondering about the way light comes to us. It says in verse 8, "Jehovah sent a prophet to the children of Israel". It seems that all the people should have profited by this light, but an angel of Jehovah came to Gideon only. There must be some distinction between the prophet's coming and the Angel's coming.
J.T. Suppose there is a prophetic word at a meeting like this, then it is for everyone present but who among us takes it to heart? Tonight or tomorrow the Lord will be looking on us to see who is taking it to heart. This man had evidently taken things to heart, so that an angel sits under the terebinth and takes account of him.
A.A.T. This is evidently the first mention we have of Gideon.
W.G.T. It appears that the Angel was there in relation to the house of Joash.
J.T. Yes, he has that house in mind and is going to secure it, but his eye is upon Gideon. The hope of Israel is in him.
W.B-w. The facts mentioned show that there was a work of God in Gideon.
F.H.L. Do the persons mentioned speak of what is progressive? First a prophet, then an angel, and then Jehovah Himself?
J.T. It is progress in nearness and intimacy. It says, "Jehovah looked upon him"; a
{116}
conversation follows, and Gideon proposes to bring his "present".
B.T.F. Would you take the wine press as representing the influence of the death of Christ, including His love, and the food for the people produced under that influence?
J.T. I think that is right. Gethsemane is the same idea as the wine press, meaning a place of pressure, the Lord having gone through the most extreme pressure there. Gideon was experiencing something of that.
A.P. It required patience to work in such limited conditions.
J.T. We are not of much use unless we begin to work thus. The Lord answered "from the horns of the buffaloes", (@Psalm 22:21). Think of the external limitations and pressure there! And yet He was accomplishing the great work of atonement!
A.R.S. But He was brought into "a large place". (@Psalm 18:19)
A.L. Gideon was acquainted with the history of Israel.
J.T. That would show that he read his bible, so to speak; a good example for a young brother to follow. He took account, too, of the character of the enemy; and secured the wheat from the Midianites.
A.F.M. The spirit that animated Gideon was to expand -- there were finally three hundred others who were of the same spirit. What a contrast it was to the masses of Israel who were oppressed by the Midianites!
E.C. You have used the word 'struggle' in connection with a new meeting; to what did you refer?
J.T. To the difficulties we have to go through. Generally things are not easy, but especially in a new meeting.
{117}
E.G. You would want young men like Gideon in that meeting.
J.T. That is it; to get things on the true foundation -- on the "strong place in the ordered manner".
C.A.M. The enemy is always against something of God that is started.
J.T. God allows that so that your valour comes to light in the effort you make. In spite of opposition and limitation, you are along with David and the mighty men of valour; and so here, Gideon is the mighty man of valour.
J.T.Jr. Does it refer to the work of the Spirit of God in his soul -- the power by which he did things, as a man marked by the Spirit?
J.T. Exactly. He will go on in spite of opposition.
A.R. His father's house in Ophrah was his local setting in which he had qualified; now he could be commissioned; it says, "Jehovah looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of Midian". One right in his local setting becomes profitable universally.
Rem Verse 13 indicates that Gideon felt things keenly: "Ah my Lord, if Jehovah be with us, why then is all this befallen us?"
J.T. God greatly respects our feelings, if they are the outcome of an unselfish view of things.
C.A.M. The fact that he starts small does not govern the Angel's vision of Gideon. The incoming of Christ, although outwardly small, results in what is infinitely great.
J.T. Thus you have to consider all these types with your eye on Christ. This gives buoyancy, for victory is in view. What we are considering is a very beautiful history: you have the appearing of the Angel of Jehovah, and then what he said, namely: "Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of valour". That was a greeting. What respect there was in the
{118}
Angel's address: "Thou mighty man of valour". Gideon would never forget that!
B.T.F. Threshing was only a simple work that could have been done by any strong man; but a mighty man of valour would be one like David going out and conquering Goliath; but you would say that the simple service of threshing was owned of God?
J.T. It was the motive behind it which God owned. We are told why he was doing it; it was to secure it from the Midianites. That is a very important aspect of the subject of our readings.
A.R.S. Later he defeated the enemy utterly. That is where his great valour is seen.
Ques. What is the similarity between Gideon and Joseph?
J.T. Joseph was conserving the food, as exalted to the greatest place, under the king, in Egypt; that is, he had all the might of Egypt behind him. He is a type of Christ as now in heaven, having all power, and using it in a moral way. One who controls food has great moral power. Gideon, on the other hand, is labouring in the wine press alone, nobody is subservient to him, as far as we can see. He is the least in his father's house, and here he is threshing wheat in this narrow place. Joseph had no enemy with which to contend; but Gideon has, and overthrows him. He understands the character of the enemy, and begins by securing food from that enemy. Thus Gideon is another type of Christ with regard to food.
W.B-w. Gideon asks, "Why then is all this befallen us". -- not 'me', but "us". He felt the condition of the people.
J.T. That is a great feature too -- that we feel how the saints are suffering.
A.G.T. He acknowledged it was God's government, that God had given them into the hand of the Midianites.
J.T. Yes; he says, "Ah, my Lord, if Jehovah
{119}
be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where are all his miracles that our fathers told us of, saying, Did not Jehovah bring us up from Egypt? And now Jehovah hath cast us off, and given us into the hand of Midian". That was his speech. He felt these things, and knew also what had happened before; he was conversant with Scripture, though as yet wanting in faith.
W.G.T. He is given a mission now: "Thou shalt save Israel".
W.B-w. He could not only secure provision, but he could present something to Jehovah.
J.T. That is the next thing. He knows how to present food to God.
A.F.M. He has it to present.
J.T. Yes, that is a remarkable thing.
H.S.D. It is the act of a priest.
J.T. That is what comes out. We must not pass over the beautiful touch in verse 14: "Jehovah looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of Midian". That was the encouraging word. Notice the recurrence of the word 'Midian' in verse 16. The present enemy is ever kept in view.
C.H.H. Would this indicate the feeling and exercise of a young brother before he can be of help and a means of supply to the brethren?
J.T. That is what may be learned from it -- secret history with God, before we are used in public service.
H.S.D. Do you connect the thought of "thy might" with originality?
J.T. I should. It was the kind of might that was seen in the wielding of the flail. I think he must have been a very dexterous thresher.
J.T.Jr. He does not commend himself, he leaves it to God to do that.
{120}
C.A.M. The very fact of his having wheat to thresh would indicate a long season of exercise. He had sown and he had reaped.
J.T. He must have watched over his crop carefully, too, and harvested it in spite of the vigilance of the Midianites, showing how patient and yet energetic he was.
C.A.M. Is it not a remarkable thing that when God refers to his might, Gideon immediately alludes to his poverty?
J.T. No doubt that was his salvation. In his weakness he "became strong", (@Hebrews 11:34).
A.F.M. In this connection Gideon asks for a sign, and obtains a remarkable one, leading him up to the recognition of the Angel of Jehovah.
B.T.F. You were speaking of the comparative value of the food. How do you compare the ministry of Christ risen, with the ministry of Christ ascended?
J.T. The barley sheaf is Christ risen, typically. The sheaf of first fruits in @Leviticus 23 refers, I understand, to barley. The sheaf had been cut but the grain was not detached from the husk. But Christ in heaven is the antitype of the old corn of the land. It was corn carried over from the previous year -- denoting the plentifulness of the land.
B.T.F. It would produce an entirely different effect in the soul as one advances to the truth that Christ is ascended, after learning that Christ is risen, would it not?
J.T. It would. Christ in resurrection is the victory. That is what is presented in the gospel as in Romans; but Christ in heaven is Man in a new place and involves the teaching of Ephesians.
A.P. Would you give us some help regarding food for God in verses 18 - 21 of the chapter before us?
J.T. Quality enters largely into it; it is this for which Gideon stands in service; and the three hundred men also, as tested, show they are men of quality.
{121}
In thinking of food for God, Gideon says, "If now I have found favour in thine eyes, show me a sign that it is thou who talkest with me. Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee". He is now advancing in the truth. He has lost the sense of his insufficiency, and is taking up a priestly attitude, for he talks about a present, and has confidence to ask Jehovah to wait.
A.F.M. He seems to know what to present: "And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid of the goats, and an ephah of flour in unleavened cakes: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out to him under the terebinth, and presented it". There is priestly intelligence and order in all this.
J.T. It is very beautiful, indicating that if we are to serve and minister a portion of meat to His household, we must first learn how to minister to God.
C.A.M. @Malachi 3:10 teaches that a revival and a supply of food from heaven require that the people must bring "the whole tithe into the treasure-house, that there may be food in my house".
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. Gideon speaks with a sense of liberty; he would detain God, but in the recognition of His dignity.
J.T. Showing holy boldness. "Let us approach therefore with boldness" (@Hebrews 4:16); and, "Let us approach with a true heart". (@Hebrews 10:22). That is the principle. It is very beautiful.
A.L. Is all this the effect of Jehovah's appearance to Gideon, or of what Jehovah said to him?
J.T. Both. I think he had been made a worshipper. It is the effect of a presentation on God's part to us, which gives liberty and draws out the heart to Him. Not only did Gideon have wheat, but he had a
{122}
kid: "And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid of the goats, and an ephah of flour in unleavened cakes: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out to him under the terebinth, and presented it". He presented it; all this is very instructive and touching.
W.B-w. It is a good thing to ask God to wait for us sometimes.
J.T. It indicates a knowledge of God. The more you know of God, the more confidence and holy liberty you have in His presence.
A.A.T. According to verse 22, it would seem as if he did not know to whom he was talking.
J.T. But he did know, intuitively. With the light of the New Testament we can see that he was acting in the intelligence of the divine nature. All that he does is morally right. The man of @John 9 corresponds with this.
W.G.T. What Gideon does shows that he was taking into account the Person to whom he was giving the food. He presents it.
J.T. I think so. The Lord, when here, was not known much as to His Person, but it is remarkable how certain ones who came to Him acted rightly. When God is working in souls they act becomingly, as if the new surroundings, in which they are, impress them.
A.P. Gideon puts the flesh in a basket and the broth in a pot. These are made articles. Do you think that we should have what answers to them at the Lord's supper? We should not come empty.
J.T. These vessels are suitable, and Gideon had them. What strikes you is what he had. In spite of these marauders who were despoiling the people, here is a man who has something; he has food. He has all that is necessary for an offering to God.
A.A.T. He has a good appreciation of God and of His people.
{123}
J.T. He was evidently conscious of the divine Presence and instinctively knew what to do, which is greater than an acquired knowledge of God; like the two at Emmaus who said, "Was not our heart burning in us as he spoke to us on the way", (@Luke 24:32).
A.F.M. This service of Gideon must have been very delightful to God as He watched to its climax.
W.B-w. He had a kid, in spite of the fact that it says there was "no sustenance".
A.R. What is the thought in the laying of the flesh and the unleavened cakes on the rock.
J.T. It speaks of stability -- "The firm foundation of God stands", (@2 Timothy 2:19). We are not on sinking sand here, but on the sure foundation. The figure of a rock is often employed in the Old Testament, the meaning of which is made clear in the New Testament.
W.G.T. He is moving under instruction when he places the present there.
J.T. The Angel directed saying, "Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rook, and pour out the broth. And he did so. And the Angel of Jehovah put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes". Notice it is this rock. So that as we draw near to God, we better understand what to do. Sometimes when you get up to speak to God you have very little in your soul, but thoughts come to you that you never had before. Here, as Gideon came with his present, the Angel instructs him as to what to do.
W.B-w. What happened to the broth?
J.T. I think the broth refers to the essence of the offering. It would be what Christ is essentially in His Person.
W.G.T. That would not be consumed?
{124}
J.T. Well, it was poured out: "Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so. And the Angel of Jehovah put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there arose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes". The broth is poured out; the sentence is full of suggestion.
A.F.M. The broth is brought into evidence in His death, and the fire would refer to the suffering side of it.
J.T. It would. What He is essentially is there. The One who hung on the cross is the eternal God. It is inscrutable, but there it is!
W.G.T. What does the Angel represent in putting forth the staff?
J.T. I think the staff alludes to experience. It is that Jehovah had been with him, travelling with him. I think it would be as if God had said, 'I know all about you; I have been with you all the time'. The staff denotes authority that arises from experience. The place it has with Moses in Exodus helps as to this.
A.B.P. Would Gideon say, in principle, "Thy rod and thy staff", (@Psalm 23: 4)?
J.T. He would. He would never forget this experience.
A.R. Would you say a little more about what the Lord is essentially?
J.T. We must never forget that. Christ has come into the most lowly circumstances, even entering into death, and we are always prone to regard Him in our minds, although perhaps not in our words, as less than He is. His enemies derided Him as on the cross for His apparent weakness, but the centurion, noting the character of His loud cry, said, "Truly this man was Son of God", (@Mark 15:39).
{125}
W.G.T. So the apostle says, "Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever", (@Romans. 9:5).
J.T. You never lose sight of that, so that the Lord raises the question with the disciples: "Who do ye say that I am?" (@Matthew 16:15).
A.P. Do these priestly features qualify one to meet the idolatry in the paragraph that follows in connection with the altar of Baal?
J.T. They do. Gideon is going through things with God: "And Gideon perceived that he was an angel of Jehovah; and Gideon said, Alas, Lord Jehovah! for because I have seen an angel of Jehovah face to face. And Jehovah said to him, Peace be unto thee: fear not; thou shalt not die. And Gideon built there an altar to Jehovah, and called it Jehovah-shalom". That is the ground reached by Gideon -- 'Jehovah of peace' (footnote, verse 24).
A.P. Is it a principle that affairs must be set right locally, before there can be general service?
J.T. Quite. Before you take up service in a general way, you must be right locally.
A.P. It was not until after this that Gideon "blew the trumpet" (verse 34).
R.D.G. What is there in the fact that he built an altar himself, after the rock had been designated as an altar?
J.T. I think it is to show the progress he had made. Your own altar is to indicate your stature. He is told by God to build the next altar, but with regard to his own altar he has no instructions.
R.D.G. God would take pleasure in the fact that he built it?
J.T. I think so. God takes delight in the growth of His saints.
J.E.H. He had taken into account that God had said to him, "Peace be unto thee", and he calls the altar Jehovah-shalom, or Jehovah of peace.
{126}
A.N.W. Is not the altar an answer to the appearing rather than to what is said?
J.T. I think all that he had experienced in his relations with God so far, enters into the altar.
W.B-w. Referring to the subject of food, would you tell us the difference between Gideon as having the cakes, the kid, and the broth, and Gideon as represented in the barley cake in chapter 7?
J.T. Well, that is what he was himself. The interpretation is: "This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon, the son of Joash, the man of Israel". The enemy would be overthrown by a representation of food coming in thus; that is, the barley cake tumbling in. It is a type of Christ risen, but apprehended in the power of the Spirit by faith, for the cake had gone through the process of baking, as we have seen.
H.S.D. So that the food is a weapon?
J.T. Well, that is what we see here -- "the sword of Gideon". The cake tumbled in, and the tent lay along. It was complete overthrow.
A.P. It is interesting that the three hundred men, as they are about ready for battle, take victuals into their hands; (chapter 7:8).
J.T. Exactly. They meet the enemy on this principle of food.
A.P. It is in their hand; and is the kind of thing that is going to overcome.
A.F.M. They got the victuals from the people. It refers to venison taken in hunting, the same word as used in @Joshua 1:11.
{127}
Pages 127 - 314 -- "New York Readings", 1933 (Volume 117).
FAMINE IN THE LAND
@Genesis 12:9 - 20; 13:1 - 4
A.F.M. Will you tell us what is the object of famines in Scripture?
J.T. Famines are allowed to test us as to our dependence on God; it is significant that this famine appears as soon as Abram entered the land and built his altar.
A.F.M. Do you think a famine has a voice governmentally, whether to the saint or the sinner?
J.T. I think it has. God would bring out what is in us of Himself, by famine circumstances; He would also allow what is not of Himself to show itself in us, so that we might learn what the flesh is.
B.T.F. Are you speaking of a spiritual famine or of a material one?
J.T. We have to regard it, in a material sense, as an occasion of testing, but it has a spiritual sense, too, which will no doubt come before us in due course. Here it is a material famine; God employs such a thing to test us as to whether we carry our circumstances, or whether they carry us. If they carry us, they are like a flood which may take us out to sea; whereas, if we carry them, we are in control and can bring God into them. If my circumstances carry me, the enemy has vantage ground for an attack. Obviously the lesson to be learned is how to be in control of our circumstances.
W.B-w. Do you think Abram lost control when he went down to Egypt?
J.T. He did, absolutely. He was carried out to sea, so to speak, where he was at the mercy of the winds and waves, and so lost his bearings.
A.P. What is the object of the famine coming in
{128}
at the point where Abram had built an altar to Jehovah, etc.? And then it says, "And Abram moved onward, going on still toward the south".
J.T. The moving south is the key; why did he move away from the point where he had built an altar? The moving south would mean that he was going toward a more favourable position, but in doing so he was moving away from his altar!
J.S. He was moving according to sight, and not in faith.
J.T. I think that is the thought. He was governed by natural inclinations; for the south is more attractive, being warmer, and seems more favourable. On the voyage to Rome, the south wind blew gently, (@Acts 27:13), but was deceptive. The south has other meanings, of course, but here it is a question of natural attractions, as the history of Abram shows.
W.B-w. The word in verse 7 should have been enough: "Unto thy seed will I give this land".
J.T. Yes; that word ought to have sunk into his heart, and it did at the beginning, for "into the land of Canaan they came"; "and *there* he built an altar to Jehovah". Moving away from this position was therefore not of faith.
A.R.S. He built an altar, and called on the name of the Lord, notwithstanding, he went away to the south!
J.T. That change of position shows that Abram did not stand by his altar; he moved south, to what was apparently a more favourable land, but in doing so his sensibilities were not divinely controlled.
A.F.M. The second location of the altar was good, being near Bethel. It says, "And he removed thence towards the mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, having Bethel toward the west, and Ai toward the east".
H.S.D. Going south would suggest that he ceased to call upon the name of the Lord.
{129}
J.T. As tested, our movements tell the tale as to where we are. It is noticeable that he moved onward, "going on still toward the south". This movement certainly does not indicate that he was satisfied with, or that he was maintaining the point he had reached in faith.
J.S. Does it show that a young believer might take up a certain position which he was not morally equal to?
J.T. The position here was right, and Abram was right in taking it. The mistake was in surrendering it.
J.S. He was not equal to it in his soul.
J.T. It was a well-chosen position; his mistake was in leaving it. It says, "And Abram passed through the land to the place of Shechem, to the oak of Moreh" (verse 6), which, I think, would point to stability. The Canaanite was then in the land, and so had to be reckoned with. Next it says, "And Jehovah appeared to Abram", this is the thing that ought to have governed him. It is in this position that the Lord appeared to him and said, "Unto thy seed will I give this land". There is no suggestion in Jehovah's word that he is to move out of it.
J.S. That is the line that should have governed him.
J.T. Why should I move from the position in which Jehovah speaks to me? I certainly could not find a better. It says, "And there he built an altar to Jehovah who had appeared to him". This enhanced and confirmed the position in which Abram was.
A.R.S. Would you say that he failed to keep the word of the Lord? To the church in Philadelphia it is said, "... and has kept my word", (@Revelation 3:8).
J.T. He seems to be moving out of the divine current, moving on toward the south. We have two altars alluded to. The second one is in an excellent position, typically, in relation to the house of God
{130}
(Bethel), and yet he is moving on. I think that is where his weakness lay.
B.T.F. Would you not take account of his action in the point he has reached when he called on the name of Jehovah?
J.T. That was excellent so far. It is the moving on from the place of his altars that indicates the downward course.
T.A. If we miss our way in the path of faith, God in faithfulness will move to bring us back.
J.T. That is what you come to in the next chapter. He went on his journey from the south. Now he is on the right road; it says, "... as far as Bethel; as far as the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai; to the place of the altar that he had made there at the first. And there Abram called on the name of Jehovah". It is between the two callings on the name of Jehovah that you have the deflection.
A.B.P. Would you say that the place "where thou art" would indicate the point of departure, and also the point of full recovery? "Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, northward and southward and eastward and westward", (chapter 13:14).
J.T. Yes. Now he is in the centre of the inheritance (compare @Ephesians 3:14 - 19).
J.S. Why do you think the points of the compass come in here?
J.T. They indicate the earthly inheritance; the heavenly involves depth and height as well as breadth and length. I think Abram was the centre of everything for God here, so that it is "from the place where thou art" he is told to look northward and southward and eastward and westward.
A.J.D. The points of the compass here would indicate that God would hold nothing back from Abram.
{131}
J.T. Love would do its best for him in these circumstances. The points of the compass denote the area of the divine operations and its selections. We are to apprehend "the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ, which surpasses knowledge", (@Ephesians 3:18,19).
H.S.D. It is clear that the whole land would be given to Abram.
W.B-w. The Lord said, "And they shall come from east and west, and from north and south, and shall lie down at table in the kingdom of God", (@Luke 13:29).
J.T. Abram, in his day, was the centre of things; but when the Lord Jesus Christ was here He was the centre of everything, and is so now in heaven; so that we take our bearings from Him.
A.F.M. You spoke of stability in connection with Abram at the oak of Moreh in chapter 12:6, then Abram's position is given in chapter 13 as at the oaks of Mamre. Between these two points he evidently had gained considerably in his soul.
J.T. Yes; he is now at Hebron, which has great spiritual significance; it refers to what was before the world; thus Abram has moved spiritually.
A.R. Verse 17 reads: "Arise, walk through the land according to the length of it and according to the breadth of it; for I will give it to thee".
J.T. Length and breadth give you the area, that is all you need for square measure. We should notice, that although Hebron was in the southern district of Canaan, Abram in going there is not said to have moved toward the south; it is now a question of the breadth and length of the land, and the purpose of God.
J.S. The depth and height properly belong to Ephesians, and could not be brought in until Christ's death and resurrection.
{132}
J.T. Depth and height bring to light another thing; namely, love.
J.E.H. Why do you say that?
J.T. Because a fourth dimension is introduced. The length and breadth and height, or thickness, are all that you can get in ordinary mathematics, and depth is a moral thing. It is Christ going down in love.
A.N.W. I suppose a man must touch the depth and height before he could become available for service.
J.T. Christ had to go down; He only could do so. Geologists talk about going down, but how far do they go? Their calculations are guess-work at best; they cannot penetrate into the depth of the earth's crust. The only One who has really gone down is Christ; He went down "into the lower parts of the earth". (@Ephesians 4:9) It is a question of a moral descent in love.
A.P.T. This great city in which we live is marked by height, there is depth, too, but no moral depth to it.
J.T. Its spirit is Babylonish; we read of those that built Babel, that they said, "Come on, let us build ourselves a city and a tower, the top of which may reach to the heavens", (@Genesis 11:4). They had no idea of depth, either.
A.P.T. I suppose love in Christ that went down is the great thing to understand.
A.A.T. Do we understand that Abram's deflection was produced by famine conditions?
J.T. Well, it had begun before. It says, "And Abram moved onward, going on still toward the south. And there was a famine in the land". The famine comes in subsequently, and serves to expose fully the state Abram was in. It is the opposite of: "I being in the way, Jehovah has led me", (@Genesis 24:27).
{133}
A.A.T. His movement southward was before the famine.
A.N.W. God brought in the famine to expose a certain state of soul in Abram. It says in @Luke 15:14, "There arose a violent famine throughout that country", which coincided with the state of the prodigal's soul.
J.S. What is the spiritual significance of the famine here?
J.T. I think it is well to take notice of the fact that he was already on the way south; there was no indication of any spiritual attraction there, but simply that which appealed to the natural senses. That is what is clearly seen in the passage -- he was already bent in that direction. It would mean, in our case, that some favourable opportunity to make money, or to better one's circumstances, presented itself.
C.A.M. Things of this kind would lead down to Egypt.
J.T. Yes. The term "south" here apparently signifies the region bordering on the desert in the south. Proximity to the desert is, no doubt, the spiritual meaning here; besides, the direction was toward Egypt. For us it would be some prospect that opens up satisfactorily to nature, and so is taken advantage of. God says, as it were, 'I will test you, so that the full consequences of this may come to light for your own good'. Abram has set out already, and now God allows the famine, so that he is exposed by it.
A.J.D. Are you referring to our daily occupations and material circumstances?
J.T. Anything like that, which holds out prospects of material advantage for the gratification of our natural desires.
A.F.M. The passage would show that the famine was raised on Abram's account. Of course, others
{134}
felt it, although no one else is mentioned as suffering. Abram is evidently the object of the famine.
J.T. That is how it stands. We have to take the famine here as bearing on persons who have faith, but who have been deflected and controlled by their natural inclinations.
T.A. Is it always the case that where there is real faith, it is bound to be tested? Abram had several very severe tests, but by them God furthered His own work in him.
J.T. Yes; and God will bring to light what hinders faith, because if it is not judged now, it will reappear. Abram is to learn the lesson that he is never to go down to Egypt again.
A.J.D. Would you say a little as to what is meant by his building an altar, and calling on the name of Jehovah?
J.T. It is to bring out that he was a worshipper of the true God. You will observe that in Genesis there is no instruction given about altars, it is left to the worshipper; what is stated is that Abram was a worshipper of the true God, and it was subsequently that deflection set in.
W.B-w. Having an altar is no guarantee that I am going on with God. I may have the altar, and yet go astray.
J.T. That is the point. We have to be always on our guard; even as having advanced in the truth, we are liable to be diverted from the path by natural propensities. It may be moving, for instance, into a more favourable place of living, so as to increase natural comforts, or for more display in living. Matthew says of the Lord, "Having heard that John was delivered up, he departed into Galilee: and having left Nazareth, he went and dwelt at Capernaum" (@Matthew 4:12,13). That is a lot of history in a few words. Nazareth, as compared with Capernaum, was elevated and a much more desirable place in
{135}
which to live -- Capernaum was 600 feet below sea level. The Lord did not consider for any natural comfort; He went down. It was on that principle He dwelt in Capernaum. Matthew alone tells us that He lived there. I think that Abram's going to Egypt is the reverse of this; the Lord did not consider for any comfort, but, rather, thought of souls, having the testimony ever in view.
A.P.T. It was a question of sacrifice with the Lord.
Rem. It says, "And thou, Capernaum, who hast been raised up to heaven, shalt be brought down even to hades", (@Matthew 11:23). Would that show how favoured those in Capernaum were?
J.T. It was an immense advantage to Capernaum that He dwelt there; hence the responsibility of the city was increased thereby.
A.N.W. It is the only city called "His own city", (@Matthew 9:1).
J.T. In Nazareth "he was brought up" (@Luke 4:16), but He dwelt in Capernaum by His own selection.
A.R. The famine is allowed to come in, and it causes Abram to go down.
J.T. That is what happened; he was not going down in the sense of humiliation, but in a moral sense, as losing spiritual caste, which is a very sorrowful thing.
C.A.M. It is a sorrowful thing, not only because Abram lost, but it also has a bad effect on others when a man of faith is diverted.
J.T. Lot was evidently damaged in Egypt; then we have the terrible breakdown with regard to Sarai, and Hagar was taken into Abram's household, causing great exercise and sorrow afterwards.
J.S. It was a complete breakdown in Egypt, on Abram's part.
J.T. His going down was deliberate; it says,
{136}
"Abram went down to Egypt to sojourn there, for the famine was grievous in the land". His circumstances were more than he was, and he was weighed down by them; that is what comes out. If my business or other circumstances are more than I am, they carry me along, and I am as without rudder or compass, helplessly drifting. That is Abram's position here.
G.N.G. Is that why it is called a grievous famine?
J.T. The test is severe because this hidden state has to be exposed; so that it goes on to say, "And it came to pass when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said to Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a woman fair to look upon. And it will come to pass when the Egyptians see thee, that they will say, She is his wife; and they will slay me, and save thee alive. Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister, that it may be well with me on thy account, and my soul may live because of thee". Here is a man thinking of himself only and accordingly making arrangements which lead to disaster. Think of what his proposal meant to Sarai! But that does not seem to concern him. It shows that when we are on the downgrade, we lose conscience and right feelings, and expose ourselves to the corrupting influences of the world.
A.P.T. Would it be suggestive of throwing over assembly truth?
J.T. That is what is meant; as applied to us it would be the denial of the relation of the church to Christ.
A.N.W. "As the Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it", (@Ephesians 5:25).
A.J.D. Here it is exactly opposite to @Ephesians 5, and would show Abram's low state of soul, inasmuch as his conscience did not seem to trouble him.
A.N.W. The Lord was not thinking of Himself, as Abram was doing, but of the church.
{137}
B.T.F. Would you say that he was no longer true to his altar?
J.T. He is without rudder and compass, as was remarked. He is drifting along before the wind of his circumstances. It is a terrible breakdown.
A.J.D. Morally, Abram is like the Egyptians.
J.T. Quite, he was resorting in a worldly way to a subterfuge to protect himself.
A.P.T. "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away", (@John 18:8). The Lord would go into the danger Himself. He thought of the church, as our brother remarked.
W.B-w. Had Abram sought the Lord he would have been saved from drifting.
J.T. Surely; but there was enough in what had already been said to steady and keep him, for he was in the place of God's choice.
A.F.M. What do you think was the secret of all this departure?
J.T. There must have been a steady allowance of the flesh; a feature of natural desire which he would regard as legitimate. According to the facts already given, he cannot be regarded as a young believer. He was over seventy-five years old, and Jehovah had appeared to him twice, also Abram had obeyed His word, and had built two altars, and called upon His name. Thus what is before us points to a danger to which we all are exposed.
A.F.M. The famine was intended to arrest Abram, but he pursues this down-grade course right into Egypt.
A.P. Are we not liable, as amongst the people of God, to think that there is not sufficient for us there, and so we look elsewhere? We may not admit it publicly, but our very movements indicate it. God directed Abram into Canaan, and surely it would be sufficient for him.
J.T. He was in quest of something in the distance.
{138}
A.R. He turns his back upon God, and then upon his wife. First there is a breach with God, and then, typically, with the assembly.
J.T. That is what has happened in the history of the church -- a denial of the marital relations, by substituting the sister for the wife. The full thought of Christianity involves union; this is the first thing given up and people go back to the idea of the family, but the sister is not in the same position as the wife.
A.N.W. What does the sister relationship suggest to you?
J.T. It is the family idea -- simply that we are all brethren.
A.N.W. That relationship does not call for so much self-sacrifice as the other.
J.T. You are not as obligated to your sister as you are to your wife.
H.S.D. There was some truth in what Abram said to Pharaoh about Sarai, because she was his half-sister.
J.T. There was. We recognise our brethren, although they may be in denominations around us, but church affection is not there, because the marital relation is absent; it is a lower position.
J.S. The marital relation was the first thing given up.
J.T. Yes; union. To the assembly at Ephesus, it is said, "But I have against thee that thou hast left thy first love", (@Revelation 2:4). This difference between the sister and wife is very instructive, because the family idea runs along with love. Every true Christian belongs to the family, and must be regarded as a brother or sister, but if he is in worldly associations, religious or otherwise, he cannot be owned as in the marital relations and affections of Christ and the church.
A.N.W. It is one thing to remove from a sisterly
{139}
relation to that of a wife, but another thing to move from wife to sister.
J.T. It is abandonment of marriage relations. Think of what that means with regard to Christ and the church! Of course, the family link is right and great in its place, but how serious the state that would use it to deny the marital!
J.S. Sarai is fully exposed, and left to the mercy of the Egyptians. So the church has been left to the mercy of the world.
W.G.T. Abram is really taking issue with God in this matter.
J.T. What God has joined together, he is separating.
A.J.D. Does Abram in this connection represent the responsible element?
J.T. Yes. Man, as in relation with woman represents the side of responsibility.
A.F.M. Do you think there is a suggestion of what is Laodicean in the riches that Abram acquired?
J.T. I think so. Much is made of his riches as following his denial of his wife; Pharaoh "treated Abram well on her account; and he had sheep, and oxen, and he-asses, and bondmen, and bondwomen, and she-asses, and camels". But he had lost his wife! This world's Laodicean riches are not equal to the gain of the truth of the assembly.
A.R. The princes of Pharaoh took account of Sarai first, that she was fair, and they spoke to Pharaoh about her.
J.T. It is, typically, the beauty that Christ has put on the church that the world can take account of and mar.
A.J.D. Our position, as of the assembly, should not be given up for the sake of prosperity in the world.
J.T. In the early history of the church, those responsible, called the "early fathers", gave up the truth of the church for worldly advantage.
{140}
A.P. You are looking at Abram as responsible; it is he that tells the lie.
J.T. See where he placed his wife! That is what should come home to us. Am I moving in relation to the church? Or am I exposing it to the world?
A.P.T. Our brother's remark as to Abram telling some of the truth is worthy of consideration: people say that the radio is useful because certain good things come through it; that is only half the truth, the whole truth shows that it is an abomination.
C.A.M. On entering Egypt, there seems to be a series of questions in Abram's mind as to the position he had assumed, which results in complicity with Sarai.
J.T. The nearer you get to the world the more you feel that you have to make terms, because you have no divine protection.
A.P. The Spirit of God says to Pergamos, "I know where thou dwellest, where the throne of Satan is", (@Revelation 2:13).
A.F.M. The plagues here, are of great value.
J.T. They bring out that God is faithful; He is looking on and knows that both Abram and Sarai have faith, and He is not going to lose those precious gems, or allow such jewels to remain in swine's snouts; but is going to have them in their proper setting. He, therefore, plagues Pharaoh.
C.A.M. It is wonderful that despite Abram's breakdown, and the influence of the world, God recovers Sarai, we may say, without damage.
J.T. Were it not for this sovereign action of God, how dreadful the consequence of Abram's descent into Egypt would have been! But He is faithful; He can deal with the world's system, on behalf of His people; and is doing so today. We can reckon on that.
Ques. Do you think the present depression is
{141}
making the world's system lose its hold on the saints?
J.T. Yes, I do. God is making the world's system release its hold. Many are coming to see the hollowness and instability of the current order of things.
A.J.D. Is it not the faithfulness of God we have to reckon on today?
J.T. If we have any privileges, as we have in being here tonight, it is a faithful God that we have to thank for them.
A.B.P. There is a word for us here, that we should not be puffed up because we have received light from God. Abram had received light from Jehovah, but he seems to have been self-centred.
J.T. As in @1 Corinthians 14:36: "Did the word of God go out from you, or did it come to you only?" We are apt to think of ourselves in this way.
B.T.F. Would you say that God ever kept His eye on Abram, and came in at the right moment to effect his deliverance, although Abram had deflected from the path of faith?
J.T. Yes; that is most assuring, as we have been saying; so that Pharaoh says to Abram, "What is this thou hast done to me? Why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife? Why didst thou say, she is my sister, so that I took her as my wife. And now, behold, there is thy wife: take her, and go away". That is how God effected their release. He plagued Pharaoh and his house.
A.P. Was it not humbling that Pharaoh had to tell Abram to move?
J.T. It was very humbling, and was intended to be that.
J.S. But Pharaoh is compelled to act, God plagues him to that, end.
A.P. I would like to know how this works out in the church's history.
J.T. God operates in the world to cause it to
{142}
relax its hold, as in the release of Peter from the prison which represents the power of the world in holding God's people. One detail after another is given -- the angel comes inside and tells Peter what to do in every detail, even to following him; and when he gets to the outer gate it opens "of itself". That is the way God worked, and Peter was released. And so in the history of the church -- the great revivals experienced by it have been preceded or accompanied by certain governmental dealings of God; the ministry has been released, so that we see it now in its full setting. Pharaoh says, "And now, behold, there is thy wife: take her, and go away".
A.P. In early days, on account of persecution, many true Christians were forced to leave their respective countries, or were allowed to do so; and they went to reside in other countries; thus the truth has spread.
W.B-w. Paul would not leave the prison, but would have the authorities come and bring him out, (@Acts 16:37). Here Pharaoh tells Abram to go.
J.T. It is God acting on the holding powers. It says, "Woe to the world because of offences?" (@Matthew 18:7). The world will either persecute or corrupt the church. In recent times God has come in and released its hold, and the church in its relation to Christ has been brought into evidence.
A.F.M. Is there not a Philadelphian principle in this chapter? We read that "Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, towards the south. And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold".
T.A. He is taking advantage now of the "opened door".
J.T. That is the thing. God causes the world to release its hold, so that His people may take advantage of it, and be free.
{143}
A.J.D. When did the world begin to relax its hold on the church?
J.T. It has been a gradual process. After the reformation certain things happened, one after another, until free preaching was allowed, and then gatherings where saints were free to meet together without anyone lawfully forbidding or interfering with them. Three hundred years ago we could not have met together as we are doing tonight. But God opened the door and keeps it open: "Behold, I have set before thee an opened door, which no one can shut", (@Revelation 3:8).
H.S.D. Abram went towards the south in leaving Egypt.
J.T. He had to go that way to get out.
H.S.D. You have to travel the same road back.
J.T. That is it. But he is now meaning to go back. Note, he went up out of Egypt.
A.S. And Lot went with him.
J.T. I think you see in Lot and Hagar the aftermath of the failure; Lot had Egyptian sensibilities and desires. Later he looked on the well-watered plains; but the connection with them of "the garden of Jehovah" and "the land of Egypt" shows that his sight is illusory -- that he had Egypt in his mind. Lot was never recovered; he was taken captive a little later, and his history, to the end is a sad one. Hagar's case is another sad one; the after effects of these things remained in Abram's house, in the government of God.
A.F.M. Should not all that we have passed through this last year or two have a recovering effect on us, so as to disengage us from what is Egyptian?
J.T. That is God's thought in it. There has been a spreading out, and a moving towards what seemed to be a more favourable position which, in truth, was the world, or nearly so, and we have to learn now to judge the motives that misled us.
{144}
G.McP. This is the second time it says Lot was with him.
J.T. It was a natural link, like that which existed between Barnabas and John Mark. The recognition of the natural in divine things, as seen here ends in disaster.
W.B-w. Why did the Lord not take away all this wealth which Abram and Lot had acquired?
J.T. It remained; the Holy Spirit gives us the facts about it. "And the land could not support them, that they might dwell together, for their property was great; and they could not dwell together". That is the result of excessive possessions; they prevent brethren from dwelling together, which is a governmental sorrow.
Rem. No earthly possessions were ever intended to separate brethren.
J.T. It is better to give them away than that they should separate us.
B.T.F. An earthly-minded man and a heavenly-minded man cannot long remain together.
J.T. That is true, but the sorrowful thing is that they had so much property that they could not dwell together.
A.N.W. Say a word about the silver and gold. It says in verse 2, "And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold". Is there spoil in all this?
J.T. I think they are just stated as they are. It is a question as to whether they are properly regarded as spoil. Riches may be valuable in a true sense, for I may use them to express love; but if they hinder me from dwelling with the brethren they are not an expression of love, they are a curse -- the riches here were such, for they forbade brethren dwelling together. What a great moral victory it would have been if Abram had stayed in the land in spite of the famine! He would have proved God, and have come to know Him in a new way.
{145}
A.P. He would not have had this accumulation of wealth that divided them.
J.T. They would have had much better times in the famine as brethren than they had with the accumulation of wealth which they got in Egypt; besides, they would have been drawn closer together as in a common affliction.
A.A.T. Are you saying that a poor man is better off than a rich man?
J.T. It is a question of the way the truth stands. There can be no doubt that accumulation of wealth tends to hinder fellowship.
A.F.M. Both Abram and Lot could have proved that "a brother is born for adversity", (@Proverbs 17:17).
J.T. What a moral triumph it would have been if Abram and Lot had stayed in the land and said, "God will provide for us", as David said, "I have been young, and now am old, and I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread", (@Psalm 37:25). With smaller herds and flocks they would have had more time for the consideration of the things of God.
{146}
FAMINE IN EGYPT
@Genesis 26:1 - 6; @Genesis 41:17 - 24,53,57; @Genesis 45:1
J.T. This famine which occurred in the days of Isaac links on with that of Abram's time. The account of the famine in Egypt is intended to impress us with its *severity*, its *extent*, and its *universal* bearing. Famines that took place in the land were intended to test *those in the land*, but the objective of the famine in Egypt was to *bring to light the Lord's people*, and to bring them practically into relation with the Lord Himself -- the true Joseph. That is why I thought we might read the verse in chapter 45; it shows the *result* of the famine -- the brethren are brought to light and into relation with Christ, typically.
W.B-w. What came to light, and what was the result of the famine, spiritually, in the days of Abram?
J.T. It would be a lesson for him, but his experience would also be on our account; as being the father of all them that believe (@Romans 4); the result of his experience would extend to all the family of faith, to the end that, however tested we may be, we should not allow our circumstances to govern us, but abide in the place of privilege, i.e., in the land. In Isaac's case the error of Abram was prevented by God's direct intervention, showing that if God sets out a principle, *He helps His people in later days to be governed by it*. He not only shows us what we *should* be governed by, but helps us to conform to it.
A.P. What intervention do you see here in chapter 26?
J.T. It says, "And Jehovah appeared to him and said, Go not down to Egypt: dwell in the land that I shall tell thee of. Sojourn in this land; and I will be with thee and bless thee". That is an
{147}
intervention of God to prevent Isaac from taking a false step.
W.B-w. From going down to Egypt.
A.J.D. What does Egypt represent in Christianity?
J.T. It is the place of visible and human resources, as over against what the invisible God supplies us with. It is the difference between sight and faith.
A.N.W. That was the thing that Abram had done in error, when he left the land -- substituting sight for faith.
J.T. That is what I thought. The principle had been set out in the earlier experience -- that the believer should not leave a divinely given place because of adverse circumstances. Isaac, of course, should have known that; but God forestalls his natural inclination to go down to Egypt, and enables him to keep by right principles, which saved him from doing what his father had done.
C.A.M. So that we not only have experience, but also a word from God as a preservative, in that way.
J.T. I think we may infer from this scripture and from Isaac's experience, that although divine lessons are clearly set out, we need divine help in order to profit by them.
W.B-w. Is not Philistine territory as bad as Egyptian territory?
J.T. But the former is the *land*. The Philistine should not be there. Faith disallows and ignores their claim to possess the land; God does not tell Isaac to move away, but says, "Dwell in the land that I shall tell thee of. Sojourn in *this* land"; he obeyed and dwelt at Gerar.
B.T.F. Do you suppose that Egypt was a lower step than Gerar?
J.T. I do. Gerar is in "the land", although the Philistines were there. Their presence does not make it cease to be the land of Isaac's possession.
{148}
A.N.W. What is indicated in Isaac's going to Abimelech, a Philistine?
J.T. I should think it was a move of weakness, very much like Abram going to Egypt. Probably Isaac was gravitating in the same direction, but God prevented him.
A.R.S. God said to Isaac, "I will be with thee and bless thee". That would be a great encouragement to him to keep in the land.
J.T. Yes; Abram did not get that word; God, no doubt, intended to set out the great lesson in Abram, of which we have spoken. Abram had to suffer like Peter and others, including ourselves, that they and we might learn. God saw to it that Isaac did not suffer through the disadvantage his unbelief had placed him in.
A.P. Any principle that has been fought for and gained in previous days is brought to our attention in later days through ministry.
J.T. Yes. That would correspond somewhat with Jehovah's appearing here to Isaac. In our case it would be God coming in to prevent us from violating a principle, and to enable us to maintain it. It is the lapsing of a thing that we are to be on our guard against. Any great principle brought out by God is apt to lapse amongst us unless we walk in faith. Faith goes back to it and maintains it, as we are helped by the Spirit of God.
W.G.T. Here, God practically repeats the blessing to Isaac which He had promised to Abram, concerning his position in the land.
J.T. Quite. It is the positive side and should have been a great incentive to him: "Sojourn in this land; and I will be with thee and bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries", and then He adds: "because that Abraham hearkened to my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my
{149}
laws;" so that Abraham as linked on with this position is commended of God. What is said to Isaac would remind him that the great interest shown in him was not on his account only, and would sober him.
C.B. If God tells us to do a thing, and we do it, He will surely bless us.
J.T. We shall see that the idea of the testimony is cumulative -- God links on the light here with Abraham.
W.B-w. First principles were with Abraham.
J.T. God began with him, and he answered to His mind. It does not say here that he went down into Egypt, because it was intended by God to connect the positive side with Abraham as "the father of all them that believe".
W.B-w. That is why he says, "... because that Abraham hearkened to my voice". It is a question of features set out in him at the beginning.
J.T. The cumulative idea in the testimony is clearly seen here.
C.A.M. Its being cumulative and increasing in that way is most important to see. Stephen, when he touched on various things, had that in mind.
J.T. How beautifully and powerfully he links the different parts of the testimony together, beginning with Abraham!
A.P. Is it your thought that Isaac represents a spiritual state that can be appealed to among the people of God?
J.T. Yes, as one capable of being impressed; so it says, "And Isaac dwelt at Gerar". It implied obedience to the divine thought.
A.J.D. Does he, in faith, lay hold of what God says?
J.T. Yes, and is governed by it.
A.F.M. The position of the heavenly man is thus maintained in Isaac. He remains in the land.
{150}
A.N.W. God refers to his seed being "as the stars of heaven" in this passage, and does not add: "as the sand is on the sea shore", (@Genesis 22:17) as with Abraham, as if to emphasise the heavenly side of things.
B.T.F. Do we find Isaac falling into the same snare in Gerar that Abram fell into in Egypt?
J.T. He "went to Abimelech" because of looking at what is seen, but Jehovah appeared to him and prevented him from going further; but then, he denied his wife, which is a solemn thing, showing that he was not on much higher ground in his soul than Abram was in Egypt.
F.H.L. The enemy would seek to maintain this character of evil.
J.T. It was a very sorrowful thing, but I think the secret was that Isaac went to Abimelech as looking to him for help, the sequel of which was that he denied his wife. Divine intervention, only, prevented him going into Egypt. Who of us could stand, when under pressure, in spite of the light, principles, and object lessons we have, if God did not come in and help us? I am sure that everyone here would acknowledge that aside from divine interventions, we would not be maintained in the path of faith.
A.F.M. The lesson before us will be simplified as we see how Isaac was recovered by the coming in of God.
C.A.M. While we are warned and preserved by God from one danger, it does not mean that there will not be another one to which we may be exposed; we might feel a sense of security, but then some other test will come.
J.T. The lesson here is in seeing the faithfulness of God coming in to save us. It is the intervention of God for Isaac, we should notice; everyone here would acknowledge that aside from this he could not have stood in many a crisis.
{151}
A.D.J. You mean that light alone will not keep us?
J.T. Light, right principles, and even a right position -- all these things are not sufficient; unless God comes in we shall step aside. I think that is the lesson to be learned here. It is the faithfulness of God coming in to enable us to profit by the lesson He sets out in others.
A.N.W. Would that be worked out in the gospels and the epistles? The gospels set out in perfection what the principle is, and the epistles maintain the principle in us, largely on the negative side, saying, "Go not down to Egypt!"
J.T. That is right. It is ministry, as has just been remarked, through one and another, by which the Lord comes in to call our attention to what He has provided for us. Hence the importance of a constant ministry.
A.P. Generations change; see @Judges 2:10.
J.T. Quite. "One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh", (@Ecclesiastes 1:4). Every new generation brings out new necessities and exercises, hence past ministry, in itself, will not suffice. There must necessarily be fresh ministry for every generation.
T.A. The message to the seven churches in Asia would confirm what you are saying: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies".
J.T. There is a suited ministry for each church; if we take the churches as successive history there is a specific ministry for each.
W.B-w. Isaac feared the enemy, and said to himself, "Lest the men of the place slay me on account of Rebecca". He was not prepared to lay down his life for her.
J.T. I think his going to Abimelech, and later denying his wife, are intended to remind us that
{152}
although God comes in and prevents us from transgressing some great principle, yet our actual *state* will be exposed and has to be judged.
J.T.Jr. The wells which Abraham had dug, the Philistines filled with earth.
J.T. All that comes out, but what the chapter shows is that Isaac was blest and triumphed in the end, that is the great thing to see. It is all a question of divine intervention -- of what God is to us.
J.S. The land was outwardly in the hands of the Philistines, yet Isaac was to hold it in the faith of his soul.
J.T. It says first, "the land that I shall tell thee of" and then, "this land".
A.P. The moment he took it up he began to prosper.
W.B-w. Would the thought of the recovery of the wells correspond with the recovery of the truth of the presence of the Spirit in our day?
J.T. I think the chapter as a whole shows how obedience to God and to His word, when we might have turned aside, brings in blessing, although the state we are actually in is exposed. God will not let us off in this respect, for He loves us too well to do that. Although God appears to us and helps us, we have to go through the consequence of our unbelief, in the faithfulness of God.
B.T.F. How would you apply the denying of his wife to the church?
J.T. It was a dropping down to the level of the *family* when Isaac said Rebecca was his *sister*, instead of saying she was his wife. We lose sight of the church if we act in that manner.
With regard to the famine in chapter 41, I think what we should observe, as already said, is the great stress that is laid upon the severity and extent of it, so that it fits in with the present tine peculiarly.
A.F.M. Of course this famine is in Egypt,
{153}
in contrast to being in the land. There would be a point in that, I suppose.
J.T. There is a great deal in that. It is really in Egypt with Joseph there, not the Egypt that Abram went to.
J.S. It is, rather, Christ exalted amongst the Gentiles, is it not?
J.T. Quite so. We widen out here to the present position of Christendom.
A.R. It says, "And there was dearth in all lands;" then it says, "And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph, to buy grain, because the famine was grievous on the whole earth". Is that what you have in mind?
J.T. That helps us to see what is in view: God is now looking out on *all* countries, that is the idea of the type, in view of bringing the brethren of Christ to light. All the great distress abroad in the world at the present time is intended of God to bring true Christians into evidence, and into practical relation with Christ, as His brethren. The object in view is very great!
W.G.T. @Psalm 105:16,23 indicates that in this famine God had Jacob and his family in view: "And he called for a famine upon the land; he broke the whole staff of bread". "And Israel came into Egypt ... .".
C.A.M. Who would Pharaoh represent?
J.T. In the main, he represents the Supreme. Of course, it is not always so, but primarily he represents the responsible element. He is the ruler of Egypt, and in giving account of what he saw in his dreams he goes more into detail than the record given by the Spirit in the beginning of the chapter, which shows that he was *impressionable*. If you compare the description of the dreams the Spirit gives in the beginning of the chapter, with what Pharaoh himself relates of them to Joseph, you will
{154}
see that he was greatly impressed with the severity of what he saw in the lean kine and in the thin and parched ears.
C.A.M. It is very interesting to see that God allows the dreams to be told by Pharaoh, evidently to indicate his feelings regarding what he saw.
J.T. I think there was design in that, to remind us that if we are to get relief, we must *feel* things. Pharaoh felt the thing, and did not minimise what he saw when speaking to Joseph.
A.F.M.. It says, "It came to pass in the morning, that his spirit was troubled", (chapter 41:8).
A.N.W. The lean fleshed kine were "such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness".
J.T. Attention is called to his impressionableness. I believe the secret of blessing lies in being impressed by the nature of the affliction or discipline we are passing through. Its very severity portends that God has a special blessing for us in it. It is a *feeling* people that God respects.
B.T.F. Was the end in view that Israel and his sons should go to Joseph?
J.T. Yes. The pressure brought out the people of God.
A.F.M. In what way did it bring them out?
J.T. Well, the next chapter says, "Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt, and Jacob said to his sons, Why do ye look one upon another? And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt; go down thither and buy grain for us from thence, in order that we may live, and not die" (@Genesis 42:1,2); and in the following chapter we read that "the famine was grievous in the land. And it came to pass, when they had finished eating the grain which they had brought from Egypt, that their father said to them, Go again, buy us a *little* food" (verses 1,2). Now, there I think you have the people of
{155}
God, in the responsible element, feeling the famine and the necessity for provision for the house.
J.S. Jacob spoke according to the light he had; he knew where the grain was.
J.T. The sequel shows that what God had in mind in the famine was to bring all His people into evidence. There are thousands and thousands of God's people mixed up with the world, and when things are prosperous they do not think much about God, but go on with the things of this world, then, when pressure comes God uses it to exercise them and they begin to think of Him. There had been reduction in Jacob's mind, because you will notice in the second proposal that he says, "Buy us a *little* food"; he would be content with less than hitherto. That is what God is aiming at amongst us -- that we should be content with less than what has been customary with us.
A.F.M. You would mean less of temporal food and things in general?
J.T. We are speaking now of what is external, and how we become ready to accept less than we have hitherto had. Jacob does not use the expression "little" as to the first visit, but in relation to the second one. It is the idea of reduction -- God is reducing His people so that they might be cut from their moorings in this world; the more we expand in this world, the more like the world we become. Except we understand and reach to the *result* of the affliction, we are exposed; we need to see that the more we are reduced outwardly, the more it is open to us to expand inwardly. The apostle says, "Let your heart also expand itself", (@2 Corinthians 6:13).
A.P. They were satisfied with a little on their side, but from Joseph's side they got a great deal.
J.T. Yes. But do you not think it is important to begin to feel small? If there is a heavy hand upon us, as there is today through this world-wide
{156}
business depression, it is well to begin to feel small, for God does not intend His people to be big in this world. Smallness in a material sense makes room for God. In Andrew's mind (@John 6:9), *littleness* was the difficulty.
A.P. Many of the people of God, even those more or less on spiritual lines, are content with spiritual smallness, while aiming at material bigness.
J.T. The *little* boy in @John 6 indicates the line on which the food supply is acquired.
A.N.W. The "little power" referred to in Philadelphia (@Revelation 3:8) is not condemnatory, is it?
J.T. It is commendable that there was even *that*.
A.J.D. All this is to make us more like the Lord Himself. There is no indication that *He* acquired anything material in this world.
A.R. Do both material and spiritual prosperity go together?
J.T. Not always, although John says to Gaius, "Beloved, I desire that in all things thou shouldest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers", (@3 John 2). There is balance there. But there is the possibility of the most spiritual being "abased" and "hungry", (@Philippians 4:12).
W.G.T. Joseph made great demands on his brethren, dealing with them "roughly", and when they went back to Jacob and made these things known to him, he took them to heart.
J.T. That is the next thing to learn. If brethren are set in movement toward Christ, they are not going to be received on their own terms. If the Lord is delivering His people through the present pressure, He makes the terms, and hence the rigour of His dealings with us; He loves us too well to let sin remain unjudged in us. In the first interview, Joseph's brethren began to talk about the way they had treated him. In chapter 42:21 - 24 they say, "We are indeed guilty concerning our brother, whose
{157}
anguish of soul we saw when he besought us, and we did not hearken; therefore this distress is come upon us. And Reuben answered them, saying, Did I not speak to you, saying, Do not sin against the lad? But ye did not hearken; and now behold, his blood also is required. And they did not know that Joseph understood, for the interpreter was between them. And he turned away from them, and wept". They are not allowed to get off. If we are under the discipline of God, we must assuredly go through deep exercise; indeed, our whole history comes up in relation to the why and the wherefore of the particular pressure which has come upon us.
W.B-w. You mean the murder of Christ has yet to be answered for by this world?
J.T. Yes, or anything corresponding to it. How are Christians who are linked with the world treating the testimony of Christ and His people, who, as loving Him, keep His commandments? All this necessarily comes up, so that there must be a going through corresponding exercises and self-judgment before God.
J.S. Joseph's brethren had to go over all their path of deflection in thorough self-judgment.
J.T. Yes. The Lord loves us too well to let us off. We must let the word of God search us, if He is to make Himself known to us. The Psalmist says, "Search me, O God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts; and see if there be any grievous way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting", (@Psalm 139:23,24).
F.H.L. His brethren recognise Joseph as the saviour of the world, and in the light of that they would feel the necessity of being right before him.
J.T. They see that he is able to provide, but they do not yet know who he is. The interpreter is between them and him (chapter 42:23), which is to be noted. Applying this to the Lord Jesus, why should I not
{158}
understand Him? -- why the need of an interpreter between Him and me? Joseph understands, but they do not; they are in a state of ignorance. That is much like the Lord's people are today, as emerging from the world, the sphere of self-will.
C.A.M. Job needed an interpreter at one time, but eventually he saw the Lord and reached the end.
J.T. The analogy in @Job 33:23 is very striking: "If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand". But here the interpreter was between Joseph and his brethren. Joseph, of course, understood what they said, despite their ignorance of this fact.
A.R.S. What does an interpreter stand for in this case?
J.T. He represents distance, and all because of ignorance.
T.A. The other disciples should not have needed John to say, "It is the Lord", (@John 21:7).
A.F.M. Do you think that distress should mark those emerging from the religious world towards Christ? One could not rightly take up the thing lightly: if we apprehended the ruin of the church and our part in it, this would cause us distress.
J.T. I am sure that is what God respects. It is a *feeling* people that God regards -- "the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that are done", (@Ezekiel 9:4). The sons of Jacob were not marked by feeling, as Pharaoh and Joseph were. The latter had, earlier, gone through "anguish of soul"; but these ten brothers were destitute of feeling, hence Joseph was severe in his treatment of them. They had sinned and had not judged themselves. Reuben points this out to them: "Did I not speak to you, saying, Do not sin against the lad? But ye did not hearken". How many times the faithful word is brought near to us, and we do not hearken but remain in our hardness?
{159}
C.A.M. Saul of Tarsus was like that; he continued his opposition in spite of the wonderful testimony of Stephen.
C.B. The sorrow we cause the Lord when not walking in the truth should come home to us.
J.T. We all should learn to feel things more. God Himself leads the way in feeling, as we may see in @Genesis 6:6.
A.P.T. Joseph says: "Does my father yet live?" (@Genesis 45:3). That is the first question after making himself known to his brethren. A little later in that chapter Joseph says, "Haste and go up to my father", etc. (verse 9). There is the suggestion of the Father and Son in these statements, which God is bringing before us now.
J.T. Judah's speech (chapter 44), corresponds with what we are saying, and indeed leads immediately to Joseph's making himself known to his brethren. He spoke to Joseph most touchingly of his father and Benjamin. It is brokenness of spirit and right feeling that God values.
J.E.H. The sufferings of Joseph, as often remarked, refer, in type, to the sufferings of the Lord Jesus.
A.R.S. Joseph's brethren, in their hardness, took the place of being "honest" men; the probing brought out that they were the opposite of that.
J.T. He did not weep in their presence, at first, but when the time for the final disclosure came he could not control himself; which shows the affections were there, but pent up, for Joseph was indeed a feeling man.
A.P. Do you think that we arrive, through discipline, at some sense of the sufferings that the Lord went through, so that we may not be asleep as to them, as the disciples were in Gethsemane?
J.T. Quite so. He was heard because of His piety. In the "strong crying and tears" (@Hebrews 5:7) of Gethsemane,
{160}
the Lord leads the way for us with regard to feeling.
B.T.F. Would you say that Joseph was acting in a priestly way in dealing with his brethren?
J.T. I think he was; he knew what to do, and was very skilful in bringing them to a state suitable for the disclosure he made.
W.B-w. Regarding believers coming out to the Lord today, it is a good thing to see them moved by feeling as to their state and past associations. They thus show reality.
C.N. Do you think that all this which Joseph forces his brethren to go through was to effect the brotherly spirit in them?
J.T. That was it -- to bring out right elements that were there, also to break down their hardheartedness. Reuben is mentioned in chapter 42; he had tried to modify the action of his brethren against Joseph, but they would not hearken. As was said, testimony after testimony comes to believers who are linked up with the world, but they do not heed. @Psalm 95:8 says, "Harden not your heart".
F.H.L. Would you say a word about Benjamin, who wept with Joseph later on?
J.T. Attention is called to him; he is the overcomer who retained true affection for Joseph. He is one of the *feeling* elements. Pharaoh, Joseph, Jacob, and Benjamin were all feeling men. Both Reuben and Judah had a little feeling, but all the rest were hard. That is what had to be dealt with -- hardness of heart.
A.F.M. Do you think that Reuben had largely recovered himself as evidenced in this statement of feeling regarding Joseph?
J.T. God is so fair that He brings out every good feature that may be in us.
A.F.M. Judah recovered himself fully, later.
J.T. Quite so. They both come into evidence in that way.
{161}
W.G.T. The journey of the children of Israel through the desert is lengthened to forty years on account of their hardness of heart.
J.T. But God says later, "And I will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh" (@Ezekiel 11:19), meaning an impressionable heart.
J.E.H. Do you think that the bulk of Christians are characteristically hard-hearted?
J.T. I believe that anyone remaining in the world, who professes to be a Christian, is hard-hearted. The world has rejected and put Christ to death, and anyone who is a friend of the world is an enemy of God; such a one is in a serious position.
J.S. The present pressure in the world should have a softening effect, and at the same time bring to light the people of God, and bring them to Christ. Is not that the great object of the moment?
J.T. That is what God is doing at the present time. The universal character of this famine is in keeping with current conditions in the world. The Lord's present position in heaven and His work among the Gentiles, as characteristic of the dispensation, would lead us to look for special efforts to bring all His people to light before the end.
{162}
FAMINE WHEN JUDGES RULED
@Ruth 1
J.T. We have already considered the famines in the times of Abraham and Isaac, and the famine which was universal, with which Joseph had to do in Egypt. I think the Lord helped us to see that the effect of the famine in Egypt was to bring the brethren to light; and, as applying it to the present time, to bring into evidence the Lord's people in their relation to Him. The present pressure is to bring to light those related to Christ as Joseph's brethren were related to him, so that they might be marked off from this world. We also noted that Jacob, in sending his sons to Egypt for food the second time, said, "Buy us a *little* food" (@Genesis. 43:2), as though he accepted the reduction which the famine involved. This has a special significance now, for in the stress of the moment the Lord would have His people accept reduction, which means inward expansion. In @Judges 6 there is a famine, or rather a scarcity of food mentioned, but that was rather in the character of an oppression; whereas this book of Ruth begins with a famine and the effect of it on a certain family.
J.E.H. Would you say expansion depends upon the acceptance of the famine?
J.T. That is the way we get the gain of discipline -- by accepting it *feelingly*. That character of exercise comes out in this book; Naomi, whose name signifies "my pleasantness", changes her name to Mara, which means "bitter", showing that she *felt* the circumstances of deflection in the fields of Moab.
A.F.M. In contrast to the universal famine centred in Egypt, this famine was circumscribed, and centred, apparently, in Bethlehem-Judah; and, whereas the famine in Egypt brought to light the
{163}
brethren, this famine affects specially one family and brings Ruth to light.
J.T. Yes; Bethlehem-Judah would not be more than fifty miles from Moab, so that, as to extent, it is not to be compared with the famine under Joseph. It was evidently local to "the land", but served to bring out great results, not only for the family immediately involved, but it pointed typically to extended results in the nation of Israel represented in Naomi. Israel was the centre of God's thoughts on the earth, and Ruth comes to light as representing the remnant, having no claim at all, but entering into the greatest privileges.
A.F.M. So it is "a son born to *Naomi*", (chapter 4:17), not to Ruth.
J.T. Yes; I think it is to show what will come about in the history of God's earthly people Israel by and by, as the centre of His purpose and thoughts as to the earth. The son would be to Israel; they will say, "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given", @Isaiah 9:6). I suppose Moab here alludes to what would be fruitful under such circumstances. The word "country", may be translated "fields"; it was evidently a prolific farming country, such as would divert one straitened in circumstances.
A.N.W. "The days when the judges ruled", seems to apply more to the earlier part of their rule than the latter. I wonder whether there was a relation between that and the famine?
J.T. I think verse 1 calls attention to the weakness or defectiveness of their service.
A.F.M. Would the last verse of @Judges 21 be a sort of preface to the book? It says, "In those days there was no king in Israel; every man did what was right in his own eyes". Elimelech also did what was right in his own eyes -- he led the way to the fields of Moab.
{164}
J.T. Yes, his name is significant, meaning "whose God is king", but he was not true to it. It was the formula that governed the days when God was king, but Elimelech was not in keeping with his name, nor did he justify it. Had he really believed that God was king, he would have stayed in the land, and God would have provided for him. His course would point to *misjudgment* of the judges, rather than to being governed by their judgment. The profession implied that God was King, in which case every man should do what was right in *His* eyes. We may see by what Naomi said, that there was no need for Elimelech to have gone to Moab; she said, "I went out full". Why did they go if they were full? There must have been some will at work; and that is what should exercise us all in the present distress -- what are the *motives* actuating us in any movements we make?
C.B. Are you suggesting that we are not to move on our own initiative?
J.T. Well, if God is King, it is for us to let Him exercise His kingship, and He will not fail us.
T.A. Is it not God's prerogative to turn a wrong move into blessing?
J.T. Yes. It is very encouraging to see that working out; for example, in @John 21:3, Peter says to the disciples, "I go to fish". And then, "They say to him, We also come with thee. They went forth and went on board". This movement was one of failure, but the beginning of the chapter shows that it was a question of a *manifestation of Jesus to His disciples*. If any of us were to write a paper on @John 21, the title of it rightly would be, *A Manifestation of Jesus*, not *The Failure of Peter*. The manifestation was the result of what happened. "He manifested himself thus"; then the Spirit relates what occurred, showing that God allows things to happen for His own ends. We are told that this was
{165}
"the third time that Jesus had been manifested to the disciples, being risen from among the dead".
J.S. I was wondering whether the independency of action seen in every man doing "what was right in his own eyes", would bring about famine conditions?
J.T. Exactly. There was no credit to Peter or to the others that went with him for the way the Lord came in, but the Lord acquired glory through it, turning all into a manifestation of Himself.
A.P. You are not justifying their expedition?
J.T. No; it was a return to what they had been called from.
A.N.W. This book of Ruth is introduced by a famine; it also confirms that, whatever wrong was done, God remained King; He is over all, and through Elimelech's failure brought in the link between Judges and the prophet Samuel.
J.T. Indeed, the Messiah Himself is seen as a result, the Man under whose rule everyone would not do "what was right in his own eyes". The closing verses of the book afford a striking testimony to the over-ruling grace of God. It induces the spirit of worship, which the name given to the "son born to Naomi" implies.
H.S.D. Was it not very serious that Elimelech and the two sons had died?
J.T. They represent the responsible side; the narrative shows how God can work in spite of the failure of those responsible to own and maintain His rights -- using the most unexpected vessels. Elimelech represented the *profession* that God was King, and yet he was going against that principle; his two sons, according to the meaning of their names, were weaklings; they were sickly young men, and died. So that the book brings into evidence the feminine or subjective side, showing what God can do in this connection to maintain His testimony in spite of breakdown. What we should see, whilst
{166}
recognising the typical significance of the book as referring to Israel and the remnant, is how it applies *now*; in the breakdown of the responsible element in the church, there is, after all, what is of God in a subjective way, and it is for individuals like Ruth, who have no claim in themselves upon God, to attach themselves to that, as Ruth attached herself to Naomi.
J.S. There was a remarkable manifestation of the work of God in Ruth.
J.T. Yes, and in Naomi also. The responsible element had gone; there was no *man* left. It was a question of three women, one of whom went back, so that their number was reduced to two. What would become of them? The mind at once alights on Ruth, on the devotedness of one in whom God was working; and mark this -- it was not simply that *she* had love, there must also have been great lovableness in Naomi.
A.F.M. Would you say that Naomi stands for light, and also for state, in that she changed her name from Naomi to Mara, and that Ruth found a suited companion in such a one?
J.T. Exactly; I think she stands for light, but light in a certain connection; that is, if we take her as a type of Israel in the future. The present application would be to those who are walking in the light of the church, and who, *feeling* its sorrowful responsible history, acknowledge their part in it. The use of the word 'Mara' is very much like John's feeling when he had eaten the little book; he says, "my belly was made bitter" (@Revelation 10:10). Believers who recognise Christ and the assembly in any way, and who feel the great breakdown of the public body, are the ones to cleave to.
A.R.S. I notice that others did not call her Mara; it was what she named herself.
J.T. Well, it was *her own* feeling, into which, of
{167}
course, all who knew her then late history could enter, but, as always in such circumstances, God soon opened up a bright future to her. Normally, when we own the result of our unbelieving conduct, the brethren do not continue referring to it; nor does God. "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness", we are told in @1 John 1:9.
A.R. It says of Naomi, that she laid the child in her bosom. I suppose that would indicate the love which characterised her.
J.T. Yes. What we should see and understand is that she represents those who have the light of the church now. Whilst making full allowance for the prophetic bearing of the book, typically it emphasises those who recognise Christ and the assembly, however feeble or broken the latter may be -- those who feel things; and as fresh spiritual thoughts and light come, they embrace them, as Naomi embraced the child.
J.E.H. Naomi was, typically, of Paul's company ready for whatever God was pleased to develop.
J.T. Yes; they evidently became a test to John Mark; for he separated from them; (@Acts 13:13).
A.N.W. Is not the name Mara very closely akin to the name Mary, which is so prominent in the gospels, bringing in the link between what is broken down officially and what God takes up and maintains to the end?
J.T. That is good. Miriam, too, is associated with the thought of bitterness.
A.F.M. The waters of Mara were clearly that; they were bitter, and the children of Israel could not drink of them. Would there not be a connection between Israel at Mara and our scripture?
J.T. Exactly; they had to *taste* the bitterness of death. Christ tasted death in all that it meant as the judgment of God, and He would bring us into
{168}
accord with it in our spirits; for those who feel what God does, He surely respects.
W.B-w. Do you think Ruth recognised what answers to the church before they left Moab?
J.T. Well, I think she might have seen something of the work of God. The church would be seen in Naomi in type; she represented, figuratively, that vessel as the depository of divine thoughts. You will notice that it is said of Elimelech and his family that they were "Ephrathites of Bethlehem-Judah". Ordinarily those words would be tautological, because the people of Bethlehem-Judah were Ephrathites, so that evidently it means that they were *really* local. The ancient name of Bethlehem was Ephrath, reminding us of Rachel's sufferings and death. Scripture shows that much spiritual feeling was linked with it; the use of the name "Ephrathites" is, I think, to call attention to the fact that this family really belonged to the place. Its more recent name of Bethlehem-Judah could not have existed until the tribes of Israel had come into the land.
W.B-w. They did not belong to Moab.
J.T. Clearly; they belonged to the place with which Rachel's sepulchre was connected, where she wept for her children, and where the Messiah would be born (compare @Ruth 4:11, @Jeremiah 31:15, @Micah 5:2, @Matthew 2:18). What holy sentiments and hopes are suggested by such a place!
B.T.F. Would you say that Ruth comes into evidence in order to bring in the parentage of David?
J.T. Yes, but she also is as an example of the immensity of the privilege into which anyone may now come, who becomes attached to those who have the light of the testimony. Thus a stranger came into such a great place in Israel. But how did she come into it? The same privilege was open to Orpah, but she went back to her people and her
{169}
gods. The answer is that Ruth in affection *clave* to Naomi and would not leave her.
A.P. Is there a suggestion of sovereignty in Ruth, indicating how each of us has a place among the brethren?
J.T. I think so. She comes into the line of the Messiah, as seen in Matthew's gospel, with others of her kind, such as Rahab, to bring out what one who accepts strangership may come into in attaching himself to those who have the light of the church -- the light of the purpose of God, however brokenly. Such are taken up in *rich* mercy and in *great* love and made "fellow-citizens of the saints and of the household of God", (@Ephesians 2:19).
A.F.M. The meaning of "Ruth" is friendship or companionship.
J.T. We, as brethren, are strangers here. The more light we have as to Christ and the church, the more we accept strangership, and the more we shall look for companionship and be glad to have it. Ruth represents those who have come into touch with those who have light, and who, on remaining with such, gradually come into the full shining of Christ; they see who He is and learn their relationship with Him.
A.J.D. Naomi would represent one who had received the love of the truth?
J.T. Yes, she represents that side as seen in chapter 1; she felt things; she said, "the hand of Jehovah is gone out against me". You can see how applicable it is to Israel in the future, and to the church now. God's hand has gone out against the public body because of its failure; the more we feel it, the more God will come in for us.
A.J.D. It says, "And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse to it", (chapter 4:16).
J.T. That shows she had affection, and whatever
{170}
comes in as a subsequent thing, she is ready for it; like Simeon in Jerusalem, who was ready to receive the Child Jesus, when He was brought into the temple. The women, Naomi's neighbours, assigned the child to Naomi and called his name Obed, or "worshipper"; thus bringing to a climax all the exercises of the book, for "he is the father of Jesse, the father of David".
T.A. I suppose the discipline through which she passed prepared her for the reception of the babe.
J.T. Yes; there had been the acknowledgment of her own impotency to effect anything, so that the purpose of God was effected another way, rather than through her.
A.N.W. In the light of public failure, could Christ come in apart from the sense of widowhood?
J.T. It is a state that makes room for Him, morally. Babylon, the false church, "says in her heart, I sit a queen, I am not a widow; and I shall in no wise see grief", (@Revelation 18: 7). She is the opposite of that which is seen in Naomi.
W.B-w. Was there a state according to God at all before Naomi left Bethlehem-Judah, or did her exercise in Moab produce that state?
J.T. The early verses of chapter 1, taken typically, would show that Israel as a nation had left the land in unbelief; then when Naomi begins to return, God's work is seen. The word 'return' appears constantly in the prophets. The thing is exemplified in the case of the prodigal; returning to divine territory is the evidence of the work of God.
A.F.M. The *ten* years in the fields of Moab would be significant in that way. They had been tested on the ground of responsibility to return, and had failed; but now God has come in sovereignly, manifesting His work.
J.T. And Ruth's devotedness is to bring out more fully the work of God -- how beautiful it is! She is
{171}
allowed to say certain things. It is very fine to listen to young Christians, not merely saying what is put into their minds, but expressing their own thoughts. This speech is Ruth's own; there is no evidence that Naomi ever used speech like it. She says, "Do not entreat me to leave thee" etc., and then she binds herself, calling on Jehovah, that nought but death would part her from Naomi. It is a definite committal, which is a point of great importance for young Christians to arrive at in soul history. It is, you might say, on the principle of a covenant: "Jehovah do so to me, and more also, if aught but death part me and thee!" That is more than an ordinary word: it is a committal on her side which is irrevocable, God being brought into it.
T.H. It says, "And when she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, she left off speaking to her".
J.T. Naomi left off speaking, for it was a settled matter, "and they two went until they came to Bethlehem".
J.T.Jr. Would you say that Ruth, in principle, presented her body a living sacrifice; (@Romans 12)?
J.T. Yes; there is complete devotedness and unqualified committal to the object of her love. It will be noted that in attachment to Naomi she is free from the gods of Moab; and already in the knowledge of Jehovah, Naomi's God.
A.P. What would you say about "thy people"? She had not seen the people of God as yet; all she had seen was Naomi.
J.T. She saw one of them! If you see one of them you will see them all in principle. The ground I should take in coming in contact with souls is, that I represent not only Christ, but the people of God here; that as seeing me, they ought to see the saints, in principle. The Midianitish kings said that
{172}
Gideon's brethren were like him -- "each one resembled the sons of a king", (@Judges 8:18).
B.T.F. Would you say the traits found in Ruth and Boaz are such as came out in the Lord Himself?
J.T. Yes; Boaz, of course, is typically Christ, "a mighty man of wealth"; and the beautiful traits that come out in Ruth represent the work of God in His people, especially young ones, and how we come under the influence of Christ in a responsive way.
A.R. Is there not a responsibility laid upon us to cleave to the brethren, as Ruth clave to Naomi?
J.T. There is. People might say, "You are putting the brethren in the place of Christ"; but that is not so; it is to bring out the divine nature, and how attractive it becomes to others! You are gradually led on until you see it fully in Christ, because the redemption comes out in Boaz as representing Christ, but the Messiah Himself is in the distance, so to speak; the genealogy at the end pointing to Him, there is a gradual enlargement of the truth in the narrative.
R.W.S. May not the brethren say, "come with us, and we will do thee good", (@Numbers 10:29)? What was the force of this argument that Naomi used to dissuade her daughters-in-law from coming with her?
J.T. I think it was to bring out what was spiritual in Ruth. We get such tests in Scripture. When we are challenged thus it is to bring out what may be of God in us.
J.S. To bring to light the work of God subjectively.
J.T. I think God delights to hear young Christians speak as they see things themselves. Ruth evidently spoke from her own consciousness of things.
B.T.F. The Holy Spirit, in describing this scene, brought out beforehand what the Lord said regarding the Comforter, "He shall glorify me" (@John 16:14);
{173}
for in writing the book of Ruth He is glorifying what would come out in Christ.
J.T. I think that is important. What is recorded in a book like this are simply incidents culled from a multitude of others, and put together by the Spirit so as to produce a certain impression of Christ.
A.B.P. Does this not link on with @John 6:67, where many turned away and ceased from following the Lord? He turned to the twelve and said, "Will ye also go away?"
J.T. It does very strikingly; so that what the Lord's challenge brought out was what Peter himself had come into at the moment. He does not says, as the A.V. puts it, "thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God", but "thou art the holy one of God", which was his apprehension of what he had observed.
R.D.G. Elisha was tested three times, and made a similar response: "As Jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee!" (@2 Kings 2:2).
J.T. It is to be noticed that at each point on that remarkable journey, Elijah challenges Elisha, but only to bring out the devotedness of the latter. "And they two went on", (@2 Kings 2:6).
W.B-w. David challenges Ittai in the same way: "Return and take back thy brethren. Mercy and truth be with thee!" and he answered "As Jehovah liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be" (@2 Samuel 15:20,21).
J.T. A remarkable answer from one who was a stranger, a Gittite.
W.G.T. It was not the same with Barzillai, who would not go to Jerusalem with David.
J.T. That is the converse of this; David urged Barzillai to go with him, but he had no taste for Jerusalem. He pleaded old age, which applied to a
{174}
professed Christian is through lack of exercise, the absence of spiritual energy and taste -- a serious consideration.
A.P.T. All this should be a great help to the Lord's people now. Many of them, like Ruth and Naomi, have lost everything. The test would be whether the work of God enables us to see His hand and trust Him in the presence of the pressure.
A.J.D. We cannot make too much of what Naomi represents.
J.T. As returning, she represents those who have the light, however feebly and brokenly. If God is working in me and my will is not in activity, I shall respect those who have the light of the church, and keep by them.
J.S. Would you say Naomi represents the godly element, or remnant?
J.T. The whole nation. It is most essential to get a grasp of the *whole* thing, in however few this may be seen today; such have thoughts according to God. All that Elimelech, Mahlon, and Chilion had, belonged to Naomi.
J.S. We should, therefore, hold nothing less than the truth of the whole church, embracing it in a universal way.
T.A. Is that what came to light in Philadelphia?
J.T. That is where you see it worked out. "I also will keep thee out of the hour of trial", (@Revelation 3:10). "Thee" means the whole church; there would be an understanding of that in Philadelphia.
W.G.T. Naomi kissed both her daughters-in-law.
J.T. Orpah kissed her mother-in-law, but went back. She represents how far one may be carried in the right direction by external influences. There was no work of God in her; she does not go on to full growth, but goes back to her country and her gods.
A.P. Jonathan wept with David, but he *went back*.
W.B-w. Ruth was tested by light and love, as
{175}
we all are. As you suggested, there was not only light in Naomi, but love.
J.T. She must have been a lovable woman, because both the daughters-in-law were attached to her; but, typically, Orpah is not a subject of the work of God, whereas Ruth is.
W.G.T. Does what Naomi says represent the test for fellowship?
J.T. I think so. It is a test to Ruth's heart, but she does not cast a regretful eye on what she was leaving.
B.T.F. The Lord brought out the same trait in His disciples when He asked, "Will ye also go away?" They had discerned something in Him that they could not leave.
J.T. Ruth entered into a covenant, as was remarked; she committed herself, calling upon God.
A.F.M. How would that committal apply to us in the epistles?
J.T. It is like @Romans 6:3, where you commit yourself in baptism to the Lord: "as many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death". And then, carrying it further, it is found in the Lord's supper -- in partaking of the Lord's supper I commit myself definitely both to the Lord and to His own. I am in fellowship, which involves not only obligation to the Lord Himself, but also to the brethren.
H.S.D. The result of Ruth's devotedness is that she comes under the wings of Jehovah. Boaz says to her, "under whose wings thou art come to take refuge", (chapter 2:12). Divine protection is a feature of the greatest importance.
W.B-w. Ruth was in fellowship in a definite way when she committed herself.
J.T. The entering into this contract was from her own side; it was not demanded of her. All that followed was gain.
{176}
A.P. Her demeanour in the field was very commendable.
J.T. Yes. Every paragraph after this is constructive as bringing out how the young believer comes under the influence of Christ, and, through the knowledge of redemption, into the greatest dignity and blessing.
A.F.M. They came to Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest; would that be typical of a risen Christ?
J.T. The barley harvest is the first harvest according to @Exodus 9, and therefore would be a type of Christ risen; the wheat harvest would be the next thought, pointing to the saints as risen with Christ.
R.A.L. Boaz knew of Ruth's kindness to Naomi and gave her full credit for it. The Lord well knows whether we love and serve the brethren or not.
A.P.T. The reference to the wings of Jehovah, the God of Israel, fits in with the Lord's own remarks with regard to Jerusalem, "how often would I have gathered thy children as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" (@Matthew 23:37). Young believers, moving as this book indicates, come into the sphere of the protection of love.
J.T. Just so. You get it also in @Ezekiel 16:8, where God found Jerusalem without covering, and spread His skirt over her.
W.B-w. This protection for us would be the kingdom.
J.S. Do we see in this book the way out of famine conditions?
J.T. The way out is to discern and judge, as before God, what occasioned it. This is seen here in Naomi. We all may be assured that there has been much secret history with us that God would have us deal with unsparingly.
J.S. It is helpful for us to see the rift in the
{177}
clouds morally here. Naomi accepts the government of God and hence we see recovery from this point on.
H.S.D. She heard a very good report that moved her: "Jehovah had visited his people to give them bread".
A.P. Does the famine in a general way reflect the state of the people of God?
J.T. It did in this case, and we may say circumstances of this kind are generally allowed of God to bring to light where His people are, and then, as the discipline is accepted, to bring out what God can be to us. There is usually some fresh opening up of the mind of God as His discipline is felt and accepted. I think God is going to come in for His people at the present time; in fact, He *is* coming in for them, but it is a question of our *feeling* things, and seeing how, as we are stripped of everything, the work of God comes to light; and as subjects of it we are to be marked by comely traits of Christ. Beautiful traits, peculiar to herself, shone in Ruth, without anything being said as to how she got them; but they were there, just as when the spies found Rahab, lovely traits were there, yet we have no record of how she became possessed of them. The work of God is always its own witness.
A.P. It was when Naomi and Ruth came to Bethlehem that we hear of the barley harvest, and that Ruth has part in it.
J.T. And we see too how much she got, she was working on her own account, in the fields of Boaz; but she beat out what she had gleaned, about an ephah of barley, quite a good gleaning for one day's labour.
A.F.M. Do you not think she was greatly helped in her new surroundings by being in the company of Naomi, who, whilst the brethren did not call her Mara, called herself by that name? While the brethren may in grace avoid humbling us by such
{178}
names, it is necessary to use them ourselves, owning fully any conduct that may occasion discipline. Whatever growth there was in Naomi afterwards, the element of Mara had entered definitely into her spiritual constitution.
J.T. That is very good. When one, under discipline, says something that indicates real self-judgment, the clouds lift and everything becomes clear. The women of Bethlehem were not hard on Naomi; they did not say, "You should never have gone out of this place", because she had gone to the bottom of things. As soon as something comes out indicating that we have gone to the bottom with regard to any wayward course we may have taken, the brethren are only too glad to receive us without criticism. Naomi's statement, "I went out full", is an acknowledgment that her own will had been at work.
J.S. So that verse 21 is an evidence of thorough self-judgment on her part: "I went out full, and Jehovah has brought me home again empty ... Jehovah has brought me low, and the Almighty has afflicted me".
A.P. One word conveyed the state of her soul -- *Mara*.
J.T. And her confession did not detract from her at all in the eyes of the Bethlehemites. There was quite a stir in Bethlehem when she arrived, as if they welcomed her. Normally, the brethren are delighted when a false move or wrong conduct in one of them is fully owned. It is a conversion.
A.N.W. Although she went out under the influence of her husband, she takes the responsibility to herself, as she comes back.
J.S. Do you not think that the people of God at the present time see that the hand of God has been heavy upon them, and when there is thorough self-judgment there will be a lifting of the pressure?
{179}
J.T. I am sure of it. There will be a way out for them, not as an unfeeling but a feeling people, and that is what Mara means here.
A.J.D. Like those, in the days of Ezekiel, who sighed and cried on account of the abominations that were done.
J.S. So that the way out does not lie with the statesmen of the nations, but rather in the people of God judging themselves.
J.T. That is what God's eye is on now; He is thinking of His people. There will be a way out as soon as His people begin to feel things and look definitely to Him. The Lord says, "but on account of the elect those days shall be cut short", (@Matthew 24:22).
A.F.M. Recovery was in Bethlehem for Naomi; she arrived at the point of departure, and under Boaz proved it to be "the house of *bread*".
W.G.T. Ruth takes the initiative in chapter 2.
J.T. Yes; then in chapter 3 Naomi takes the initiative -- she tells Ruth what to do; then what comes out at the end of that chapter is, that Ruth had a measure. Boaz said, "Bring the cloak that thou hast upon thee, and hold it". Her cloak indicated her measure; she was thus tested as to it. Spiritually it was a question of what she could carry back, which indicates a certain growth. Boaz then "measured six measures of barley, and laid it on her"; it was what she was equal to.
W.G.T. In chapter 2 it was more what she had beaten out herself.
J.T. It was her own work, but now she is coming into something she did not work for -- the bounty of God, as we may say.
J.S. Would that be like Ephesians?
J.T. Pretty much.
T.A. Would this measure be what the apostle speaks of as "the measure of the gift of the Christ"?(@Ephesians 4:7).
{180}
J.T. Yes. It is a question here of what you can contain. The quantity given is from Boaz, but the cloak was equal to it. Joseph's brethren were to take "as much as they can carry", (@Genesis 44:1). Here six measures are put into the cloak; the figure is beautiful.
T.A. Paul spoke about his cloak.
J.T. Yes. Timothy, in carrying it to the apostle, would be reminded of what a great vessel Paul was. You will observe that after he gave her the measures of barley, "*he* went into the city" (@Ruth 3:15). It is questioned whether it was Boaz or Ruth who went into the city, but it is "he" in the original; meaning that Boaz took the initiative in going into the city. There is now a great movement on, and Boaz is leading in it. What follows in chapter 4 shows what he has in mind to accomplish in the city.
J.S. What would the six measures be indicative of?
J.T. Well, six has a great place in Scripture in a good sense, and sometimes in a bad sense, but obviously this is in a good sense, and would mean she was going on to full growth.
J.S. Like @John 2 -- there were six water vessels.
J.T. All you have to do now is to add one more, and you have the complete idea, which is seven. After six you are waiting for completion, and you get completion in the end of this book.
W.B-w. The last verse of chapter 3 has completion in view: "for the man will not rest until he have completed the matter this day".
J.T. Exactly; the completion is in Boaz; i.e., in Christ. No one of us should be without completeness. The epistle to the Colossians has completeness in view; Paul announced Christ "to the end that we may present every man perfect in Christ", (chapter 1:28).
{181}
A.P. You were going to say something more about the city?
J.T. Well, the city is the place of administration, and it is remarkable that *Boaz* went into the city. Christ comes first because the city is His place and the matter on hand is to be carried out there in an orderly way.
A.P.T. It says of the woman of worth, "Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land", (@Proverbs 31:23). Here Boaz sits down in the gate and takes up the question of redemption.
J.T. It has now to be a settled state of things. This great transaction has to be done carefully, and without hurry. Boaz says, "Thou, such an one, turn aside, sit down here", (chapter 4:1). An important matter is now in hand; it is a question of redemption and all that hinges upon it.
W.G.T. Boaz would represent the place the Lord has in administration in the assembly.
J.T. Yes; it is Christ in the city now, in the place of administration, and the first thing that comes out is the elimination of the man that had the right of redemption; his name is not even given, it is: "Thou, such an one". There is not much distinction about "such an one"! This man is typical of the law which did not effect anything; @Hebrews 7 says, "The law perfected nothing"; it could not add to the six!
A.F.M. Would the order, then, in this chapter be -- first, redemption; and then union, which seems naturally to follow?
J.T. Exactly. "Boaz said to the elders and all the people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have *bought* all ... moreover Ruth ... have I purchased to be my wife", (chapter 4::9,10).
{182}
W.G.T. The verses at the end of the book attribute everything to the sovereignty of God.
J.T. The Messiah, too, is there, but in the distance. There is a link with Ephesians in these chapters, where a wonderful vista is opened up to us, in the presence of which Paul says, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen", (@Ephesians 3:21).
{183}
FAMINE IN DAVID'S DAYS
@2 Samuel 21:1 - 14
J.T. Each of the famines we are considering affords a certain lesson for us, and our present inquiry will be as to what lesson this famine teaches. We have to take account of the *time* of it; viz., "in the days of David". The previous one that we considered occurred "in the days when the judges ruled" (@Ruth 1:1), as if to call attention to some defect in their rule.
C.A.M. Would the idea be that the matter of responsibility was different?
J.T. I think what is stated here is to bring out what may occur in times when God is blessing, for God blessed the reign of David. So that there is some particular lesson in it that it should occur then and not in the days of Saul.
A.R.S. You would have thought that there would be no famine in David's reign, because he was standing for God, and yet it *did* occur at that time.
J.T. That is the point to notice. There may be a time of general prosperity and blessing, and yet something like this may happen; so that we cannot be too sure as to the underlying state among the people of God. Things may be going well, outwardly, and yet God may see need for special discipline. Here the famine continued year after year, for three years. So that we must note the extended period over which the famine occurred, and then inquire *why* it occurred.
A.F.M. Does not the famine show that God does not overlook such violations as Saul's?
J.T. That is what should stand out prominently in our reading -- *why* this affliction took place.
A.N.W. Do you mean that there is more reason
{184}
for inquiring why it happened in this instance than in the previous ones?
J.T. I think so, because it refers to an incident so far back. The covenant was made over four hundred years before, and this violation of it would have been a good few years before the famine occurred; also it took place at a time of general prosperity, all of which is significant.
A.R.S. You think that it should have come in the days of Saul.
J.T. That it did not shows that God does not view things as we do, which makes it solemn. God does not need to give account of His matters; so that what occurs may sometimes be the occasion of surprise.
A.A.T. Is it not remarkable that David simply asked the question as to why the famine was there, and got such an answer?
J.T. You wonder why he did not ask God before, instead of letting it run on for three years, year after year. If we do not turn to God about our trials they may remain.
A.F.M. You would apply this to what we are passing through at the present time? The question for us all to ask is: Why has this great pressure come upon us?
J.T. It is time to begin to inquire, if we have not already done so. At the outset of this depression it was assumed that it would end shortly, and people took it lightly, but it is not ending as expected as far as we can see.
A.P. Is it your thought that the famine might have been averted if the people of God had judged what occasioned it when it arose?
J.T. Yes; evidently there had been no godly concern with regard to what Saul had done, or the famine would have been unnecessary. The great lesson to be learned here is *fidelity* -- fidelity to a vow,
{185}
or to a certain position taken up Godward or manward. That is to say, if we have sworn to our hurt, so to speak, as @Psalm 15:4 says, we let it stand. We do not abrogate that which we commit ourselves to as before God.
A.N.W. We are touching a very important and interesting line as to the government of God -- God may bring a thing governmentally upon His people, and they may fail to understand why it is brought upon them.
J.T. Well, I suppose it is largely so now. How many of us have really questioned before God why all this trial has come upon us, and sought His mind about it? Possibly, had we so done, we should have found that *each* of us had contributed to it.
H.S.D. But David was not responsible for this act, and yet he had to suffer with others through it.
J.T. He was sitting on the throne of Israel, as had Saul, and the responsibility was attached to that. Earlier the Gibeonites deceived Joshua and the princes, who entered into a covenant with them, to which the whole nation was committed. As to ourselves, it is a question of fellowship, of what we commit ourselves to, and therefore fidelity is in view.
W.B-w. Do you think that some of our past history might be unjudged by us or not taken up with God?
J.T. You may be sure that is the secret of it all. If we take things up with God, we shall find that there is something to account for.
A.N.W. Does it not indicate spiritual power in David in that he is allowed to be an instrument in putting right the wrong of another?
J.T. I suppose it was wisely ordered by God that it should come in under David's reign. At least, he inquired as to it; whether the method of dealing with it was right is another matter. But immediately he asked God about it he got an answer.
{186}
A.P. Has the fact that it happened in the days of Saul any reflection on the people's selection of Saul?
J.T. No doubt. A man that disregards a covenant is held up in Scripture to great reproach.
W.G.T. The princes and Joshua bound the whole nation. The people would have slain the Gibeonites even after the covenant was made, but the princes and Joshua stood by the covenant.
A.F.M. The action of Saul in slaying the Gibeonites was zeal for the children of Israel and Judah. Evidently Jehovah was not before him.
J.T. It was not zeal for Jehovah.
J.S. Does it not show wisdom on the part of God in deferring this famine to David's days so that the people would get more gain out of it?
J.T. Well, it seems so. Saul would hardly have inquired as David did. He began his reign in this humble and dependent way of asking God as to things; although apparently he deferred this inquiry to the damage of himself and the nation.
C.A.M. Perhaps, in that way God allows matters to stand for the time being, until a day of light and power when they can be dealt with. I was wondering whether this covenant would be similar to a vow. God apparently never forgets a vow made by His people.
J.T. So that it resolves itself, for us, into such obligations as we have taken on in our baptism, or in partaking of the Lord's supper.
C.A.M. Or in Nazariteship, perhaps.
J.T. Yes; whatever we enter into in the way of obligation toward God or toward our brethren. The Old Testament idea is of an engagement by oath, or covenant, which is carried into the New Testament; but on our side it is seen under the head of baptism and the Lord's supper; partaking in these involves committal. (Compare footnote on the word 'demand' in @1 Peter 3:21, J.N.D.¬s new translation. )
{187}
A.F.M. Baptism is more personal, whereas the Lord's supper would involve others, which is more serious should failure occur.
J.T. Yes; it is necessarily collective, implying fellowship.
S.J.H. Why does it say, "Saul, and for his *house* of blood"?
J.T. That is what God says, "It is for Saul and for his house of blood, because he slew the Gibeonites". It confirms what we were saying, that he involved his house; but then he also involved the nation. The house was not cleared, but the nation was. It says, "God was propitious to the *land*", but it does not say that He was propitious to the house of Saul because he was the offender, representing the flesh. Sin had occurred; the covenant had been broken by Saul as responsible for the nation, but God did not allow it to pass unchallenged even though the nation had overlooked it, showing that He requires what is past; (@Ecclesiastes 3:15).
W.B-w. The thought of oath, or covenant, is prominent in this chapter; an oath between Jonathan and David is mentioned in it.
J.T. Yes; we see how David abode by that oath, and spared Mephibosheth on account of it.
A.F.M. Is your thought that the house of Saul was not released of responsibility in this giving up of the seven sons?
J.T. Yes; it was a question of the house of Saul disappearing altogether. The flesh has to be unsparingly dealt with.
A.P. What does this phase of the flesh represent?
J.T. Well, it involves the *whole* history of Saul -- a man what was the choice of the people, and stood head and shoulders above his brethren, but failed in the carrying out of the will of God. He did not keep this covenant, nor did he wait for Samuel, at the
{188}
outset, to come to Gilgal (@1 Samuel 13). God *removed* him; (@Acts 13:22).
A.P. Is there an element in the religious world or amongst the people of God that has this faithless feature of Saul?
J.T. I think it is in every one of us. That side of the flesh has to be discerned and judged, so that each one has to question himself before God as to how faithful he has been to God and to his brethren. If we thus question ourselves, we shall probably find out why the pressure is so severe with each of us.
A.F.M. Elijah said, "For the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant" (@1 Kings 19:10); and then @Hebrews 8:9 says, "Because they did not continue in my covenant". Would this disregard of the covenant be equivalent to breaking it?
J.T. Yes. Throughout the Old Testament you have Israel's unfaithfulness constantly alluded to. But their breach of the covenant is not mere history, but bears directly on ourselves. It is said that Christianity does not involve any such obligation, but it does; the Lord would bring home to us the question as to how much the idea of covenant Godward and manward has been disregarded by us.
W.B-w. What covenant might we be in danger of not keeping? How would it apply to us?
J.T. As remarked, baptism is the covenant in the principle of it. The Old Testament, as we know, is not mere history, but gives us terms the meaning of which we have to seek in the New Testament, even if the actual words do not appear. You get the idea of the covenant from the very outset. Even Adam was under covenant: "They like Adam have transgressed the covenant", (@Hosea 6:7). He was placed under covenant, and transgressed. God entered into covenant with Noah, and He is true to that covenant to this day, as we see in the mention of the rainbow in @Revelation 4. Time does not cancel God's engagements
{189}
and He never forgets them. How much do men abroad in the world think of the covenant of God when they look at the rainbow? But God still regards it as the sign of His covenant with Noah and the earth; (@Genesis 9).
A.J.D. Is @Romans 12 like a covenant following on the line of baptism in @Romans 6?
J.T. It is the carrying out of @Romans 6, only in a priestly way, as "your intelligent service". The body presented as a living sacrifice to God is never to be recalled, it belongs to Him. @Romans 6:13 is: "*Yield* yourselves to God"; but @Romans 12:1 is: "*Present* your bodies". The act is priestly.
W.B-w. What is the meaning of baptism?
J.T. It obligates everyone who is baptised to be true to it: "As many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised *unto his death*", @Romans 6:3). If we disregard the import of His death, we simply trifle with the covenant involved. I use the word 'covenant' because of its place in the Old Testament, so that, as before stated, we must look for its meaning in the New Testament.
A.J.D. What would correspond with @Romans 6 in the Old Testament?
J.T. Israel being "baptised unto Moses", (@1 Corinthians 10:2). Leviticus is priestly committal, to which @Romans 12 in measure answered. The priests in Leviticus are consecrated to remain in the court of the tabernacle all the time, i.e., seven days. Disregard of priestly obligations brings down the judgment of God; see @Leviticus 10.
T.A. Would any Christian, no matter how young, who desires to break bread be under the obligation of the covenant?
J.T. Surely. The Lord's supper is a further thought which corresponds with the covenant made at Sinai. Whilst the Sinaitic covenant may be viewed as over against Christianity as in @Hebrews 12,
{190}
from another point of view it is a type of Christianity. We must look for the corresponding idea in our dispensation. The people actually committed themselves to Jehovah on the mount, they answered with one voice: "All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!" (@Exodus 24:3).
A.N.W. And so as regards the Lord's table -- that comes prior to @1 Corinthians 11 -- would you say that every believer; young and old, whether breaking bread or not, is under obligation?
J.T. It is a question of *one* Christian fellowship, and one only.
J.S. Did the children of Israel, in passing through the Red Sea, definitely commit themselves to the leadership of Moses, as having come from under Pharaoh?
J.T. They did. They "believed in Jehovah, and in Moses his bondman", (@Exodus 14:31). Moses was the mediator. Our ways must correspond with Christ's death; we should walk in newness of life, and not go on with the world as if nothing had happened.
W.B-w. "*By faith* they passed through the Red sea" (@Hebrews 11:29); it was *their* act.
J.T. It is the one act of faith that is attributed to Israel; therefore they committed themselves to Moses, and were in that position throughout the forty years in the wilderness. But then, when they came to mount Sinai, they committed themselves collectively to all that God had said, as already noted.
J.S. They came under the will of God -- to move in relation to His will.
J.T. And in relation to His mind too -- what He had *spoken*. God says, "for after the tenor of these words have I made a covenant with thee and with Israel" (@Exodus 34:27), meaning that the covenant
{191}
was to be in the spirit of the words that had been spoken.
A.J.D. Every person formally baptised unto Christ is committed to the Lord's table.
J.T. Not quite. The Lord's table is a later thought than baptism. In the types it involves the acceptance of the covenant at Horeb. The Lord's table and the Lord's cup of @1 Corinthians 10 refer to the Lord's supper. Chapter 10 is the public position in the testimony; it is the *fellowship*, and alludes to chapter 11.
A.P. Is your thought that @1 Corinthians 10 does not include any more than @1 Corinthians 11?
J.T. Yes. Those who *partake* of the Supper are in view. "The cup of blessing which we bless ... the bread which we break" refers to the Lord's supper. The partakers of the Lord's table are those who eat the Supper, not simply those baptised. The table involves the fellowship; those who partake of it are in the fellowship and are under obligation to the saints. "Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body", (@1 Corinthians 10:17).
A.J.D. So that if you break the bread and drink the cup you have to look back to chapter 10 and ask yourself whether your associations are in accord with what you do.
A.N.W. In @1 Corinthians 10:22 the apostle says, "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?" In chapter 11:30 he says, "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep".
J.T. The conduct dealt with in chapter 11 is *inside* whilst that in chapter 10 is *outside*, but in either case it is a question of those who partake of the Lord's supper, and no others. You cannot make the obligation of baptism correlative with the obligation of the Supper, because many may be baptised and never partake of it.
{192}
J.E.H. Why does it say, "Ye cannot"? We should think that it would say, "Ye should not".
J.T. You might say, 'The State of New York cannot secede from the United States'. It might do it literally, as the Southern States did from the Northern States, but constitutionally it cannot; that is the idea.
C.A.M. "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy?" This would incur His judgment.
J.T. "Are we stronger than he?" The stronger will overcome, so it is most serious to provoke the Lord; that is @1 Corinthians 10. But chapter 11 of that epistle refers to what is inside, where the Lord's supper is actually celebrated. The Corinthians were carrying on scandalously. "On this account", it says, "many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep", but it does not say He was yet dealing with them because of the evil spoken of in chapter 10.
W.B-w. In @2 Samuel 18 Absalom's system is overthrown, and David's rule re-established.
J.T. It is most interesting that this incident of Saul's behaviour is brought in after David is reinstated on his throne. This violation of a covenant is brought in here in a very striking manner, and I am sure it has a voice to us today.
S.J.H. Is it not a fact that the nearer we get to God the more these things will be brought to light?
J.T. Yes. No doubt the incident fits in here, because David has been through so much in relation to Absalom and others, that it would touch him; and yet he is very slow in asking the Lord about it.
A.F.M. Do you think David should have asked Jehovah what to do with regard to making amends to these Gibeonites, instead of asking *them* what he should do for them?
J.T. I think so. They should not have been their arbiters; it should have been a question
{193}
of God's mind rather than theirs; apparently David did not inquire of Him as to that.
A.F.M. Instead of these seven sons being slain, do you not think that some other step might have been taken so that God could have been propitious?
J.T. It looks so; they were slain at the Gibeonites¬ word; whereas the matter was serious, so that counsel should have been sought from God.
J.S. Would it be near the end of the third year before David inquired of the Lord as to what had happened?
J.T. It would. Why did he not ask at the beginning of the first year? When God brings some trial upon us He means us to feel it and seek Him as to it; otherwise we do not get any good out of it.
J.S. Is that not what is happening just now -- people are beginning to inquire why?
J.T. I think that is right; and as we do that, God will help us.
C.A.M. One who knows God can afford to look at the *cause* of an affliction.
J.T. David knew God; so that it is immediately stated that he inquired of Jehovah as to it. I believe the Lord is waiting for us to ask Him about the matters that are exercising us; each one of us has to take up the exercise with regard to *himself*.
A.P. Are famines to remind us of some failure in the past, or do they have in view the bringing in of something fresh?
J.T. It is a question of fidelity to a covenant that is emphasised here -- fidelity to God, or to one another.
J.S. There is complete breakdown in christendom with regard to covenant responsibility and commitments.
J.T. Generally there seems to be but little idea of faithfulness to a covenant, now. Among men it is a question of getting out of a covenant, without much
{194}
regard for righteousness. The Lord would say to us, "It shall not be thus amongst you", (@Matthew 20:26).
J.E.H. We have to learn that we, ourselves, have not been true to the covenant.
J.T. That is the lesson for us. We are not here to discuss what the world is doing; although it is important to notice that, in recent years, the nations have been peculiarly disregardful of their obligations; they think nothing of abrogating covenants. Whatever is current publicly has usually some reflection among the people of God, we must therefore be watchful as to this. On the other hand, faithfulness among God's people acts on men.
A.F.M. In what do you think lies the solution of all this depression and difficulty through which we are passing?
J.T. You cannot get a better example as to this than David, so far as he went, he asked counsel of the Lord, but it does not seem as if he went far enough. David surely should have seen that they never had such a matter as this to face before, and that divine counsel as to what should be done was needed.
A.R.S. Did not David's action carry out the purpose of God -- that Saul's house should be cut off by degrees?
J.T. God was propitious to the land after the burial, but in verses 10 - 14 you are challenged as to why the action should have called forth such an expression of natural feeling from Rizpah. She exposed herself for a long period, day and night, to keep the birds and beasts from the bodies of the slain.
C.A.M. Perhaps the fact that God calls attention to this woman would show that the action was extreme.
J.T. There was disregard of *burial* (compare @Deuteronomy 21:23). Natural feeling ought not to be outraged in a judgment like this. God has found
{195}
a way of atonement in Christ, and it was not mitigated at all, but He was buried.
C.A.M. Burial was what God wanted to arrive at.
J.T. He was not propitious to the land until the burial had taken place. It says that "it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done". It is to be noted that he took account of all that she did and proceeded to bury the bones of the seven who were hanged, with the bones of Saul and Jonathan. The action of Rizpah involves profound feeling. One is not saying that she had faith, but she was profoundly affected by what happened, and David was moved by what she did. Apparently he would have done nothing more than hang the seven men, but that was not the end of it, for there was this deep feeling in Rizpah. David heard of it and "went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh-Gilead ... and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged. And they buried them with the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son in the country of Benjamin in Zela, in the sepulchre of Kish his father; and they did all that the king had commanded. And afterwards God was propitious to the land". I think a great deal of instruction is contained in all that.
A.R.S. What do you make of David's getting the bones of Jonathan and Saul, and the bones of them that were hanged and of their being buried together?
J.T. Burial is really part of the atonement -- "Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures; and ... he was buried", (@1 Corinthians 15:3). Burial implies that everything that is obnoxious goes out of sight; the Lord, in identifying Himself with us, was made sin, and died on the cross; but He was buried because that was necessary.
C.A.M. So that everything in our life that is not in accord with His death should be buried.
{196}
J.T. We begin with it in baptism; burial is in baptism.
A.N.W. We see here that God was over all that was done, so that propitiation was effected.
J.T. God overruled it, and as a result, was propitious to the land. Fruitfulness would thus be resumed.
W.G.T. "And they did all that the king had *commanded*". The element of obedience was in evidence.
J.T. "Command" comes in after the expression of feeling on the part of Rizpah. What David does is after that, for he is affected by what she does. The moral feature is now seen: all that the king .-- -as rightly affected -- commands is performed.
A.P. If Rizpah had not had special feeling, the fowls of the heavens or the beasts would have destroyed completely the bodies of those hanged, which, according to @Deuteronomy 28:26, is open humiliation.
J.T. Yes; such exposure after death is not a feature of atonement. In the case of Ananias and Sapphira it is remarkable that it is especially said they were buried. There was a certain dignity attached to them, and so there was to Saul.
C.A.M. This act of the woman, which was evidently a right expression of feeling, was an instruction to the king himself.
A.F.M. Do you think the way out of the present pressure lies in returning to the truth of our burial by baptism?
J.T. I think so. Burial is the point here. This is a chapter full of right sentiment; the Gibeonites refer even to Saul as "chosen of Jehovah". That is the element we should respect. And then Rizpah's action shows profound feeling, of which David takes notice; the action of the men of Jabesh-Gilead is another evidence of right feeling -- that the bodies of Saul and Jonathan should not be exposed to the rude gaze of the Philistines.
{197}
G.McP. In @1 Samuel 31:12 it says that the men of Jabesh-Gilead burned the bodies of Saul and his three sons.
J.T. But they buried their bones, and fasted seven days.
W.B-w. This is a question of burial, not of cremation.
J.T. Burial is the divine thought. The first mention of burial in Scripture is that of Sarah, the act of Abraham, a man of faith.
S.J.H. There is no right feeling about cremation?
J.T. Absolutely none. I think it is allied with infidelity. Burial comes in appropriately here, for it was after this that God was propitious to the land.
J.S. Would you think that the famine was limited to the land?
J.T. Yes; for it says, "God was propitious to the land".
{198}
FAMINE "IN THE DAYS OF ELIAS"
@1 Kings 17; 18:40 - 46
J.T. The New Testament alludes to this section of scripture more than once, and throws light on it, especially the reference to it in @James 5:17: "Elias was a man of like passions to us, and he prayed with prayer that it should not rain; and it did not rain upon the earth three years and six months; and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth caused its fruit to spring forth". James brings it into our own times, and shows how famine or similar circumstances may arise and come about in the world in answer to prayer; that is, the Lord's people may take account of things from God's point of view and pray. The answer may be in the form of certain governmental conditions arising and affecting the saints who go through those circumstances as Elijah did according to our chapter. Then further, prayer by Elijah brings about rain, and so the cessation of the famine or pressure.
A.R.S. Is there any connection between Elijah's prayer and the prayer in @Revelation 6:10? It says, "And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O sovereign ruler, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth?"
J.T. I think there is. In that section of Revelation an angel appears at the golden altar, with "a golden censer; and much incense was given to him, that he might give efficacy to the prayers of all saints" (chapter 8:3), and special judgments follow; it may be that the fearful condition that now exists has arisen through the exercises of the saints; but then we have to go through the circumstances ourselves, as Elijah did.
{199}
A.N.W. Was his prayer for dearth an index of his sympathy with God as to the condition of the people?
J.T. Clearly. James's allusion to it gives us facts further to those we get here. He tells us Elijah prayed, which would direct the mind to Elijah's previous history -- to what his relations with God were. The state of the nation at that time is aptly described in verses 29 - 34 at the end of chapter 16. These verses give us the unprecedented state of wickedness in Ahab and the nation of Israel, and James's allusion to the prayer of Elijah would show that he had been with God with regard to it.
A.F.M. It says of Elijah: "He prayed *with prayer* that it should not rain". (@James 5:17).
J.T. That would show that he had learned how to pray.
A.F.M. He would present intelligently before God what was needed.
J.T. I think so; what James says would indicate Elijah's secret history, which the Old Testament does not disclose. A disciple said to the Lord, "Lord, teach us to pray", (@Luke 11:1). Elijah had learned how, in that he prayed *with prayer*. If you take account of the existing conditions and his secret history with God thus indicated, I suppose it would give him the moral power that is shown in his first statement: "As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by *my* word". Why did he not say, "... except by *Jehovah's* word" It shows he had acquired confidence in his history with God, also that he was in conscious spiritual dignity as commissioned of God, like Peter, who, with authority, said in his first sermon, "Give heed to *my words*", (@Acts 2:14). We might say, "Why did he not say, 'listen to the gospel'?" It indicates a
{200}
previous history with God, and involves moral power as in possession of a divine commission.
A.N.W. It would appear that it needed more spiritual energy to pray for a dearth than it did to pray for the rain. Scripture says he prayed for the rain, and it came; but it says he prayed *with prayer* for the dearth.
J.T. It would show that he had an understanding of what was requisite to meet the occasion. This chapter shows that Elijah shared in the sufferings involved in the famine. What God does in this way should direct us to consider what have been our burdens as before the golden altar. We do not always stop to think of the consequences of what we ask. God is coming in in an unexpected way, I believe, but none the less effectively. He is working out His thought, but His people have to go through things with the rest; we must not seek to avoid the consequences of our prayers.
W.B-w. Do the altar set up to Baal and the rebuilding of Jericho represent two systems of evil in the world today?
J.T. Yes. The idolatrous system is connected with Jezebel. It is amplified as we see in the address to Thyatira. The rebuilding of Jericho would be the revival of the world in the current profession of Christianity. It is the bringing back of ancient conditions through modernism. It seems to be the full limit of lawlessness, and is mentioned here in this sense by the Spirit of God.
A.F.M. Would the introduction of Baal, or another *lord*, suggest insubjection to Christ at God's right hand, and the rebuilding of Jericho, the world system adapting itself to the Christian profession?
J.T. I think so. Delivered believers can say, "Jehovah our God, other lords than thee have had dominion over us; by thee only will we make mention of thy name", (@Isaiah 26:13). The gospel brings in
{201}
one Lord: "One Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him",(@1 Corinthians 8:6). Turning to Baal, or what corresponds to him today, is apostasy -- giving up the Lord Jesus. Chapter 17 is occupied with Elijah's own experience and the experience of the widow and her son; i.e., what is worked out before the open relief from God came. Chapter 18 brings out the overthrow of Baal. The people seized the prophets of Baal, and Elijah slaughtered them; that is, the people were brought into the judgment of Baal, and then the rain came.
J.S. The only way to meet the extreme lawlessness as stated in chapter 16 would be God's severe governmental dealings.
J.T. Yes. In the current pressure it is not that the world will be overthrown outwardly. The intent is that it may be overthrown in the saints. God is aiming at the deliverance of His people and making way for the testimony. If not all, some of God's people, now in the world, will be delivered from other lords who have dominion over them.
J.S. Elijah would represent the man of God, who is in the secret of God's mind, and what is necessary to meet the extreme conditions.
J.T. That is the idea. We have no notice of him previously; he is introduced here in a way that is very significant, showing that God prepares His vessels secretly. We may expect Him to act thus, for He loves His people and will always come in for them. One prepared of Him has moral weight and sensibilities. It is important to notice that Elijah had to go through much exercise before anything was done with the prophets of Baal. We also have to experience the consequences of what God may order in His wise government, to reach the deliverance desired.
H.S.D. Elijah was told to hide himself. What would you say about that?
{202}
J.T. Verses 2 - 4 are very interesting, because you now get the word of the Lord. Elijah had called attention to what *he* said, but now there is a word from the Lord for himself, directing his movements. His prayer had brought in a condition of scarcity and want which he had to go through, beginning with hiding himself by the torrent Cherith.
C.A.M. Before the public side in chapter 18, marvellous things are going on in secret.
J.T. Secret spiritual history preceding what becomes public is most interesting. In chapter 16 we have Ahab's iniquitous conduct and that of Jezebel, but nothing is intimated as to what God was doing with Elijah, and yet He was preparing His servant for the great work He had in view for him to accomplish.
A.R.S. He hid himself very successfully, because neither the king nor anybody else could find him. @Obadiah 18:10 says, "There is no nation or kingdom whither my lord has not sent to seek thee".
A.N.W. Sometimes they tell us we hide too much!
J.T. The Lord's brethren said to Him, "Remove hence and go into Judaea, that thy disciples also may see thy works which thou doest; for no one does anything in secret and himself seeks to be known in public ... Jesus therefore says to them, My time is not yet come, but your time is always ready", (@John 7:3 - 6). I believe entrance into the truth of the epistle to the Colossians brings about a hiding of ourselves. It says, "Your life is hid ...", (chapter 3:3). It is the hiding epistle, showing that God would keep His people out of sight in the sense of gaining for themselves a place of distinction here, not, of course, in a physical sense but morally: "For this reason the world knows us not", (@1 John 3:1).
A.F.M. Is it on that principle the Lord hid the treasure in the field?
{203}
J.T. I think so. If the enemy had found it, he would have spoiled it or carried it away.
A.B.P. Was the enemy rebuilding Jericho at Colosse?
J.T. Quite -- through philosophy and ceremonialism.
A.J.D. In what sense are we hid?
J.T. Well, I think the divine nature operating in us leads to the acceptance of obscurity, so that we are unknown by the world: "For this reason the world knows us not, because it knew him not", (@1 John 3:1). The divine nature in the believer as allowed its full activity brings us to a point of accepting a hidden position in relation to this world.
A.J.D. So that people do not understand how or by what we live.
J.T. It is said of the Lord that by day He taught in the temple and by night He remained abroad on the mount of Olives; (@Luke 21:37). They would not have found Him at the street corners speaking with others about current events. His living associations were with His Father. He was out of sight, morally, here. In @John 18:19,20 it says, "The high priest therefore demanded of Jesus concerning his disciples and concerning his doctrine. Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world; I taught always in the synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews come together, and in secret I have spoken nothing;" had the high priest asked Him where He*lived*, that would have been another matter; that life was not disclosed.
C.B. An obedient man like Elijah can go into hiding, and have power in prayer.
J.T. Yes; he was entirely obedient. It says, "He went and did according to the word of Jehovah; he went and abode by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan"; that is a good location to abide in. "And the ravens brought him bread and
{204}
flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the torrent". He had contact, not with the brethren, but with these creatures of God, the ravens.
T.A. The service of the ravens was an evidence of the power of God. They would eat the flesh.
J.T. Yes, they are omnivorous. That they brought *flesh* (which naturally they themselves would eat) shows that God prepared them for their service to Elijah. We are reminded in this fact of what God can do.
A.F.M. Do you think the experience that Elijah went through in chapter 17 is analogous to Colossian teaching? Jordan comes in morally in Colossians, and in this chapter we have death and resurrection in the widow's son.
J.T. I think that is what we ought to come to if we are to get the benefit of the current pressure. We should then say like @Habakkuk 3:17,18 "For though the fig tree shall not blossom, Neither shall fruit be in the vines; The labour of the olive-tree shall fail, And the fields shall yield no food; The flock shall be cut off from the fold, And there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in Jehovah, I will joy in the God of my salvation". It is much happier to reach the end in that way than to get outward relief; i.e., to reach the end through the work of God in your soul, so as to be in superiority to the famine, even if it continues. You are, by the grace and sympathy of Christ in victory.
T.A. Was there not further testing when the brook dried up?
J.T. That is what we experience; things get worse and worse, but God opens up another resource for you. God had His eye on Elijah in view of the work in him. The experience he was caused to pass
{205}
through would form him, especially the testimony of death and resurrection. The power of God thus realized -- it was exercised through him -- would have an immense bearing on his service afterwards. It is similar to what came out in @John 11, the great principle of death and resurrection; and reaching that experimentally (however bad things may be here) we are in victory.
A.N.W. What is the Obadiah element as compared with Elijah?
J.T. It is an element that also exists and is of value, but this matter of chapter 17 is of chief importance; God would work out to result in each one of our souls what we are going through in all this pressure. If we come to resurrection we shall be in victory, and that is what Habakkuk's testimony means. It is victory to overcome in such conditions, and is a much greater thing than to have the conditions altered.
A.P.T. So that when the brook dries up Elijah gets a fresh word from the Lord: "It came to pass after a while that the torrent dried up, for there had been no rain in the land. And the word of Jehovah came to him saying, Arise ...". He was with God, and He comes in for him.
J.T. Exactly; God could speak to him at any time; and he moved according to the divine direction.
W.B-w. Suppose a brother or sister, living in a locality, has no employment, nor means on which to live, might it be the Lord's thought for him to move elsewhere?
J.T. @James 4:15 provides for that: "If the Lord *should so will* and we should live, we will also do this or that". In obeying the word of God Elijah had the long journey to take from the Jordan to Zidon. What exercise he must have passed through as he traversed Canaan!
{206}
A.F.M. And it was in view of abiding among the Gentiles; the honour conferred on the widow is remarked upon by the Lord in @Luke 4.
J.T. How beautifully He touches on it! "... to none of them was Elias sent but to Sarepta of Sidonia, to a woman that was a widow", (@Luke 4:26). And this direction by Jehovah brings out obedience in another. He said, "I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". Then: "he arose and went to Zarephath; and when he came to the entrance of the city, behold a widow woman was there gathering sticks". Elijah is learning in these new circumstances; but the woman has to learn, too. The great principle of death and resurrection is to be worked out in her house.
W.G.T. The woman would be impressionable; whereas, the ravens could not be.
J.T. Exactly; that is what we may see. It is now a question of another whom we may regard as a believer, and still another; each being the objects of divine care and teaching; it is a circle of companionship in a spiritual sense -- the prophet, the woman, and her son. Elijah called to the woman and said, "Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand. And she said, As Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and behold I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. And Elijah said to her, Fear not; go, do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first; and bring it to me; and afterwards make for thee and for thy son". These verses present the situation just as it was. Elijah's request would be a great test to the widow; she might well have said, 'Why is he so selfish?' But she had to learn that it was a question of divine right -- that *God must be first*. All this is instruction for us, that we
{207}
might learn how to make God everything, and not consider for ourselves.
J.S. Elijah typifies Christ here.
J.T. Yes; that is what came out; she had to learn that if God is first, the meal will not run out nor the cruse of oil fail. It is a question of giving God His place. Have we been considering for God in all our business calculations, or have we been considering only for ourselves -- living in this world and enlarging our borders in it?
A.P. The Lord said, "Seek his kingdom, and all these things shall be added to you", (@Luke 12:31).
J.T. God's rights are brought near to her in a very forceful way, because her natural thought would be, Why should not this be mutual? He does not say, "Let me share what you have", but "Bring me water", and "Make a little cake and bring it to me first".
A.N.W. @Luke 4:26 shows us that Elijah's being sent to the widow was really an honour. The Lord said, "To none of them was Elias sent but to Sarepta ...".
J.T. That would come out afterwards, but I am sure she must have questioned as to Elijah having consideration *first*, for it looked so selfish; but it was a question of God's rights, and that is what we have to come to in our present exercises.
W.F.K. What would be the lesson for Elijah in being supported by a *widow*?
J.T. She would represent the absence of *natural* resources.
W.F.K. It would be humiliating for him to go to a widow for support.
J.T. Yes -- a man about to be dependent upon a widow who had nothing.. But the testimony at this juncture required such an experience, and the great power of God was manifested through it. Romans, as asserting the rights of God, enters into this chapter.
{208}
When God's rights are not allowed in the soul, nothing more develops; but as they are allowed, you reach the idea of the little cake, and you come to the idea of the vessel, which Romans develops. Vessels are mentioned in our chapter; the oil is in a *cruse*, and the meal is in a *barrel*. The idea of the little cake would find its expression in @Colossians 2:17; it is the *whole* thought -- "the body is of Christ". The little cake is a product. You must have not only meal but dough to make a cake of the meal; then the fire with which to bake it, that is the process.
A.R. In Romans you have everything in Christianity, in principle.
J.T. The cake is suggested in @Romans 12:5 in "one body in Christ;" but we must go to Colossians and Ephesians for the full thought of the kneading and baking processes.
A.N.W. Why is Elijah so considerate; he asked for a *little* cake?
J.T. That fits in with circumstances; it is similar to Jacob's saying, "Buy us a little food", (@Genesis 43:2), as we noted on a previous occasion.
A.F.M. The *whole* idea was before Elijah; it should be before us, too.
J.T. However small the cake may be, it is a question of the *whole* idea.
A.P. Does this fit in with the public position of the church today?
J.T. It is the idea of the church to which the Lord would ever bring us; however small our conception of it may be, we must have the complete thought before us. It works out in the saints in their local relations, however few they may be.
W.B-w. *Three* persons could work out the idea of the assembly -- here we have Elijah, the widow, and her son.
{209}
J.T. Yes; two or three persons gathered together, as in @Matthew 18.
A.F.M. I suppose it is significant that there was one kind of food upon which Elijah fed as before Jordan, and then a different kind of food which he ate in the widow's house. The "bread and flesh" was stronger food, and was required by Elijah to build up a constitution in view of accepting death; the food he ate at the widow's house would be in view of sustaining one as risen with Christ.
J.T. Yes; first we have the cake, and the meal in the barrel and the oil in the cruse lasting for a year, and then death is brought in. The food by the brook does not point to the collective side of the truth, but to the individual side, although in an advanced sense, like @John 6. The food in the widow's house is collective and lasts to the end of the famine. As we have already remarked, the cake not only involves meal but dough, and then there is the baking -- the work of the fire; all this leads up to the *whole* idea. In this sense it corresponds with the loaf in the Lord's supper.
A.R. It is something like Gideon's barley cake. This is the kind of food that would maintain us. Jehovah said to Elijah, "I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". The Lord said, "Take, eat: this is my body", (@Matthew 26:26). I suppose there is really no other food that will maintain us as this does.
J.T. It has been remarked often that Matthew and Mark, in speaking of the Lord's supper, present the idea of food: "Take, eat: this is my body"; but Luke presents the *memorial*. There are two aspects of the Lord's supper; there is food, "my body", having in view the formation of the church; and then there is the memorial which Luke presents.
A.N.W. Elijah asked her for "a morsel of bread"; was that to test her?
{210}
J.T. Yes; the idea is smallness, She answers, "As Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die". We have remarked that the meal in the barrel and the oil in the cruse would bring in the idea of a vessel as presented in Romans. It is an individual thought as seen in the woman of Samaria; she left her waterpot and went away. *She* was a vessel, that is the individual side; but then the *going* and *doing* leads on to the church. Elijah asks for the water only, first; then, as the woman *goes to fetch it* he asks for the morsel of bread, and as she says she has not a cake, only meal in a barrel, he asks her to make a little cake for *him* first. Thus the truth including the church, is foreshadowed.
J.S. Mutuality is seen there.
J.T. It is a question of coming under divine direction, and the exercise from that culminates in the cake. I am not to be selfish, but own practically the rights of God. The widow was thinking of making something for herself and her boy. The process arising from Elijah's request led to the cake, which is the point. We may be a good way on in the truth and yet be selfish; and if we are thus marked, we shall not reach the truth of the body, for the body implies that we are merged into what is greater than ourselves, and leads to the abandonment of all personal consideration, so that we consider for others. It is this consideration for others that leads one *practically* into the truth of the church.
A.N.W. Does not Romans, properly received, give you the body?
J.T. You get the thought there, as was said, "We ... are one body in Christ", but it does not go so far as Colossians, or even @1 Corinthians 12:13, where it is
{211}
said, "In the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body".
A.F.M. What the widow learned with regard to her son as risen, would qualify her for the truth of the body, typically.
J.T. As she apprehended his death and resurrection, she would typically be wholly clear of the adverse influences spoken of in Colossians. The apprehension of being risen with Christ sets me entirely free, and enables me to enter into the truth of Ephesians, and to see the greatness of the church's place. Christ is "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body" (@Ephesians 1:22,23); the position is available now, and as risen and quickened with Christ I am able to take my place in it.
J.S. Would this widow represent the opposite of the professing church: "I sit a queen, and I am not a widow", (@Revelation 18:7)?
J.T. Yes; and I think she represents what leads up to the church, in the sense of believers being a *vessel*. We have the barrel and the cruse mentioned which would represent the idea of vessels containing something. Then we have the idea of unselfishness in the woman considering for Elijah; we are to think of others; nothing will bring us into the practical idea of the church quicker than that. The provision made for the believers in Judaea by those at Antioch well illustrates the point; unity was thereby promoted in this service of ministering in love to the Jewish believers.
W.B-w. The unselfish principle in the woman enabled her to abandon her idea of preparing food so as to eat and die.
J.T. Yes; it would lead her to give up such thoughts. It was illogical, as unbelief always is. We eat to live, not to die. We need to see the importance of thinking of others, however little we may have to dispense. Of another widow the Lord said, "This
{212}
poor widow has cast in more than all", (@Luke 21:3). It was the attitude of her heart. Those who are 'well off' should give and give liberally, of course, but *all* should accept obligation to give. As with the Macedonians: "Their deep poverty has abounded to the riches of their free-hearted liberality", (@2 Corinthians 8:2). It is a most remarkable and stimulating statement. The widow of Zarephath is brought into this. Naturally she would say, of Elijah, 'What selfishness on his part in asking me to give to him first, and I have only this little portion for me and my son!' She had to learn that God must come first, and if first, then the saints also must come next.
A.P. The woman in @John 4 left her waterpot; is she a type of our bodies being presented as a living sacrifice?
J.T. That is right; the body is a vessel, and that idea enters into @Romans 12:5: "We, being many, are one body in Christ". It takes form in persons who have resigned themselves unselfishly.
A.J.D. Are you suggesting that one should put his last dollar in the box?
J.T. We are to be in accord with God; it is love's way. The question is: How far am I prepared to go on the line of unselfishness and of love? As soon as we get on to the line of unselfishly giving, there will be enough and to spare; and it is not only a question of those giving that are well off, as was said, but I think the Lord would lay upon our hearts those parts of the letters to the Corinthians that relate to giving; He would bring them home to us. The direction in the first letter was to put by at home on the first day of the week; that is to say, the spirit of the first day of the week ought to induce giving. But in the second letter it was out of their *deep poverty* that their free-hearted liberality abounded.
A.P.T. In @Luke 21 the Lord's comment on the widow's mites is a climax in connection with giving.
{213}
J.T. Yes; the Lord, having spoken of her giving, immediately proceeds to speak about the overthrow of the temple, indicating that the system at Jerusalem was not great enough for her. Giving up is one thing, but then there is the giving away, too. Barnabas had land and sold it; I think he would obtain a fair price for it, because it was a question of doing good with it; he sold the land and brought the money and laid it at the apostles¬ feet. He gave unselfishly and placed the gift where it would be of most service.
W.B-w. After Elijah's service in the widow's house, they ought to have had a good meeting in Zarephath!
J.T. Now we are getting to the practical side; they entered the realm of life. What a time they must have had! Elijah said, "See, thy son lives". The Lord would lead us also, through the present pressure, into the sphere of life.
W.B-w. The oil, no doubt, would refer to the Spirit. What kind of food would the meal suggest to us?
J.T. It would allude to Christ's humanity, to the way He would be represented in the idea of a vessel. A little meal in a barrel and oil in a cruse is Christ and the Spirit in the believer. It is the truth as presented in Romans.
W.B-w. The enlargement of the little that was there was miraculous.
J.T. Typically, it is church development in believers who are delivered; Christ is in them, however small the measure. "But if Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness", (@Romans 8:10). I think that is in mind, and where it is practically known, you have church development or the basis of it. It is the Holy Spirit coming in in that connection, and in result you have a *cake*.
{214}
A.F.M. Would these exercises at Zarephath be preparatory to Elijah's showing himself to Ahab?
J.T. Well, you can understand what a man he was now. He had stretched himself upon the child three times and cried to Jehovah. How suggestive that is! "And Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into him again, and he lived". What an experience that was! That holy man was representative of Christ, who identified Himself with us so that we should live. Elijah's impress would henceforth be left upon the child.
C.A.M. The widow went through a remarkable process in view of all this; the loss of her son brought a deep moral exercise into her soul, did it not?
J.T. You can understand how she went through death in her spirit, and how thoroughly Elijah entered into it. He stretched himself upon the child, and cried to Jehovah, and the child's soul came into him again.
A.N.W. In @Acts 20 the apostle would lead up to the Ephesian side, in restoring Eutychus.
J.T. Yes; that was in view. The apostle enfolded him.
C.B. Would this speak of continuing, and not giving up until we get the results?
J.T. Exactly; we do not want to get anything less. @John 11:4 brings out that: "This sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God".
J.E.H. The widow would not think of talking about dying *now*.
J.S. She is getting on to assembly lines, so to say -- "Thy son lives".
C.A.M. It reminds one of the scripture that speaks of women receiving their dead by resurrection.
J.T. Just so. This wonderful testimony comes out, so that in the next chapter, as we have remarked, you have Elijah showing himself to Ahab. With all
{215}
this behind him, how developed he was now! And then we have the slaying of the prophets of Baal, in which the people join. Then the rain came, for God came in, consequent on all this.
R.A.L. Was the brook Kishon a good place to slay the prophets?,
J.T. Quite. "Elijah brought them down to the *torrent* of Kishon". Kishon comes to light when Deborah sent for Barak to go against Sisera, and is dwelt upon in her song. It was a great means of dealing with the enemy, i.e., the army of Sisera.
A.F.M. It says, "The torrent of Kishon swept them away", (@Judges 5:21).
C.B. Does this imply that if we get rid of the idols there will be blessing?
J.T. That is the point; are we facing things? Why is all this pressure upon us? Chapter 18 shows that the people, having judged idolatry, seized the prophets of Baal.
F.H.L. So that this is the justification of prayer.
J.T. That is right; it is the moral justification of Elijah's first prayer. The result is now reached, and he can pray again. That is what you get in chapter 18:42 - 45. The moral process we have spoken of ended in "a great pour of rain"!
A.P. We cannot expect the famine to be removed until we answer to the mind of God.
W.B-w. Elijah exposes the prophets of Baal in a public way before they are slain.
J.T. There is conviction and exposure here, you might say, where sin had existed; and that was accomplished in power. It is more public, like "those that sin convict before all", (@1 Timothy 5:20).
A.F.M. The last verse gives the impression of triumph and victory: "And the hand of Jehovah was upon Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jizreel".
{216}
J.T. What is stressed here is what God can do with one man; Elijah stands out as a marvellous type of man. The seven thousand have to be taken into account, but they did not come into the light of what is represented in the little cake, nor into the holy circle at Zarephath. That was a lowly hiding place where the "fellowship of life" was enjoyed. Neither had Obadiah part in that happy sphere, yet he did a very creditable thing -- he fed one hundred prophets by fifty in a cave, showing he had some little idea of "a meeting" in doing so.
A.N.W. He feared Jehovah greatly. You may find some of our brethren in religious systems pious and God-fearing, but, as you say, they miss the cake; they do not come into the light of that.
J.T. They may listen to the truth and, in a way, value it, but they do not come into it. You cannot but honour them, for they do good service to the Lord's people, but they do not know anything about this little circle of life in the widow's house.
A.F.M. It is because of cowardice, no doubt, that they do not come out from religious associations and suffer for the Lord.
W.G.T. Would Ahab represent christendom?
J.T. Yes. From now on this book teaches us a great lesson as to God's patience with the professing system, but Obadiah is almost afraid to breathe. He would say, as it were, "If I go to Zarephath and link myself with those people, I shall lose my status in Israel". That is the idea; people are afraid to lose some fancied advantage in the public body.
A.B.P. They lack the spirit of widowhood.
J.T. Exactly; and there is a great deal of cowardice.
A.J.D. People are afraid to lose their lives in order to find them.
J.T. Like the rich young man who went away *sorrowful*; he could not bear the loss of his means
{217}
and the reproach of following Christ. Yet God took account of the "seven thousand in Israel", and we must keep those represented by them constantly in mind also.
W.B-w. Were we more in the good of the circle of life, we should extend more help to those coming along.
J.T. Yes; but it is remarkable the number one has known, who come to the meetings and seem to enjoy the things of God, and then drop off. They are afraid of the consequences; the path is too narrow; there is no provision for the flesh in it, or allowance of it. There was no sense of the presence and power of God in the cave, as there was in the widow's house.
{218}
FAMINE IN ELISHA'S TIME
@2 Kings 4:38 - 44; 7
A.N.W. Do you see any relation between these two families?
J.T. There is a relation between them; in both cases it is a question of *what is done*. In the one, the gatherer of the wild gourds brought in death; and in the other, the four lepers, we may say, brought in life.
A.F.M. It does not appear that this man's act was wilful. He was ignorant of the harm he was doing.
J.T. We have not had this feature, so far, in our readings: viz., *what we are to do* under such circumstances such as are here presented.
W.B-w. Does this first famine refer more to the sons of the prophet -- whereas the one in Samaria has a wider bearing?
J.T. Quite. A famine was in the land, and the sons of the prophets were before Elisha; the circumstances were such that there was a necessity for providing food for them.
H.S.D. What class do the sons of the prophets represent?
J.T. Those who have light from a previous generation; they have great prominence in this book. They do not make a good showing, generally; but still they have an important place. Their distinction is not of themselves, but from their fathers. They are not said to be prophets, but sons of the prophets, and they may or may not be helpful. The sequel shows which it is.
W.B-w. They would represent those brought up in the light.
J.T. In the light of a given movement of God.
{219}
They would have to prove whether they have profited by it, or not.
A.F.M. Being sons in relation to any specific prophetic movement, would give them great advantage, but corresponding responsibility, too.
A.N.W. They seem to be found in groups and in contradistinction to the prophets, who stand out in their individualities.
A.F.M. Such as Elijah, Elisha, and others who served on individual lines.
W.B-w. There were also fifty "valiant men" with the sons of the prophets.
A.R.S. These sons of the prophets were characterised by unbelief with regard to Elijah's departure.
J.T. Such knowledge helps us as to them. They were interested in the movements of Elijah and of Elisha, and they knew about Elijah's translation, but they did not *add* anything of value to that fact. They would instruct Elisha as to Elijah's translation, but he was more intelligent as to it than they, and far more interested.
A.R.S. Spiritually, they seemed to be unable to accomplish anything.
J.T. What marks them at the outset of this book is, they know what is current, but they do not add anything to it. If people undertake to minister, you look for some *additional* contribution. Elisha knew better than the sons of the prophets; they would inform him of Elijah's translation, but he said, "I also know it: be silent!" (chapter 2:3). And then, there were fifty valiant men, already referred to, whom these sons of the prophets would send to seek Elijah, contrary to Elisha's wishes. "And he said, Ye shall not send. And they pressed him till he was ashamed, and he said, Send. They sent therefore fifty men, and they sought three days, but did not find him. And they came again to him (now he was staying at Jericho); and he said to them, Did I not
{220}
say to you, Go not?" (chapter 2:16 - 18). It was a futile enterprise marked by unbelief. But then there is another side of the truth in connection with these sons of the prophets; the Spirit of God does not dismiss them as devoid of usefulness. In chapter 6 we find them saying to Elisha, "Behold now, the place where we dwell before thee is too strait for us. Let us go, we pray thee, to the Jordan" (verses 1,2). That seemed to be a spiritual movement; they had been "on the opposite side" (chapter 2:15), but now they wanted to go to the Jordan, to make a place and dwell there.
C.A.M. There seems to be an element in them that is capable of education, as opening up great possibilities.
J.T. As a class, you cannot be sure of them; but there are possibilities, which is an important fact.
W.G.T. In chapter 4 a widow of one of the sons of the prophets said, "Thy servant my husband is dead, and thou knowest that thy servant *feared Jehovah*". He had that distinction.
H.S.D. Is there not something potential in these sons of the prophets that is capable of expansion for service?
J.T. That is the point. We have a good few young brothers in this district, and it is for them to prove themselves by their ministry.
A.N.W. I was wondering whether a son of a prophet develops into a prophet.
J.T. One of them is called a young prophet, in chapter 9. There are possibilities in them, but what comes out is that their salvation, development, and usefulness lie in their coming under the influence of Elisha.
A.R.S. They got into trouble here through the wild gourd, and in chapter 6 one of them in felling a beam lost the axe head, but Elisha met both difficulties.
{221}
J.T. They are marked by defectiveness, but generally are subject to correction. They needed the guidance of the man of God.
A.F.M. It was to their credit that they knew Elijah was going to be translated and that the spirit of Elijah had fallen on Elisha.
A.N.W. Would you say they were a product of the light objectively, but needed the subjective work of God?
J.T. I think so. The first mention of them in this book brings out that they were capable of speaking of what God was about to do; they had that much knowledge, but they were not affected by it. They were at a distance when Elijah and Elisha crossed the Jordan, merely as *spectators*. There are many like them in Christendom today, people who are benefiting by the light that has been recovered, but who are at a distance from those who are walking in it. They can speak about divine things and even write books about the Lord's coming and other such great subjects, but they are not identified with those who are going on in these things, although they may not be against them. Such people are capable of turning the truth into ridicule and of causing damage, as is illustrated here; for sending fifty men to find Elijah (chapter 2:15 - 18), was an infidel thing, and they even, for the moment, influenced Elisha. But on the other hand they were capable of being turned in the right direction.
F.H.L. In famine conditions they sit before Elisha as obedient to him.
W.B-w. In ordering this great pot to be set on, Elisha would feed them; he saw possibilities in them.
J.T. He makes much of them; it alludes, I think, to the Spirit of Christ that would foster every potential element for the work of God; that is the idea of it. This book is marked by the feature of grace and consideration for others.
{222}
A.F.M. Chapter 6:3 supports that; when the sons of the prophets would go to the Jordan, and desired Elisha to go with them, he said, "I will go".
C.A.M. As you say, there seems to be a great advance in chapter 6:1: "Behold now, the place where we dwell before thee is too strait for us".
J.T. Yes; they did not want to act independently, but with Elisha. They would learn much from his causing the axe head to swim, upon the wood being cast in. Typically, they are now on resurrection ground.
W.G.T. They are seen here as "sitting before him".
J.T. I think we can see progress as we proceed, they are coming more into evidence. The son of the prophet who died was evidently a worthy man, and Elisha took account of his widow and sons. Then Elisha came again to Gilgal. Will they go too? The first mention of Gilgal in this book is in chapter 2, where Elijah went from there with Elisha; it is now seen in that spiritual setting. Here Elisha came again to Gilgal, and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him, which was to their credit.
W.B-w. Do you think they learned at Jordan that the power of death is overthrown, and now they are at Gilgal with him?
J.T. Yes; the Holy Spirit is now bringing into evidence the possibilities there are, and the test is Jordan and Gilgal.
A.F.M. What do you think was the occasion of this famine?
J.T. We have no previous notice of it, but I think it is to bring out this very condition -- of what was in the sons of the prophets, and what Elisha could be to them.
A.F.M. It was for their special benefit.
J.T. I think that is the lesson we have to learn -- *how we are to behave in a famine*. Elisha said, "Set
{223}
on the *great* pot", which means that it was to be a mutual and large affair. It could be applied to a conference where there is opportunity for liberal contributions in ministry; God would thus bring out what there is amongst His people. It could further be applied to the "edification" meeting, which affords opportunity for prophetic ministry.
C.A.M. One man made a mistake and brought in the wrong kind of food.
J.T. There is the possibility in the great pot of good or evil; what one says may, or may not, be right.
J.T.Jr. It may be Gilgal outwardly but not inwardly.
C.A.M. They do not seem to be like grown men that have power of discernment between good and evil.
J.T. This man did not know that what he brought in was poisonous. He did not mean to poison the brethren. Applying the figure to the present time: one may not mean to say anything wrong, and yet do so. Going to the field was not wrong, for "the king himself is dependent upon the field", (@Ecclesiastes 5:9). The field should be productive of good food; it is really oneself.
A.F.M. We can only contribute as edifying that which we cultivate.
W.B-w. Certain herbs are good. We have to select the kind suitable for food.
J.T. @Hebrews 6:7 speaks of "useful herbs"; we have to "prove all things", and "hold fast the right", (@1 Thessalonians 5:21).
A.R.S. Do you not think that the man, in going to get the herbs, became careless in his selection?
J.T. That is exactly what happened. One has seen it in persons that minister; they gather up from books, or from other sources, information which is false yet interwoven with the truth -- perverted
{224}
things; but they do not mean to give out what is wrong. It says, "Then one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered from it his lap full of wild colocynths". The meaning of colocynths is obscure; but it says they were *wild*
J.S. Would this famine bring to light whether the sons of the prophets were with God or not?
J.T. That is the point; this feature comes first. Elisha is concerned for the sons of the prophets, and orders his servant to boil pottage for them. Pottage consists of several ingredients; it is generally good food and suggests *mutuality*. We might have an "open" meeting with three addresses, and some thanksgivings and hymns, all of which might be most helpful, yet something might be introduced by one of the speakers, poisonous in character, which would affect all present.
J.S. If we were with God, the food would be wholesome.
J.T. Quite. You would yourself prove what you say; you would be sure it was of God. "If anyone speak -- as oracles of God", (@1 Peter 4:11). This man gathered a lapful; he had no proper vessel. The lap was unlike the cruse and the barrel which the widow of Sarepta had.
T.A. Does the meal cast into the pot suggest a spiritual ministry of Christ?
J.T. Yes; it is the kind of humanity seen in the Lord Jesus.
A.F.M. It would appear that these sons of the prophets discerned what was in the pot and refused it while eating, and said, "Man of God, there is death in the pot!"
J.T. That is the next thing. They are entirely dependent upon Elisha. It was as they were eating that they discovered the "death".
A.R.S. This man may represent a good speaker.
{225}
He gathered a lot in his lap, but the character of it was not discerned until they commenced to eat it. It is like the Newton movement: some thought it was all right, but others discerned that there was death in the pot.
J.T. That was deliberate, but, as you say, the evil was not generally discerned at first.
J.T.Jr. Would you connect the famine in verse 38 with what the man actually did in bringing in what was wild?
J.T. There was a famine in the land, and the great pot is put on so that there might be something to eat in spite of the famine. One evidently acted of himself and gathered these wild gourds, and the others did not discern that they were poisonous. In other words, the mutual side failed; so we must be on our guard. You may say you had a very good meeting, but then you want to be sure that everything that was said is right.
W.B-w. Accordingly, it is important to have notes carefully revised before circulation.
C.N. So that Paul begged Timothy to remain at Ephesus, "that thou mightest enjoin some *not to teach other doctrines*, nor to turn their minds to fables and interminable genealogies", (@1 Timothy 1:3,4).
J.T. Yes; all corrective epistles are like the meal.
A.N.W. In connection with damaging ministry, typified in the wild gourds, it is one thing to discover what is wrong, and another to supply the meal. The sons of the prophets discerned the defect, but Elisha applied the remedy.
J.T. We must bear in mind that the mutual side cannot be trusted very much; you must bring in the element of the "man of God".
J.S. We must bring in the spiritual element.
F.H.L. There is no suggestion of Elisha's sharing in the pot or in the loaves; it is set before the sons of the prophets.
{226}
J.T. Elisha represents the mind of God -- the Spirit of Christ here as representative of God; otherwise there is no authoritative element, because the mutual side is not authoritative in itself. I am not now speaking of the assembly, but of what is called *mutual*.
C.A.M. That seems immensely important -- the recognition of the mind of God authoritatively; where that is lost sight of there is independence and disintegration.
J.T. It is beautiful to see brethren together, and it is right that there should be opportunity for mutual participation in divine things, but without the authoritative element we are apt to get the wild gourds.
A.N.W. Elisha is contrasted with Elijah in connection with famine conditions. Elisha seems to be above them -- what is in the pot is not for him; whereas, in connection with Elijah, the cake was made for him first.
J.T. Elijah had to go through the consequences of the famine in a very personal way; but that side is not presented in this second book; here the man of God is not seen as in need, but rather meets it.
W.F.K. Is Elisha's action like the apostle Paul's ministry to the Corinthians?
J.T. Just so; his epistles to them furnish the "meal".
A.R.S. Do you not think that this man who shred the gourds into the pot was a kind of free lance; he got away from the company and went into the world?
J.T. I should not like to say that the field here is the world; it is a legitimate place in which to look for food. Ecclesiastes tells us that "the king himself is dependent upon the field". In @Proverbs 24:27 we have: "Prepare thy work without, and put thy *field* in order, and afterwards build thy house". We must have the field; it is the place of tillage, but then if it is not properly tilled it may yield
{227}
poisonous things; the man who went out for the herbs did not take account of that, he did not consider the danger of gathering from the untilled part. As already remarked, the field really is oneself, which brings the responsibility home to us, to keep the field in order.
H.S.D. The situation was met by bringing something positive in, not by pouring out the contents of the pot, but by putting the meal into it.
J.T. That is important; it shows that divine things cannot be handled like human things. The meal would allude to powerful ministry being brought m, a ministry of Christ which is corrective, as at Corinth, so that the poison is overcome.
F.H.L. Do you not think it was the servants who brought the meal?
J.T. In verse 41 Elisha said, "Then bring meal". And *he* cast it into the pot; the correction was evidently in the way Elisha used the meal.
A.R. The meal was to neutralise what was there.
J.T. The apostle said to the Corinthians, "Do ye not know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump?" (@1 Corinthians 5:6); and he said the same thing to the Galatians: "A little leaven leavens the whole lump", (@Galatians 5:9). But instead of the Corinthians being leavened, the correction was successful and they were restored.
W.G.T. The one who went out to gather the wild gourds ignored the man of God. You would think he would have gone to Elisha first, before casting them into the pot.
J.T. Yes; especially with a lapful.
A.R. Sometimes it is said that our "open" meetings, so-called, are poor. Would you look for this remedial element?
J.T. Yes; if I complain, then I should, in such a case, bring in the meal.
A.F.M. As the result of what Elisha did "there
{228}
was no harm in the pot". Paul's letters to the Corinthians brought about positive results; his second letter shows that -- the new covenant and reconciliation are on positive and constructive lines.
J.T.Jr. Would you look for this man, who brought in the wild gourds, to be recovered, because the next setting in the chapter gives another man? The idea of adjustment comes in. You look for the brother, the next time, to bring in something positive.
J.T. Yes; what follows is sequential.
A.N.W. Does not every corrective epistle use the occasion to bring in a further suggestion of Christ?
J.T. It does; it brings in the positive side; so that in verse 42, we have a man from another realm, Baal-shalishah, a significant name. It was a place having a *dominant* element; that is not the mutual side, but a place governed by authority. It is suggestive of heaven, where everything is according to the mind of God.
J.T.Jr. There is nothing "wild" there.
A.N.W. Would it suggest Ephesians, which is hardly corrective at all?
J.T. I think it goes on to Ephesians; there is a positive line. The second epistle to the Corinthians really lays the basis for Ephesians; the new covenant and reconciliation lay the basis in our souls for the heavenly side -- man coming from *another place*. In Ephesians the gospel includes the idea of *place*, involving not only salvation from Satan's power and the world, but also from the earth as a *place*.
J.S. The man came from a place where things were evidently under cultivation.
J.T. Baal-shalishah would mean a place where there is authority. Baal is "lord" -- the Lord dominates, and, as has been remarked, there is nothing wild there. "Let thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth", (@Matthew 6:10). It implies
{229}
subjection to authority, and that is what we must come to.
W.B-w. He was thinking of the man of God, not of the sons of the prophets; he brought the man of God bread.
J.T. Yes; you are on a higher level now, and the food that is brought is in keeping with it; it is "bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley, and fresh ears of corn in his sack". Notice that the corn is not in his lap, but in his sack -- a proper container. Elisha said, "Give to the people that they may eat. And his attendant said, How shall I set this before a hundred men? And he said, Give the people that they may eat; for thus saith Jehovah: They shall eat and shall have to spare". That is a very fine word in a famine -- "They shall eat and shall have to spare".
J.S. It is authority now.
J.T. Yes; "They *shall* eat, and *shall* have to spare". God has come in now from another place; we are lifted out of the realm of man's world into the realm of God's world.
J.S. It reminds us of the incident of the Lord's feeding the multitude, when the disciples took up twelve baskets of fragments. It is also like the father's house of @Luke 15.
J.T. *Abundance of bread*; yet the prodigal had been perishing with hunger!
C.B. This kind of ministry which is positive would overcome all our doubts.
J.T. I think that is right; here you are lifted up into God's realm. Baal-shalishah signifies God's realm -- a realm wholly dominated by God where there are no wild things; everything is of God and according to His mind.
W.B-w. Things-from God are always *fresh*.
{230}
G.McP. As apprehending these things we would be lifted out of the sphere of mere profession into what is real.
J.T. Yes; it is not a question, here, of testing the sons of the prophets; we are now on known ground, each food is mentioned. The great pot contained a mixture.
A.F.M. Would you say a word about the first-fruits, the loaves of barley, and then the fresh ears of corn? They each seem to have a distinctive setting.
J.T. First-fruits have their own significance -- "The first-fruits, Christ", (@1 Corinthians 15:23). I suppose it is the very best; and then the baking process has been gone through.
A.F.M. In @Leviticus 23 we get the two wave-loaves of the first-fruits baken. Is this after that order?
J.T. Yes. In that chapter the first of the first-fruits is the sheaf cut down and waved before Jehovah, in that instance the fire is not applied; it refers to Christ Himself in resurrection. But the second part of the first-fruits is the wave-loaves which are baked; they are brought out of the dwellings of Israel.
W.B-w. Does this go beyond the wave-loaves? There is a big supply of twenty loaves.
J.T. It is *quantity* here. The two wave-loaves were more a testimony as to what was possible in the households of the people.
A.N.W. How distinct these elements are! A herb may be difficult to classify, but wheat, barley, and corn are very distinctive.
W.G.T. The man from Baal-shalishah would displace the official element, such as the sons of the prophets, who had a standing.
J.T. His importance lies in the fact that he comes from Baal-shalishah bringing food to the man of
{231}
God. He is, typically, the link between heaven and that which represents God down here.
A.P.T. Would the supplies this man brought be on the line of ministry -- a direct word from God?
J.T. I think so; and it links on, in Ephesian character, with what is known to be of God down here. The food is brought to the *man of God*.
R.A.L. And all get the benefit of it.
J.T. Yes. "He set it before them, and they ate and left thereof, according to the word of Jehovah".
H.S.D. What the man from Baal-shalishah had was capable of expansion.
J.T. Well, we see what it is as in the hands of the man of God.
W.B-w. Why does it say a *hundred* men?
J.T. That is, relatively, a goodly number; the twenty loaves are also a goodly, though not a vast, number -- something you can compass, but there were some left over.
A.F.M. In the words, "they ate and left thereof", we have a suggestion of the abundance contained in the epistle to the Ephesians, made available through prophetic ministry.
F.H.L. Does what this man brought suggest the immense possibility of the field as properly cultivated; i.e., what comes in here in contrast to the *wild* vine?
J.T. What the man brings indicates the country from which he comes and what prevails there.
A.N.W. Would what he brought suggest ministry from the ascended Head?
J.T. I think so; you feel how orderly and well things are done at Baal-shalishah.
W.F.K. We should note that all is "according to the word of Jehovah".
J.T. Things are determined by His word, which is in keeping with the ground we are on here.
A.C. When the attendant asks, "How shall I set
{232}
this before a hundred men?" he brings in an element of doubt. The man of God emphasises what he had said before.
J.T. Yes; it is a question of authority: "And he said, Give the people that they may eat; for *thus saith Jehovah*: They shall eat, and shall have to spare. And he set it before them, and they ate and left thereof, *according to the word of Jehovah*".
A.C. Would that not impress the attendant further as to the man of God?
J.T. I think so. It should come home to every one of us that there is authority in heaven to be reflected in the assembly.
A.R. It is remarkable that the will of God enters into Ephesians.
J.T. That is a very important thing -- the idea of "the good pleasure of his will", "the mystery of his will", and "the counsel of his own will" (@Ephesians 1:5,9,11) -- so that we do well to recognise it and bow to it as essential to our spiritual growth and prosperity.
{233}
FAMINE IN SAMARIA
@2 Kings 7
J.T. The subject before us is introduced in chapter 6: "And it came to pass after this that Ben-hadad, king of Syria, gathered all his army and went up and besieged Samaria. And there was a great famine in Samaria; and behold, they besieged it, until an ass's head was worth eighty silver pieces, and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung five silver pieces" (verse 24). The situation was so dreadful that two women bargained to eat their offspring; one of them addressed the king of Israel and said, "This woman said to me, Give thy son, that we may eat him today, and we will eat my son to-morrow. And we boiled my son, and ate him; and I said to her on the next day, Give thy son, that we may eat him; and she had hidden her son" (verses 28,29). The Spirit calls our attention to the repulsive food that was available, and to its great cost. The occasion of this famine was not providential, as an act of God directly, but was caused by the Syrian army. It especially exposes the king of Israel, who, while he pretended to feel things, having put on sackcloth, was a murderer; then his captain was an unbeliever in the direct testimony of God. So that the situation was one of evil against evil; but with all that, the prophet Elisha was seated in his house, and the elders sat with him. That was another position in Samaria to be taken into account. Then, as completing the picture, we have these four leprous men outside of the gate. It is for us to compare this state of things with what is current today, and to see that whilst God is over all that is transpiring, the famine condition has arisen not by His withholding food, for there
{234}
is abundance of it, but as the result of man's avarice and his inability to cope with its consequences.
A.F.M. You were saying this afternoon that the key to the relieving of this awful position was with individuals who did something; and you referred to the exercises of these four leprous men.
J.T. That is what I think we may see. The general features of the famine are seen in chapter 6. God is shut out as far as those in authority are concerned. The king of Israel was a murderer ready to take off Elisha's head; and another king, Ben-hadad, is outside with all his army. We have thus a set of circumstances brought about by human wickedness. But in the midst of this is Elisha representing the mind of God; then there are four lepers outside the gate who, in the midst of all these things have no status at all, and we have to understand whom they represent, which is seen largely in what they do. They become capable of announcing glad tidings, as we shall see; they are marked off as persons who reason out things -- putting two and two together, as we say, and rightly concluding, as children of wisdom, what is the best course -- indeed, the only course -- to take. There is this and that way to go, but death would be the certain result of taking either.
J.S. They were facing death.
J.T. Yes; they said, "The famine is in the city, and we shall die there; and if we abide here, we shall die". It was negative guidance, but there was one door open affording some hope, and they entered that door; they said, "let us fall away to the camp of the Syrians".
J.S. They decided to face the enemy!
A.F.M. The king of Israel was idolatrous; he clave to the sins of Jeroboam. Would you think that on that account Jehovah had a controversy with him and the city of Samaria?
J.T. God was doubtless allowing the Syrians to
{235}
chastise him for that reason. With regard to the conditions facing the four lepers, there was not much choice; their position is much like that of the people of God today who find themselves in the midst of most trying circumstances, as morally outside and in reproach.
W.B-w. This woman was crying, "Help, my lord, O king!" (chapter 6:26); but she was looking to the wrong person.
J.T. The king could do nothing for her; in fact, the cry only brought out his murderous spirit.
W.G.T. Her request brought to light how serious the conditions were:
J.T. Yes; showing what awful conditions there are in a moral sense in the world today; think of the food men eat, and for which they pay so high a price! Think of one woman entering into a bargain with another woman with regard to their sons -- that they should be alternative food! It shows how terrible the extremities are to which men bring themselves. Although the food in "the great pot" was not the most, refined, apart from the wild gourd, it was healthful food, and involved no disregard of right principles. But boiling one's child for food is the utmost disregard of all right feeling. The woman appealed but only to enforce her claim that the hidden child should be boiled. The king admitted that he was helpless. With assumed piety he said, "If Jehovah do not help thee, whence should I help thee? Out of the threshing floor, or out of the wine-press?" (chapter 6:27). And then when she tells him her sad tale, it says "he rent his garments; and he was passing by upon the wall, and the people looked, and behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh. And he said, God do so, and more also to me, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall remain on him this day!" (chapter 6:30,31). There is a pretence of godliness about him, but a murderous heart within.
{236}
A.F.M. It would show that, with all its severity, the famine had not rightly affected him; although it was intended to affect him first and most of all.
A.N.W. Do you think the fact that his name is withheld would suggest that he stands as the head of a system -- of a condition that is being dealt with and is exposing itself? His title is given but not his name; you have to go a long way back to get it.
J.T. You do not get the name of the captain on whom the king leaned either; both are representative of the system, as you say. It is to call attention to the helplessness of those in authority under these circumstances.
A.C. Why is this special attack aimed at Elisha? His life is threatened.
J.T. It brings out the wickedness of those in high stations; not that we would speak of such now, but of the principle of it, showing how untrustworthy unregenerate men in the most exalted stations are. Why did the king not blame himself? Instead, he would murder the man of God, by taking off his head. Beheading implies, I think, that the enemy is aiming at the wisdom of God that is there. Satan would get rid of that.
W.G.T. How is it that in the first part of chapter 6 you get deliverance from the hand of the Syrian, but in the last part you get no deliverance?
J.T. Chapter 6 brings in resurrection, and is the completion of one subject. The bands of the Syrians did not invade Israel again; this is a great attempt of king Ben-hadad with all his army. The bands of Syrians coming in may be regarded, typically as partisan action, and not as a general attack as this is.
J.S. The earlier attacks were against the testimony as represented in the man of God (chapter 6:13,14). Here the king himself, while assuming a garb of repentance, would slay Elisha.
J.T. It is very important, as seeking to maintain
{237}
things for God to keep this in mind -- that persons in high stations cannot be relied upon. Deliverance must come in some other way.
J.S. The king's captain was infidel.
W.G.T. The king called Elisha "my father", (chapter 6:21).
J.T. That was just outward recognition of his dignity. When the Lord was here, they called Him "Rabbi", but it did not mean that there was any true faith in the persons who thus addressed Him. This captain is brought in at the end to show that God had not forgotten his unbelief in the mercy and power of God -- that it met with His swift judgment "according to what the man of God had said".
We should direct our attention to these four leprous men, because they are representative of Christians at the present time from the world's standpoint, and therefore not in a complimentary way. From the standpoint of the children of wisdom, it is most complimentary. They arrive at the right course to pursue on the principle of analysing their surroundings; having considered the different avenues that might be taken, they finally decided on the only one through which there was any possibility of deliverance.
J.S. Would you say it is a good thing for us, as in like circumstances, to be able to analyse the situation?
J.T. We should take account of things and, by the process of spiritual reasoning, arrive at a decision as to the way out -- for there is a way out for faith. God never allows His people to be definitely circumvented. "Our way not entirely shut up", Paul says, (@2 Corinthians 4:8); but then, the apostle would have to find that way through waiting on God.
J.S. Therefore if we move forward in considerate faith to meet difficulties, the Lord will show us a way out.
J.T. Exactly; as soon as we begin to move, God
{238}
begins to move. It says, "And they rose up in the dusk to go to the camp of the Syrians; and they came to the extremity of the camp of the Syrians; and behold, there was no man there. For the Lord had made the army of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, a noise of a great host; and they said one to another, Behold, the king of Israel has hired against us the kings of the Hittites and the kings of the Egyptians to come upon us". It is in their moving toward the Syrians that God moved; they found the right way and took it. On arriving at that knowledge through a process of wise reasoning, and moving accordingly, we find that God acts for us.
J.S. He acts and overwhelms the enemy and they flee.
H.S.D. God's movements and the lepers¬ movements synchronise.
W.B-w. Say a word about chapter 6:32 -- "And Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him".
J.T. We have noticed that already; they are not the sons of the prophets, but a development of them, so to speak, being elders. We have seen the sons of the prophets coming into the light of resurrection at the Jordan, but now we have elders, and they are with the prophet in his house. After chapter 6 the sons of the prophets are hardly noticed. One of them is employed to anoint Jehu, and is called a "young prophet", (chapter 9:l).
W.B-w. Would the elders sitting with Elisha suggest counsel being taken?
J.T. I think so; we have in them the thought of experience.
J.T. They represent one side of our position, Elisha represents another, and the elders still another.
{239}
A.C. Would you emphasise the position of Elisha and the elders? The man of God knows to whom to look.
J.T. The light is with Elisha. He is sitting in his house. Deliberation is indicated. He knows the king as the son of a murderer, and can anticipate what he is going to do; he is perfectly cognisant of everything; and yet he does not bring about deliverance, for it is not that side here, although he prophesies that it is coming. God has other means of relief before Him.
A.F.M. Do you think that side, as set forth in the lepers, has to be arrived at by us under such conditions?
J.T. I think it is a question of what we have now -- the brethren together taking counsel as children of wisdom. Of course, we have the Scriptures and the Spirit of God, yet we arrive at the divine way on the principle of consideration of the conditions in which we may be. God values this in His people, and makes their decisions effective.
G.McP Why are they leprous men?
J.T. I think it is to bring out their relative position -- that they were ostracised; they had no status at all.
A.R. Representing the public reproach of the testimony?
J.T. I think so. We all are leprous morally, for we are of no moral value to heaven unless we have arrived at that estimate of ourselves; and the more we realise it, the more outside the gate we are.
A.P.T. Why are there four lepers?
J.T. They represent something general or universal.
F.H.L. They are unnamed.
J.T. What they represent is in view, not so much the persons. Here are these men, outside of the city gate, with no status at all, and yet deliverance comes through them! The more we accept our leprous
{240}
condition (and only true Christians do), the more outside we are, and the less use people have for us.
G.McP. Would it be akin to the Lord's being found in Simon the leper's house?
J.T. Pretty much; Simon was of that kind, and had that reputation. Spiritually, he was a confessed sinner. Paul said, speaking of himself, that he was the chief of sinners. It is most interesting to see the debating of these leprous men among themselves, as to what they should do. "If we say, Let us enter into the city, the famine is in the city, and we shall die there; and if we abide here, we shall die. And now come, let us fall away to the camp of the Syrians: if they save us alive, we shall live; and if they put us to death, we shall but die".
J.S. That was the way of faith.
J.T. Yes; but it is not put as though God showed them the way. It is not exactly, "This is the way, walk ye in it", (@Isaiah 30:21). It is arrived at inwardly by a process. First, there is a negative outlook with respect to entering the city, but that way cannot be taken. Many an exercised soul is baffled as to what he is going to do; he knows he is a sinner, but what is he to do to be forgiven? And many a Christian is baffled similarly as he looks around at the various religious organisations, and wonders if he will get food if he goes to this one or that one.
A.C. These four men are united in the way they move.
J.T. Yes; there is no division among them in judgment or action.
J.S. Would that be a moral outcome of the counsel with the elders in the previous chapter?
J.T. The elders were sitting with Elisha in his house, and there must be some spiritual link between them and those who take counsel in this way. If you transfer it to the present time, the brethren who accepted their leprous condition are outside;
{241}
they have intelligence and wisdom, and can confer together; they can look this way and that way and take neither. But they can reach a definite decision, like the lepers who said, "And now come, let us fall away to the camp of the Syrians; if they save us alive, we shall live". They knew the Syrians could save them alive; that is to say, there is food and a means of sustenance there. "If they save us alive, we shall live".
J.S. They reasoned and acted as wisdom's children.
R.D.G. Is it to their credit that they go out in the dusk?
J.T. I suppose it was part of the wisdom because the enemy was in view; we have, therefore, to move very carefully.
E.B. Would you say that the public position is like that of the four leprous men?
J.T. I think so. Do you not find yourself in reproach because you have accepted your place as leprous before God? People do not care for lepers, we well know. Referring again to Elisha, he was sitting in his house. That is another position; there he is in seclusion and dignity.
J.S. It is like "within the veil" (@Hebrews 6:19), but "without the camp", (@Hebrews 13:13).
J.T. Yes; it is quite remarkable that Elisha is spoken of as having a house in those circumstances.
W.B-w. He could tell the time of the relief from the famine. He said, "To-morrow about this time".
A.N.W. The elders are with him in his house. Is the position a counterpart of that of the four leprous men?
J.T. I think so. Elisha is marked by the inside feature; when Naaman first went to him he was
{242}
inside. He did not even go out, but sent a messenger to him.
A.R. Is this instance of the lepers to show that persons might get light as to the unscripturalness of religious systems, and yet have no food? Being outside in itself is not sufficient.
J.T. There must be movement. There is a spiritual touch in this, in that they moved in the right direction. It is a great thing to know of a place where people are saved alive. The Syrians did not save them alive, for they had left, but the means of sustenance was there. The apostle says, "concluding that the Lord had called us, ...". (@Acts 16:10); by consideration of what is presented, as subject, we find the way of life.
C.A.M. I suppose after having looked death in the face, you are ready to meet the enemy; these men were really prepared to face the enemy on his own ground.
J.T. They were; but they find no enemy there, God had gone before them, and the enemy had fled.
A.R.S. Is this like the strong man being vanquished and his goods spoiled?
J.T. Yes; it is God dealing with the enemy so that His people might live. Elisha in his house with the elders before him; he is morally in keeping with this movement of the lepers, in relation to whom God is acting so that there might be relief for all. There is instruction in this, bearing on the present time.
C.N. You are conveying to us the thought that as we are able to take in the position of Elisha and the elders, and connect them with the lepers, we shall find the way out.
J.T. Yes; there is a way out. We find it not by carelessly letting things go, but by carefully taking account of every phase of the position and in deciding what to do according to the wisdom that God gives us, and by putting into effect the decision arrived at.
{243}
J.S. It was an extreme exercise that the four leprous men went through, bringing in the morning of plenty.
J.T.Jr. May we not reckon on the noise of the chariots -- on God's acting?
J.T. Yes; we may reckon on God's acting as we move according to the wisdom He gives us. Of course, He acts sovereignly, too.
J.S. God caused them to think they were being pursued, as seen in their garments and materials being left on the way of their flight.
J.T. Yes; the complete clearance of the enemy is very striking. You would think a rear-guard would watch the camp in military fashion; but there was not one left behind, showing the perfection of God's intervention; the enemy was entirely routed.
A.F.M. Is Jordan suggestive? They traced the Syrians as far as Jordan. Would that refer to the death of Christ?
J.T. It seems so; as seen in this book, the meaning of Jordan has to be arrived at. It means the power of death overcome by the power of God. The messengers see only "garments and materials" all the way to Jordan, but no Syrians. The ground is clear, and so we have "good tidings"; there is plenty of food.
F.H.L. It is remarkable how God moved with the lepers; they rose at dusk, and the enemy fled in the dusk.
A.R. They spoke with one another about going out to the Syrians, but now they speak to one another about coming back.
J.T. We must note the kind of counsel they took in the midst of plenty. They were failing men, as we all are; they ate and drank, and took silver and gold and garments, and hid them. But they were capable of better thoughts. It is a pleasure to see a brother or a sister, who has acted unworthily, being
{244}
capable of better thoughts and returning to those thoughts. These lepers said, "We are not doing right; this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace". That side of the truth is presented in those four men.
A.F.M. I suppose the eating and drinking were all right; it is right for us to appropriate so that our needs are met. It says that they ate and drank, and later became evangelists; is that the order?
J.T. Yes; they were living by eating and drinking, but the hiding of things was selfish; however, they judged that. God has great regard for people who judge themselves. If I say, I am doing something wrong, and confess it to God, He has great regard for that. These men, as judging themselves, became evangelists.
W.G.T. They said, "the iniquity will find us out". They were now morally right.
W.B-w. The enemy was easily frightened. They said that the king was hiring the Hittites and the Egyptians to fight against them.
J.T. It was false reckoning. These were probably not the ordinary Hittites left in Canaan, but a powerful people in the north, as were the Egyptians in the south. Why should the kings of those great nations hire themselves out to the king of Israel?
A.D. Why did they leave the horses and asses behind?
J.T. That they were left was part of the good tidings. Horses and asses are useful creatures; they can be employed in the testimony. You may be sure they were used later to carry the food into the city. It is said they were tied; they were thus available and do not represent what is lawless.
J.S. They were available for service connected with the glad tidings.
J.T. Yes; the Lord had need of the young ass tied in the village near Jerusalem.
{245}
C.N. Whom do these Syrians represent?
J.T. I suppose they represent the enemy in a governmental character. It is Ben-hadad king of Syria and all his army. You get the king's name -- it is a characteristic enemy.
C.P. The prophetic word at the beginning of the chapter exposes the infidel captain, and then the glad tidings at the end of the chapter corresponds with @2 Corinthians 2:16, "... to the one an odour from death unto death, but to the others an odour from life unto life".
A.P.T. The king of Israel was a poor reasoner in view of this remarkable situation. He possessed no ability to take advantage of this God-given victory.
A.R.S. He was, virtually, in the dark.
J.T. Although he made a pretence of godliness in having sackcloth within upon his flesh. He said here, in effect, "The Syrians are resorting to a ruse", thinking he knew. His wisdom was of the kind the apostle refers to as "the wisdom of this world", (@1 Corinthians 3:19). Notice that in his reasoning he assumes that the Syrians would catch the Israelites "alive"; whereas, one of his servants rather intimates that there was not much evidence of life; the horses, as well as those left of Israel, were dying rather than living.
A.N.W. It is interesting to see that the leprous men have life in mind; they say, "if they save us alive, we shall live".
A.R. The Syrian horses and asses would represent, as was said, the colt of which the Lord had need; (@Luke 19:31). It was ready for service.
A.F.M. The basis of this plentiful supply in Samaria would be from the camp of the Syrians.
J.T. That is where the relief came from: "Out of the eater came forth food, And out of the strong came forth sweetness", (@Judges 14:14). Relief comes in as the enemy is overthrown.
{246}
W.G.T. Has not the current stringency been brought in through a demoralised condition abroad, so that men are no longer able to think rightly? It is the kind of thinking which marked the king that is in the world today.
J.T. I think we should be impressed with that; and thinking powers of men have been unable to meet the situation. Administrative efficiency has broken down, and the Lord would say to us, "But ye shall not be thus", (@Luke 22:26). He has given us the power of right thinking. The four lepers had the power to reach a solution; they found a way out. It is a question of using the wisdom God has given us; Peter said, "I stir up, in the way of putting you in remembrance, your pure mind", (@2 Peter 3:1). That is an important thing, "your pure mind". Paul speaks of renewing our minds. As children of wisdom, we shall not be circumvented; the way out may be a humiliating and a heart-searching one, as seen in these four men, but it will become a clear way to us. If the world is suffering, we ought not to expect to be immune from it, God intends this to be a heart-searching time for the saints. You can understand the heart-searchings of these four men, and as we transfer the idea to the Lord's people, we become immense gainers.
A.F.M. So that the solution of present difficulties in which we find ourselves lies in the saints coming to self-judgment and right action.
J.T. I believe as soon as that is reached there will be relief -- as we take things home to ourselves, and go through the thing with God, as these men did. It says here, "And they said one to another, We are not doing right". That is a word that ought to come home to every one of us.
F.H.L. They had reached the extremity of the camp. How far would that take us?
{247}
J.T. They were beginning to enter into the sphere of plenty.
F.H.L. The extremity of the camp would not go so far as Jordan.
J.T. No; it would not; but the lepers went through Jordan in principle when they took previous counsel, owning that death was on them. They were accepting death in going to the Syrian camp, but it was life. This indicates the divine way.
J.T.Jr. They realised, too, that their iniquity would be found out. They were judging in a moral way.
A.N.W. Have you any idea about the order of the recovery of the spoil. They ate and drank, and carried away thence silver and gold and garments.
J.T. I think eating and drinking means that they were going to live; it is the way to life. Through want of something to eat, death was facing them; but in the camp of the Syrians there was abundance, and so it was a question of appropriating that first.
J.S. It no doubt helped them in their reasoning.
J.T. Yes; you can understand that when they had had something to eat, they could reason more clearly and definitely, for we eat to live. The silver and gold and garments would be right spiritually, but under those circumstances it was no time for hiding; and that brought out the reasoning. "And they came again, and entered into another tent, and carried thence, and went and hid it". That is the second time, but now they had a conscience about the hiding. They said one to another, "We are not doing right". It is a fine thing, morally, when people come to that point.
W.G.T. The principle of hoarding during a famine is a selfish one; it takes what is needed out of circulation.
A.N.W. Their very instincts should have told them that what was in the camp was universal in its
{248}
aspect; it was not for them only. The Christian knows that what he has in Christ is for all.
C.P. If life is brought in through food, testimony would follow that.
J.T. You feel that there was a moral thread in their fibre -- the thread of righteousness -- which is an important thing in evangelists; it gives them a good conscience.
A.F.M. In order to preach the righteousness of God, we must do what is right.
J.T. You must have "put on the breastplate of righteousness", (@Ephesians 6:14).
W.F.K. The gospel message is urgent; it cannot wait even for the "morning light".
J.T. Quite so. It is to be proclaimed "in season and out of season", (@2 Timothy 4:2).
A.N.W. Why does "iniquity" suggest itself?
J.T. It is to bring out the moral fibre, as has been said, so important in those who preach.
J.T.Jr. If we do not admit it, the government of God will bring it out.
J.T. Quite so; so it says, "if we tarry till the morning light, the iniquity will find us out; and now come, let us go and tell the king's household. And they came and called to the porters of the city, and told them, saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians, and behold, there was no one there, no sound of man, but the horses tied, and the asses tied, and the tents as they were". You can hardly conceive of anything more like the glad tidings than that report to Samaria, as under those terrible conditions.
R.A.L. These four men had left the enemy's camp and had come to the city.
J.T. They had already reached the sphere of life. There is no danger after you get to the sphere of life, having acted on God-given wisdom.
A.C. They used further wisdom in announcing it
{249}}
to the king's household despite the fact that he was a murderer.
J.T. In telling the king's household these men did what was right; it was the authoritative connection, for, after all, the king was king of Israel.
G.McP. God was coming in for the city, too.
J.T. He was delivering the city, in mercy.
H.S.D. Those glad tidings had effect; there was movement as a result. I suppose we cannot move others beyond the measure in which we are affected ourselves.
J.T. At the end of the chapter the Spirit of God goes back to the "captain", so as to rebuke infidelity. We all are prone to unbelief as to God's faithfulness, and so need this rebuke:
A.R. Will you say a word about these two kinds of food in verse 16, the fine flour and the barley.
J.T. I suppose they point to the Lord Jesus -- the beautiful kind of humanity seen in Him. The meal cast into "the great pot" (@2 Kings 4:38), is a cognate thought.
A.F.M. Could not verse 9 be applied to our delinquency in evangelism?
J.T. I am sure it could.
A.N.W. Mr. Darby said that if we cease to be evangelical the Lord will cease to be with us.
J.S. I suppose we see that Jehovah deals not only with the enemy outside, as seen in the Syrians, but with the enemy within. The captain came under God's governmental dealing.
A.N.W. The captain's doom is like @Mark 16:16 "He that disbelieves shall be condemned". The Spirit dwells very much on the unbelief of this man.
J.T. The king leaned on him. It is like "modernism".
J.S. Those publicly responsible in christendom today are leaning on modernism.
{250}
A.F.M. We should not omit to present in the gospel the warning side to those remaining in unbelief; (@John 8:24).
W.G.T. In chapter 8 of this book we see Gehazi telling the king of the great things Elisha had done. He is with the king and no longer with Elisha.
J.T. He represents another modern element. Although no longer in the testimony -- the leprosy of Naaman being upon him by the government of God -- he can speak of past exploits.
{251}
FAMINE CONDITIONS PRESENTED BY JOEL
@Joel 1; 2:1
J.T. Those who have looked into the subject of famines will know that the prophets refer very extensively to it, but none of them gives a more concrete example of famine than Joel. We have famine conditions presented here, in remarkable severity, without the actual use of the word 'famine'; the instrumentality, too, is fourfold, namely, the palmer-worm, locust, canker-worm, and caterpillar; one after the other, all were employed in order to make the thing complete.
J.S. You have destructive things here as well as God's hand governmentally over all.
J.T. Yes; it is very touching that although these insects were employed in the destruction of vegetation, Jehovah said it was in *His* land. "For a nation is come up upon *my* land". He owned it as His, and yet all this had come about. I thought this would afford a different feature of our subject, as interwoven in the prophetic word.
A.F.M. Is there any particular cause assigned to such a calamity coming to pass?
J.T. I think it was on account of the lack of what was due to Jehovah, as verse 9 shows. He therefore calls attention to His day -- "the day of Jehovah"; the famine feature is linked up with the final result of God's government. These marauders portended something. The way this book is linked up with the beginning of Christianity is most interesting. It furnished the text for the introduction of our dispensation, see @Acts 2.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that when Peter was speaking in @Acts 2 he referred to "the last day", and yet he was really in the first days of Christianity.
{252}
J.T. Peter there indicates how the Old Testament scriptures may be used. Pentecost was not all that was in view in the quotation from the book of Joel, spoken by Peter, but it corresponded with it; the Spirit had been poured out, but the testimony was to Israel and, as to them, the last days had come, indeed, the seventieth week of Daniel was running its course. The day of the Lord was in view. The blowing of the trumpet in Zion was to prepare for it. The Lord may help us to see that in all this famine there is the blowing of the trumpet -- the sounding out of the testimony in Zion, which certainly marked Peter's great service at Pentecost.
A.F.M. I was just going to remark that what you referred to in Peter's preaching is really greater than what is spoken of in Joel.
J.T. Yes; it was anticipating the coming millennial day. Peter's address involved what is greater, but it was in accord with Joel.
A.N.W. Do you view Peter's preaching as an alarm?
J.T. It is rather the gospel, for calling together of the assembly, corresponding with the *first* blowing of trumpets mentioned in @Numbers 10. Here we have the same thing: "Blow the trumpet in Zion, hallow a fast, proclaim a solemn assembly; gather the people, hallow the congregation, assemble the elders", (chapter 2:15,16). It has the character of gathering. But chapter 2:1,2 is "an alarm", having judgment in view. The idea of the alarm also has to do with the enemy -- that he is attacking.
A.F.M. In chapter 2:1 it says, "Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble". The trumpet sounding an alarm here was to produce exercise generally, in order to avert, if possible, the impending judgment.
J.T. I have been thinking of the ministry of trumpets as entering into this phase of the testimony.
{253}
The allusion is to @Numbers 10, where you have a variety of trumpet ministry. It simply means the assertion of love in a very pronounced way. The trumpets were to be made of beaten silver; that is, God asserts His rights of redemption over His people. If the enemy were to come, they were to sound an alarm; but the first use of the trumpet ministry is when *they* sound *them* (@Numbers 10:3), meaning that the two trumpets were employed; that is, a means of a full or adequate testimony of God -- and the whole assembly were to assemble to Moses at the entrance of the tabernacle. If *one* trumpet was sounded, all the princes were to assemble. An alarm blown would mean that there was to be movement, those on the east side were to move forward; and when the second alarm was blown, those on the south side were to "set forward".
C.A.M. These trumpets seemed to have the effect of awakening or arousing, did they not?
J.T. I think the trumpets allude to God's way of asserting His love, when, perhaps, we are very indifferent to it.
C.A.M. The memorial of blowing of trumpets will be the awakening of Israel.
J.T. Quite so; that comes in in the sequence of the feasts (@Leviticus 23:24). But then what is presented in @Numbers 10 may happen at any time, and it is not necessarily an awakening, but rather shows that when things are in order God asserts His love in this pronounced way; and the idea enters into this book in a very striking manner.
T.A. @1 Corinthians 15:52 gives us the *last* trumpet: "For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed".
J.T. Quite so; it immediately precedes the resurrection, which is a further proof of the assertion of God's rights over us.
{254}
A.R. Does verse 1 of chapter 2 suggest God's sovereign rights over the people? "Blow the trumpet in Zion".
J.T. Yes; He has a centre of His own, which is Zion, His holy mountain. Verse 15 is like sounding out the testimony now, in relation to the church; it is not announcing the gospel in a free, independent manner. Many may assume to be sounding out the gospel, but the "trumpet in Zion" means that it is in relation to what God has inaugurated. It is not in any chance place, but in that spot which God has selected.
A.P. It is just the opposite of present-day evangelism which leaves souls where they were converted; this is *gathering*.
J.T. It is not independency; Zion means a centre for God; it is His own spot.
A.J.D. What does that represent today?
J.T. The assembly -- the testimony is to go out in relation to the assembly. I think Peter's use of the book of Joel is very significant because it was a great gathering time then.
A.J.D. Would the trumpet suggest ministry of a special character?
J.T. Yes; something in a pronounced way -- the rights of God in Zion.
W.G.T. Peter's address was to the men of Judaea, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
J.T. That is the idea; his word was effectual, for the Lord had told the disciples to tarry in the city until they were clothed with power from on high, (@Luke 24:49).
W.B-w. Do these drunkards, husbandmen, etc., represent the low sinful state into which the people had lapsed.
J.T. That is right. There was a stupified or insensible condition. The point made is that God's house was void of the oblation and of the drink offering;
{255}
that is, the bread and wine for God were lacking.
T.A. Does that account for the famine condition?
J.T. Yes; God allowed this famine to come about through this remarkable army of insects. It is here shown that they should change the whole aspect of the land; for they, literally, as the scripture tells us, rendered the country a desolation. Although it may have been like a garden of Eden before then, it became behind them a desolate wilderness.
A.F.M. How would you apply these four species of insects -- these destructive elements -- to present conditions?
J.T. Well, they are God's creatures, although severally very small. When God spoke to Job He did not allude to them, but called his attention to the *great* things of His creation. These insects were very insignificant things; in fact, you hardly know what they were. Their names, with the exception of the word "locust", indicate destructive characteristics. "Locust" signifies a swarming characteristic. The passage would allude to God's employing His creation in its least reputable feature for the execution of His government in this desolating character.
H.S.D. The fact that there are four species might indicate that it is world-wide.
J.T. The desired result would be complete. God acts in a four-square way; even though He uses such insignificant creatures, the bearing is universal, as to the area in view.
A.P. Does the effect produced by these four species of insects extend beyond the captivity?
J.T. It is just a portent; they point to something coming in -- the fulness of this day of the Lord is still future, but it had a then-present bearing. As we were remarking, Peter's use of this book shows how scripture may be used. A passage may refer to any circumstance in the history of the testimony, and yet the full bearing of it be yet future. Attention is
{256}
called here to what God can do with the least significant of His creatures. The name "Joel" seems to be a compound from "Jehovah" and "Elohim", i.e., God revealed in covenant relations and made known in His creation.
C.A.M. There is not anything, I suppose, in the entire ways of God but what we should have some sense of it at this present time.
J.T. You are impressed with the greatness of God -- how He can use the most insignificant of His creatures for the fulfilment of His will, and all to bring down the pride of man.
A.F.M. Does what you have said apply to difficulties we are facing today? I suppose it would be difficult for men of the world to determine how these depressed conditions in which we are found came about -- what their origin is; it may be something small outwardly, like avarice, and yet effectual.
J.T. I think so; perhaps unnoticed save by the spiritual eye. The effect is most marked, that these insects leave a garden of Eden as a wilderness behind them.
W.G.T. What is the difference between chapter 1 and chapter 2 with regard to this great army?
J.T. Chapter 2 is rather God's government through the northern army. The general thought is of the most thorough and dreadful destruction of prosperity, and this by insignificant creatures of God -- these insects whose names are given, but of which you hardly know what to make, beyond that they are *destructive*.
W.G.T. When you come to chapter 2 you get God intervening.
J.T. If we bear the trumpet in mind, then God is before us in all this. He has something to say -- testimony is going out in the blowing of the trumpet in Zion. It is merely talking about what is current in its business effect but what is God saying?
{257}
C.A.M. There should be exercise with us in response.
J.T. Yes; that is to say, we are not to settle down in these things as inevitable, compare chapter 2:15 - 17.
C.A.M. We are not to become resigned to current conditions, we should have a deep sense that God is behind them.
J.T. We are not under the pressure of things, but above them, as we pay attention to these trumpets.
A.P. What comes out in the latter part of chapter 2 is conveyed to the people after they are assumed to be gathered.
J.T. Yes; the gathering is the great thing. Of course, the gathering here is to bring about a state of humiliation, as you will notice in verse 16: "Gather the people, hallow the congregation, assemble the elders". That is really the secret of the whole matter; it is our being called together in the recognition of the circumstances and in humiliation. Joel may be taken as representative of prophetic ministry in relation to this subject. Habakkuk in the spirit of Christ, piously accepting famine conditions, says: "For though the fig-tree shall not blossom, Neither shall fruit be in the vines; The labour of the olive-tree shall fail, And the fields shall yield no food; The flock shall be cut off from the fold, And there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in Jehovah, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Jehovah, the Lord, is my strength, And he maketh my feet like hinds¬ feet, And he will make me to walk upon my high places. To the chief Musician. On my stringed instruments". (@Habakkuk 3:17 - 19). He shows how we may emerge from all this is triumph; whereas Joel brings in the prophetic ministry to bring about, through the trumpet in Zion, a state of humiliation.
{258}
A.F.M. In view of what Habakkuk arrives at in the verses quoted, you would look to see a similar result amongst us today.
J.T. Exactly; Habakkuk gives the lead; spiritually, he reaches the highest point, you might say, in spite of the direst conditions.
A.N.W. It is quite understandable that the epistle to the Ephesians, giving as it does our greatest light, should have been written from a prison, and is in keeping with this.
W.B-w. Why is the idea of the *generation* opened up in chapter 1?
J.T. To point out that it was an unprecedented condition; that there had been nothing like it before. An appeal is made to the people: "Hath this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers? Tell your children of it, and let your children tell their children, and their children another generation".
A.B.P. Is the antidote for this evil seen in the oblation and in the drink offering?
J.T. That is the thought. They were missing; it really meant God's bread and wine.
A.F.M. That is, it is, typically, Christ ministering through His people to God for His satisfaction and pleasure.
J.T. Quite; God allowed Himself to be deprived of His portion in order to bring home to His people how low their condition had become.
A.P.T. Jehovah says, "Rend your *heart* and not your garments", (chapter 2:13). That would be an appeal to inward feeling.
W.B-w. When Peter and John went up to the temple at the hour of prayer (@Acts 3), was the oblation missing at that time?
J.T. As far as Jewish ritual went, it was. They said to the lame man, "Look on us". The idea of the oblation was in them.
{259}
C.A.M. In the beginning of Acts, I suppose the priestly activities of these men brought about a position in which the whole sacrificial service was restored to God.
J.T. Yes; you can see how the apostles and the early Christians superseded what was in the temple; not in an arbitrary way, but by moral worth -- the priestly conditions were there. The description given of them in @Acts 2 shows this; and that is the idea now -- to bring out moral worth. The bread and the wine refer to what Christ is as ministering to God.
A.J.D. Does this ministering bring about a moral preparation in view of the day of Jehovah?
J.T. Quite; and also, immediately, the oblation and the drink offering. It is a solemn thing if those are missing from the house of God. The oblation and the drink offering were cut off, according to chapter 1.
A.B.P. Is there a tendency with us to be ministered unto instead of being exercised about ministering?
J.T. That is right; they were depriving God of His due. He says, as it were, "Has it occurred to you that with Me there is a famine too? -- for there is no oblation or drink offering for Me".
J.S. Is that not what you see all through the minor prophets? God is being deprived, and that is what the prophet here would call attention to.
J.T. It may seem strange to apply famine to God; but there was a famine, for no bread and no wine were being offered to Him.
A.F.M. Are you applying this to christendom?
J.T. Yes, generally; but then we have to challenge our own hearts. The land was God's, yet there was no oblation for Him. Our depressed condition is to bring home to us that God is suffering, so to speak, in being thus deprived. Why should the meetings be thin and poor, if it be not that there is disregard of
{260}
the divine rights? In chapter 2 the priests are called upon to take part with the ordinary people in general humiliation. "Blow the trumpet in Zion, hallow a fast, proclaim a solemn assembly; gather the people, hallow the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that suck the breasts; let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber, and the bride from her closet. Let the priests, the ministers of Jehovah, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare ..". The priests were not inside, but between the porch and the altar.
A.P. It is as moving in this way that we get a right idea of the general deplorable conditions that exist. The principle of gathering must be acknowledged.
J.T. Here it is for *humiliation*, but the coming together of the saints, as brought about by the first blowing of trumpets mentioned in @Numbers 10, is normal. As the saints are thus together there is something for God.
C.A.M. Do you not think that when Peter and John went up to the temple to pray, they were thinking of God? I suppose in causing the lame man to rise up and leap and praise God, Peter had a sense that God had been deprived and was now being ministered to.
J.T. I think so. What was current in the temple corresponded with the prayer of the Pharisee in the scene depicted by the Lord in @Luke 18. The Pharisee said, "God, I thank thee that I am not as the rest of men" (verse 11). Where were the oblation and the drink offering? There was nothing for God in that! On the other hand, the tax-gatherer smote upon his breast and said, "O God, have compassion on me, the sinner" (verse 13). There is some little idea of the oblation there; although the wheat is not formed into a cake, still the idea is there. But if you think of Peter and John going up "at the *hour of prayer*,
{261}
which is the ninth hour", it would seem that the Holy Spirit is calling attention to the hour in which the most momentous event that ever happened took place, for the Lord Jesus died at that hour. So that God was being ministered to at that time through Peter and John, as being in the gain of all this.
A.R. Did they follow the Lord's example, according to Luke? I was wondering whether you get the idea of the oblation and drink offering presented by Luke in his gospel.
J.T. Quite; Luke, in presenting the humanity of Christ, emphasises prayer as seen in Him. It is what Daniel was engaged in at the time of the evening oblation. About that time Gabriel touched him and said, "For thou art one greatly beloved", (@Daniel 9:23). That is the idea. God was not deprived of the oblation in Daniel; nor in Peter and John, and then increase came in in connection with the lame man. As placed at the temple gate, there was nothing for God in that lame man. He looked for alms, but now he is walking and praising God. That is what God is doing; through current pressure He is seeking to secure from us the oblation and the drink offering.
J.S. Would the condition of the lame man be indicative of Israel's position?
J.T. No doubt; there was nothing for God in a lame man asking for alms; but He saw a difference in Peter and John. Peter said, "Look on us"; and God was looking on them. They were delightful to Him as reflecting Jesus.
J.S. The light of God was in *them* -- not in the temple. They superseded the temple.
A.B.P. The man ceased being ministered unto, and became, a minister.
J.T. Yes; he praised God, and, later, held Peter and John. In that way, you see how the system at Jerusalem was being superseded by moral qualities in those who formed the assembly.
{262}
A.B.P. Peter said, "Silver and gold I have not". One feels that is a very appropriate statement for the moment, when there is not much of it about, but God is interested in the moral qualities we may have by the power of the Spirit.
J.T. So Peter says, "But what I *have*" Although he did not have silver and gold, he had that by which the lame man was healed, and God would make *what we have* effectual in like manner.
A.J.D. Why did he say he had not silver and gold?
J.T. Because that is what the man wanted naturally; he was receiving these things, as was his custom; but Peter says, "What I have, this give I to thee". Acts shows how the legal system was being superseded, not yet judicially, but morally. God was justified in owning what answered to His mind, and in finally setting aside judicially what was proved reprobate.
A.F.M. The need expressed by the vision Paul had of the Macedonian man, in @Acts 16, led in the same direction, inasmuch as, through Paul's activities and sufferings at Philippi, the oblation and drink offering were secured.
J.T. Exactly; as provided by Paul and Silas in the prison.
A.N.W. Would you mind saying how the early Acts is an advance on the end of Luke?
J.T. You will remember that the Lord said to His disciples in @Luke 24:49, "But do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high"; that is, there was no thought of exercise or any journeying on their part to get this power, it was to come down. He had said also to them, "And *ye* are witnesses of these things" (verse 48). But in @Acts 1:8 it is: "And ye shall be my witnesses". They now stand in relation to Him as "*My* witnesses". So Peter, in standing up to speak, is filled with the power
{263}
from on high. The temple is not in view at the beginning, but the upper room; and power from on high is in relation to that. In chapter 3 they go in the direction of the temple, while in the end of chapter 2 it is said they were daily in it. But in chapter 3 Peter and John are seen going up to it at a particular hour, evidently to call attention to the moral superiority in these two men to what was in the temple; because the man had been placed at the gate of the temple day after day and had received no permanent good. Now he is brought into accord with Peter and John and the moral superiority of what was there, as the fruit of the Spirit.
T.A. The power for all this lay in the name of Jesus: "In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk", (@Acts 3:6).
J.T. Quite; but the vessels were in accord with it. They said, "Look on us". The idea of the oblation was in them, as remarked.
W.G.T. You spoke about God being revealed in Christ, and God being known in creation; would that come out in the proclamation of the glad tidings?
J.T. Surely. The testimony of creation is referred to in @Romans 1. God also refers to the creation in speaking to Job, but I think Joel combines the two thoughts -- what God can do in creation, and what He can do in Christ.
G.McP. Do you think the apostle Paul combines those two thoughts in @Romans 1, where He speaks of the righteousness of God in Christ, and created things witnessing to His eternal power and divinity?
J.T. Yes. "The invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made, both his eternal power and divinity", (@Romans 1:20). That stands.
C.A.M. We might wonder why God in all His greatness created such contemptible little things as these insects, but what has been said is a key to it.
{264}
J.T. I think that is what we might see -- the agencies God has and employs, like the lice and flies in Egypt.
W.G.T. Here they are well trained, like an army that is invincible.
J.T. They are. A description of the locusts¬ attack in the East shows that there is nothing more destructive; they are invincible. God has these as a testimony to His power.
H.S.D. Man cannot cope with them.
A.F.M. Is the great end to be reached in chapter 2:14? It says, "Who knoweth? He might return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him, an oblation and a drink offering for Jehovah your God?" Verses 12 and 13 seem to be very suggestive, as encouraging repentance in relation to what Jehovah had been deprived of. Is that the great end to be reached in the assembling of verse 15 and onward?
J.T. That is a sort of key to the book -- the oblation and drink offering. God was missing those things.
R.D.G. In @Malachi 3 you get a similar situation.
J.T. Yes; God's tithes and heave-offerings were not brought into the treasure house.
A.N.W. Tell us a little more about what this oblation and drink offering are for us.
J.T. Well, I think it is a question of apprehending Christ as presented in the oblation and the drink offering; that is to say, what Christ is as Man fully tested, that is the oblation. The drink offering is added, and, speaking reverently, it is what stimulates, what delights the heart of God. When these things are missing God brings in the famine by which He would say to us, 'You are feeling the famine, but I have been suffering from famine for years; I have looked for something from you, but you have not yielded it to Me'. That is what I think His present voice to us is.
{265}
J.T.Jr. The husbandmen are told to be ashamed in verse 11 of chapter 1. You would have thought the husbandmen would see to it that there would be an oblation.
J.T. The thing is to *be ashamed*. If I am feeling the pinch of adverse circumstances, God has been feeling the loss of what has been withholden from His house, and I am to blame for that; I ought to be ashamed!
W.F.K. Is the secret of the oblation in the assembly today?
J.T. It is. It is what Christ is as worked out in us. @Leviticus 2 gives us the variety of the oblations.
A.N.W. "In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk". Does that suggest the oblation; and then the praise to God as overflow of the soul, the drink offering?
J.T. Quite so. How delighted God was with that man as he walked and leaped and praised Him!
W.B-w. Are the husbandmen responsible for the famine outside, and the priests for the famine inside?
J.T. The priests could do nothing unless the vine-dressers and the husbandmen did their part; that is, the vine-dressers and the husbandmen bring the meal and the wine -- the crops. These things provided work for the priests inside.
G.McP. Is there any significance in the priests mourning? "The priests, Jehovah's ministers, mourn".
J.T. Yes. It says in verses 7 - 9, "He hath made my vine a desolation, and barked my fig tree; he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away; its branches are made white. Wail like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth. The oblation and the drink-offering are cut off from the house of Jehovah; the priests, Jehovah's ministers, mourn". That is, they are deprived of the first-fruits; nothing for God was coming in.
{266}
J.S. No service for God.
J.T. People say, 'We are all suffering'; but then God would say, 'There is nothing coming in to Me either'. The famine should lead us to think of God's rights.
A.F.M. The word "be ashamed" would apply to those responsible, under God, for the produce of the land. The reference is to the corn and the vine and all the trees of the field, and the oil, which includes the olive-tree. From these fruits would be made up the oblation and the drink offering.
J.T. Yes; all these minister to the priests, and to God, coming through the common people. The vine-dressers and the husbandmen are the common people of the land; that is, the saints viewed as gaining through daily exercises, and thus developing priestly wealth and ability. In the chapters we are considering, all this is wanting.
J.S. @Acts 2 would be in contrast to all this. There is fulness there in the incoming of the Spirit.
J.T. Yes; the oblation was there and the drink offering.
A.P. Do you not think that the discipline connected with famine ought to yield a richness in relation to the service of God?
J.T. If the trumpet is heard and we come together in solemn assembly, so to speak, for humiliation, there will be something for God. This book is full of hope. It is the announcing of the Spirit, and that God will replace what these insects have destroyed. As we accept the discipline, He will do more than we could have expected.
A.R.S. Would this trumpet have the same effect as: "Behold, the bridegroom", (@Matthew 25:6)? It is a serious matter for God to say, "Be ashamed"; the apostle John desired of his children that they abide in Christ, that he should *not* "be put to shame from before him at his coming", (@1 John 2:28).
{267}
J.T. It is a question for every one of us as to whether we should be ashamed in speaking of material deprivation; whereas, we may have been depriving God of His right all these years. How much have I been ministering to God of the oblation and the wine?
A.J.D. Right exercise should bring about a fruitful condition amongst the people of God; whereas, it says in verse 16, "Is not the food cut off before our eyes, joy and gladness from the house of our God?"
A.N.W. Before the five thousand had food at the Lord's hand, God had His portion, under the Lord's hand. The Lord lifted up His eyes to thank God.
J.T. This is significantly referred to later: "After that the Lord had given thanks", (@John 6:23).
A.B.P. Would you say it is important to consider the famine as coming after the era of prosperity? But the famine begins with God before it begins with us.
J.T. Quite so. If we could get this one thought into our hearts it would be a great gain to us -- that the oblation and the drink offering are not in the house; that is what God is thinking about. The solemn assembly brings about repentance and then we have in chapter 2: "Then Jehovah will be jealous for his land, and will have pity on his people. And Jehovah will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I send you corn, and new wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith; and I will no more make you a reproach among the nations. And I will remove far off from you him that cometh from the north, and will drive him into a land barren and desolate, his face toward the eastern sea, and his rear toward the hinder sea ..". (verses 18 - 20). Then the wonderful passage that Peter cites in @Acts 2 follows that.
J.E.H. I was thinking that what you have just read is really the outcome of verse 17, where the
{268}
priests are to weep and pray, because it immediately says, "*Then* Jehovah ..". in verse 18.
J.T. If we get an idea of the trumpet in Zion, and move in that light, discerning that God has been deprived of His due, then blessing will come, and like Habakkuk, we become superior even though the material blessing does not come, as we touch the highest note: "And he will make me to walk upon my high places. To the chief Musician. On my stringed instruments". (@Habakkuk 3:19).
C.A.M. There seems to be a great deal in considering for *God's* feelings; we rightly ask that God should take account of our feelings, but God's feelings should take precedence of all.
J.T. I believe there will be a great gain to God out of all this suffering. What He has in mind is the assembly and what belongs to it, as seen in Habakkuk and what is opened up in the epistle to the Hebrews -- what the sanctuary is, and the service suited to it.
A.F.M. Something on that line is found in the @Song of Songs 4:16: "Awake, north wind, and come, thou south; Blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth". So that if adversity goes and prosperity returns to us, like the south wind, the spices may still flow forth for our beloved.
G.L. Does the deep affliction in the assemblies in Macedonia bring about the oblation and the drink offering, in a sense? We read that out of their deep poverty abounded their free-hearted liberality.
J.T. Very good. We have been speaking of that in view of our collections, as having before us the great need there is -- that although there be "deep poverty", there may be "free-hearted liberality".
{269}
That is what God values. He is looking at the state of our hearts whether we have little or much.
F.H.L. The Lord valued the two mites that the widow cast in.
J.T. He was sitting opposite the treasury, and saw how the crowd was casting money into it, and appraised the giving.
A.N.W. The apostle could say, "... as poor but enriching many", (@2 Corinthians 6:10).
W.G.T. Is there danger in being occupied with famine conditions; whereas, God would have us occupied with this oblation and drink offering -- with what is due to Him? Great events are going on in the world, and we are liable to have our attention focussed on them.
J.T. Well, great events were going on here when this army of Jehovah was devastating, but what people were not noticing was what was missing in the house of God. There was a state of poverty there; God was not getting anything.
A.R. There was no activity in the sanctuary.
A.P. Does the solemn assembly refer to any particular meeting?
J.T. It is described here.
A.P. Does it include more than the prayer meeting?
J.T. It is a question of *feeling things before God*. The priests forego their proper function as priests, and mourn between the porch and the altar. You do not go by the letter of this. The trumpet blown in Zion is God's testimony sounded out there, where His interests are, and He calls upon us to look into current conditions, and judge what is wrong. We have similar appeals in Haggai and Malachi.
J.S. God has His great army to bring all this about. It is marvellous the way He can effect His will.
{270}
R.D.G. Does the trumpet *in Zion* prove that God will reach His *end*?
A.P.T. The prophet Joel finished his prophecy with, "... for Jehovah dwelleth in Zion", (@Joel 3:21).
J.T. That is the great *end* in the prophetic ministry, that God has a dwelling-place of His own selection. "This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it", (@Psalm 132:14).
G.G. Why did it take twenty years before Jacob offered a drink offering?
J.T. It is quite obvious that he had made progress during those years. He was conscious that God had blessed him as he returned to Bethel, as recorded in @Genesis 35. He had the sense in Bethel that he was pleasing to God *there*. God had directed him to go up there; he had stopped on the way, but he finally went up there, having buried the idols of his household. He was conscious now that God was pleased with him, so that he not only anoints the pillar, but pours out the drink offering. It is, typically, the sense that God is complacent in us as formed after Christ.
A.F.M. He had anointed the pillar with oil twenty years before, but he had not the sense of being pleasurable to God then.
J.T. It is more a matter of light when you simply anoint, but the drink offering is a subjective feature.
A.F.M. Christ is before us.
J.T. Exactly; I am according to Him in my apprehension and state.
J.E.H. It says in chapter 2:32, "And it shall be that whosoever shall call upon the name of Jehovah shall be saved". That is a very encouraging word.
A.N.W. Peter did not leave it out in @Acts 2. It was a very opportune time in which to bring it in.
A.P-f. If God gets His portion, would not that be the end of the famine for us?
J.T. I think so. It would also be the end of it for God. When did God begin to get anything out of
{271}
Jacob? It was really when he came back to Bethel. All the time previous to that Jacob was connecting God with himself. In Shechem, it is "El-Elohe-Israel" (@Genesis 33:20); that is, "God, the God of Israel". He was connecting God with *himself*; but in Bethel it is "El-beth-el" (@Genesis 35:7), or "God of the house of God"; that is entirely another matter and means that God has a place of His own, and I am in it in relation to Him. He is pleased with me there, for I am there in accord with Christ; that is the idea of the drink offering.
A.N.W. One of the greatest gains in coming to the assembly is in having learned that *I* am not the centre, but that God Himself is the object and end of all that is being done.
A.P.T. Jacob was much self-centred. He began with promising God ten percent if God would be with him, etc.
A.B.P. Does this consideration for God throw light on part of the prayer the Lord taught the disciples: "Father, thy name be hallowed", (@Luke 11:2)? They would be given their daily bread, but first God's name was to be hallowed.
J.T. Yes; agreeing with Elijah's word: "Make me thereof a little cake first" (@1 Kings 17:13); which implies God's rights.
A.P. In chapter 3:13 the sickle is to be put in.
J.T. That refers to God setting aside the enemy. The press is God's judgment. His enemies¬ wickedness was great -- "the vats overflow", (chapter 3:13).
R.A.L. Referring again to the tenth part which Jacob vowed he would give to God, do you think he gave that to God in Mesopotamia?
J.T. I do not think so. It is one thing to bargain and another thing to fulfil. "When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed", (@Ecclesiastes 5:4). Jacob would have remained at Shechem,
{272}
but God said, "Go up to Bethel", (@Genesis 35:1). God has His own place, and He receives our offerings *there*.
A.J.D. "Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion more than all the habitations of Jacob", (@Psalm 87:2). Is Zion where He gets His portion?
J.T. Quite so; and Bethel answers to that, being the house of God.
A.P.T. David's pouring out the water, brought to him at great cost, was a wonderful drink offering. He poured it out to Jehovah; (@1 Chronicles 11:15 - 19).
J.T. It was a fine expression of making God everything -- putting Him first.
C.A.M. It is striking that David considered that those men's lives were for God.
J.T. That is the idea. Their action was really devotedness to Him, and David recognized that. It is beautiful when you are able to see an expression of Christ in others, and merge in it. David directs the devotedness of the three mighty men Godward, identifying himself with it.
{273}
A VIOLENT FAMINE
@Amos 7:1 - 8; 8:11 - 14; @Luke 15:11 - 32
J.T. There can be no doubt that the famine mentioned in @Luke 15 is figurative of *spiritual* want. There is also a material side of it, but it is distinctly figurative here; accordingly, it may be linked on with the passage in Amos which says that the famine in the land was "not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of Jehovah". Chapter 7 helps us with regard to our subject, in bringing forward the service of intercession, and shows how the Spirit of Christ in the saints may prevent an occurrence or a calamity such as a famine. The Lord showed the thing beforehand to Amos who interceded for the people because they were *small*; and it says, "Jehovah repented for this: It shall not be, said Jehovah" (and see verse 6). This chapter helps us with regard to *watchfulness*, thus enabling us to see what may be threatening the people of God, and then to set ourselves by *intercession* to prevent the pending disaster.
A.P. Might the *latter growth* referred to in verse 1 suggest the present period?
J.T. I think it points to the king's rights. After the king's mowings had taken place, there was a further growth; and that was in danger.
A.P. When was the early growth -- the first growth?
J.T. It would allude to the time of the general harvest, being the king's mowing, and would point to the rights of the Lord; but then there is the *latter growth* and that is what the enemy would aim to destroy. Therefore we have to be watchful lest it be spoiled.
{274}
A.J.D. Is the latter growth a ripened thing?
J.T. It shows sustained fruitfulness, after the king's mowings. It says, "in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth, and behold, it was the latter growth after the king's mowings". It is something additional, and it is in danger.
J.S. In the agricultural year there are two or three crops. This would refer to a latter crop.
J.T. Yes; the harvest began early.
C.B. Is there a suggestion that if we are not careful the enemy will take away that which God intends us to have?
J.T. I think so; especially the *latter growth*.
H.S.D. What would answer today to the excess?
J.T. Very much what we have in the way of recovery. It might be an unexpected thing, but I think it points to sustained fruitfulness. The presence here of the Holy Spirit implies sustained fruitfulness right up to the end. When we might look for a little, there is what is said to be a "shooting up of the latter growth". The "shooting up" would mean that it was growing up of itself, pointing figuratively, I think, to the Spirit -- to the latent power that lies in the Spirit where room is made for Him.
A.F.M. Would this latter growth refer to what has been in evidence during the last hundred years?
J.T. Well, I think we might apply it in that way. The king's mowings would allude to the grass ready for reaping, and would refer to the Lord's rights, as stated; while the latter growth would allude to the power of the Spirit who will operate where He is given a free hand.
A.P. Is the aftergrowth of the same kind?
J.T. Yes; it shoots up; it is not cultivated, but points to latent power of fruitfulness.
J.S. The inherent power of life is there.
A.N.W. You spoke of the prophet's intercession for the people, in which he spoke of Jacob. Does that
{275}
stand in relation to intercession for all men as in @1 Timothy 2:1?
J.T. Well, you hardly get the universal thought of "all men" in the Old Testament; it is rather Israel as a people, Jacob being taken up. "How shall Jacob arise? for he is small". He was small at the outset of his history, but this refers to his smallness under the government of God.
A.P. Is it your thought that the arising of Jacob and the springing up of this latter growth are, in a sense, the same?
J.T. The arising of Jacob would be dependent upon this latter growth, i.e., the maintenance of the responsible element for God would be dependent upon the later crop. We cannot go on in the present time with a ministry of a past generation. Many are pushing it forward as though it were final, but we cannot live on that. This latter growth alludes to *current* ministry of the Spirit.
A.J.D. Are we in the days of the latter growth?
J.T. It is just an application. We have come in at the end when things are very small, but the element of responsibility remains. I think that is the point in the reference to Jacob. "How is he to arise?" says Amos, in interceding.
A.F.M. Something like the Lord's word to Philadelphia, "Thou hast a little power, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name", (@Revelation 3:8).
J.T. That is how it would come out, and is where the latter growth is seen. The shooting up of the latter growth would synchronise with the little power -- the evidence of life in the saints. This latter growth refers to what the enemy would aim at in our day; and God may allow him to do this. It would allude to the cutting off of ministry; and not only ministry, but normal growth amongst the brethren -- the happy evidence of life and fruitfulness.
C.A.M. The one that interceded had not only a
{276}
knowledge of Jacob, but also a knowledge of God. Amos must have known that the Lord's heart would be touched by his calling attention to the fact that there was smallness in Jacob.
J.T. That is how I look at it. The priestly intelligence of the prophet knew what would appeal to God -- that God would feel that Jacob could not arise, and that the filling out of His purpose was bound up so much with Jacob.
A.B.P. In the parable of @Matthew 25, we are told that while the bridegroom tarried, they all grew heavy and slept. His tarrying would give opportunity for a further crop.
J.T. Exactly; the agricultural year is not the same as the calendar year; it is elastic and runs on after the time of the first putting of the sickle to the grass.
W.G.T. You did not mention anything about the locusts in verse 1; they are destructive creatures.
J.T. They would represent, in the government of God, something allowed that would be most destructive. After their appearance, there would be nothing left; and it is well for us to face this in relation to what God may allow. We may have a time of plenty, but then conditions may arise which would require God's withdrawing fruitfulness. Many of our brethren, alas! have turned aside and have gone into conditions where there is no latter growth. They are living on the past, if they are living at all; for if they are where there is no present growth, how can they be living according to God?
E.B. Would this latter growth be new light, or would it be an increase of the light that we have had in the past?
J.T. Growth is more than light; it is the fruit of life, really, and would include ministry; but it points to the latent power of the Spirit; He is ever ready,
{277}
where the opportunity is given to Him, to produce His own fruits in us.
A.R. Much like the ministry of John's gospel?
J.T. Very much; it points to what is collective, as found amongst the brethren, and is the evidence of the fruit of the Spirit.
A.F.M. The Spirit of God is constantly ministering to us *fresh* things; but are they new, or are they rather what has been recovered?
J.T. There is nothing new in the sense of revelation, but there is newness in the sense of recovery -- new *features* of the truth. I believe the Holy Spirit gives new dress to things; so that you get things now in a way that perhaps the saints did not have them in the earlier days. The Lord would preserve things amongst us, so that speaking of the Spirit, He says that He "will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you", (@John 14:26).
H.S.D. Would that verse in @John 14 have in view the meeting of later conditions?
J.T. Exactly; conditions are altered, and the truth would meet them.
A.N.W. What you have said seems to be confirmed distinctly by the letters to the churches: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit *says* to the assemblies".
J.T. Yes; I think if we keep the greatness of the Spirit before us, we may always expect something distinctive, He being who He is.
C.B. "He receives of mine and shall announce it to you", (@John 16:15). I suppose it would be a continuing of what went before.
J.T. Exactly; the Spirit of God is God Himself.
J.E.H. I was thinking of the scripture: "In thy light shall we see light" (@Psalm 36:9). Would not that fit in here? It is a question of the light being received and made use of.
J.T. Yes; there is always something beautiful
{278}
about a fresh crop. It may be the same kind of crop, but it is fresh, and there is something about it that is distinctive.
C.A.M. There is always variety in the world of vegetation; so that every evidence of life would have its own special features.
J.T. Growth according to God is always *fresh*.
A.J.D. Would the scripture which says: "... like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old" (@Matthew 13:52), confirm our looking for fresh features of ministry?
J.T. Yes; "things new" are said to be in the treasure of every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens; it does not say, every great gift, but "every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens". He has these things in his treasure.
A.F.M. As to the truth of the Son of God which has been before us so helpfully of late, would you say that it is not new, but that it is presented to us in a very fresh character to meet the enemy's opposition with regard to His Person, as well as to afford help to us?
J.T. I think so. The general drift of infidelity and of apostasy requires that the proof of the Lord's Person be emphasised, as if the Lord would say, "Who do ye say that I am?" (@Luke 9:20). If He were to raise that question in our day, and I am merely orthodox, I shall be saying what many are saying now, which is what has been handed down in the creeds, but then that is not answering the Lord's question. If He says to us, "Who do *ye* say that I am?" we must answer Him according to the apprehension we may have of Him.
A.N.W. The enemy is defeated as the truth is maintained according to the features the Spirit emphasises. Men view these creeds as having authority on account of their antiquity, but they overlook the fresh development of the Spirit.
{279}
J.T. It has been well said that you could drive a coach and four through any so-called creed; but the scriptural idea is to hold the truth, not in a creed, but by the Spirit. It says, "Keep, by the Holy Spirit, which dwells in us, the good deposit entrusted", (@2 Timothy 1:14). If we do that, we shall be maintained in freshness, and there will be an increase in our apprehension of the truth.
W.B-w. Amos was a gatherer of sycamore fruit. He gathered what was fresh.
J.T. Yes. In the beginning of chapter 8 it says, "Thus did Jehovah show unto me; and behold, a basket of summer-fruit", which meant, as verse 2 shows, that the end had come; but then it had not come in decay, the summer fruit denotes that there was freshness.
R.D.G. How do you account for the prophet's not being able to intercede before the grass was wholly eaten up?
J.T. This was only in a vision. "Thus did the Lord Jehovah *show* unto me". The thing itself had not yet happened; and through Amos¬ intercession the Lord forbade it. He showed the thing to the prophet beforehand; and I think if we are near to Him, He will show us things, and seeing them, we will know what to ask for. This basket of summer fruit is very suggestive and points to the end, but it is in fruitfulness.
W.B-w. Amos says, "I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was a herdman, *and a gatherer of sycamore fruit*", (chapter 7:14).
J.T. He is a *fruit gatherer*; he is not occupied with leaves, but with full results.
J.S. He was a *herdman*, too, and so would look after the flock.
A.F.M. Amos had no official or hereditary status, but was employed in profitable services, from which he was called of God.
{280}
J.T. His prophetic position was entirely from Jehovah. Amaziah the priest told him to leave the place. He said, "Go, flee away into the land of Judah, and eat bread there, and prophesy there". (verse 12). He wanted to get rid of God's prophet; and that is the secret of the next chapter, where the famine of hearing the words of Jehovah is announced. If prophecy is refused, then God will send a famine of His word.
W.B-w. Would Amaziah the priest represent the religious system of the world?
J.T. Yes; "the king's sanctuary" describes the official religious state of things in which Amos was an interferer and a disturber.
W.B-w. It says in chapter 5:5, "And seek not Bethel, neither go to Gilgal, and pass not to Beersheba". Would this show that the official thing had broken down?
J.T. These names refer to places where God has been known at one time, but is known no longer. In chapter 7:14 we get the three things that are shown to Amos; but the first two were revoked. God said, "It shall not be". The revocation of the first two was on the ground of Amos¬ intercession; but in the third case, Jehovah was standing upon a wall built by a plumb line, with a plumb line in His hand, and Amos interceded no more, for the end had come, meaning that judgment may be put off by the intercession of the saints, but God will not keep putting off for ever; there is going to be an end of things. God is ministering to us bountifully at the moment, but He is not going to bear indefinitely with conditions of indifference among His people. He is standing upon a wall built by a plumb line, with a plumb line in His hand, meaning that He has His own principles from which He will not deviate; and inasmuch as the people have departed from them, He will not pass by them any more, but will judge
{281}
them. It is a very solemn thing. Amaziah would get rid of the prophet Amos, who was interfering with and disturbing the ordered religious conditions; but he ignored the fact that there was a plumb line in the hands of the Lord and that through the intercession of Amos the judgment of God had been stayed.
A.F.M. Is the plumb line suggestive of righteousness?
J.T. I think so. God is infinitely accurate; we cannot build loosely; we must build plumb, or the building will come down. This principle would be set in the midst of Israel as a testimony that the judgment would be stayed no longer.
A.P. The plumb line is in the hands of the Lord, not in the hands of men.
J.T. And the wall that He was standing upon was built by a plumb line, so that He says, "I will not again pass by them any more"; everything must be according to the plumb line.
J.S. The wall built by the plumb line was the standard to go by.
J.T. Very much like the firm foundation of God today -- it stands.
A.P. All those in Asia turned away from Paul, but he saw the latter crop coming into view, such as is spoken of in 2 Timothy, and provided for its preservation.
J.T. Quite so; so that you can see that the efforts of Amaziah to get rid of the prophet suggest what we have in chapter 8 -- the famine; and that *unless we value what God gives at any given time, we may get a famine of the word of God*.
J.S. God may come in governmentally and bring this about in the souls of men.
W.G.T. Amaziah made much of the "king's sanctuary" as being "the house of the kingdom", as if this order of things was being set aside by the teaching of Amos.
{282}
J.T. Yes; Amos was disturbing conditions. It says, "The land is not able to bear all his words", (chapter 7:10). And then he was asked to go to Judah.
W.B-w. The word to Laodicea is, "I am about to spue thee out of my mouth", (@Revelation 3:16). The Lord would not pass by them any more.
H.S.D. Do the prophet and the spiritual supply go together?
J.T. I think that is how it stands. If they want to get rid of Amos, then the next chapter speaks of a famine of the word of God. If we refuse what God gives, He may cease to give.
A.F.M. "The words of Jehovah" would convey the *present* mind of God, at any given time, would they not?
J.T. Yes. "Behold, days come, saith the Lord Jehovah, when I will send a famine in the land; not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of Jehovah". It would be on account of the state of the people, that there would be no hearing of the words of Jehovah. *Words* are very precious. It is not a general thought, but detail in words. It further says, "And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north to the east; they shall run to and fro to seek the word of Jehovah, and shall not find it". They would run to and fro, but not go to the right place to find the word of Jehovah.
In coming to @Luke 15 we read that there arose a violent famine throughout that country. What is to be noted is that the work of God is seen in the prodigal, but he did not run to and fro, as those referred to in Amos will do; it says of him: "... and *coming to himself*". That is the effect of the work of God.
A.R.S. Would not the running to and fro in Amos signify that those in the famine have no definite object; whereas, the prodigal had -- he was going back to his father?
{283}
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The work of God makes us definite. Indefiniteness of soul, or of purpose, would indicate that God is not working in such a case.
A.R. Coming to himself would be something like the latter growth.
J.T. Yes; there is a great deal in the prodigal coming to himself. As soon as God begins to work one thinks about oneself -- what one's history has been, not of other things and of going hither and thither.
J.E.H. The plumb line is being applied.
A.N.W. "I will set a plumb-line in the midst of my people Israel.".
A.F.M. Do you think the seriousness of the far country of @Luke 15 has been aggravated by the fact that Christ has been rejected by its inhabitants?
J.T. The far country would be the world out of which Christ has been cast; but then the coming to oneself, as was remarked, would show that a plumb-line is in the midst of God's people, that is where it is needed. When a man comes to himself he begins to face the facts of his position, and also to see that things are not hopeless. He would say, "Why does God allow a sinful man such as I am to exist on earth? There must be some hope for me!"
C.A.M. Wandering hither and thither will not help, it must be a personal matter in relation to God.
J.T. God is not far from each one of us. As soon as one comes to oneself there is hope; and so the prodigal said immediately, "How many hired servants of my father's have abundance of bread, and I perish here by famine".
J.T.Jr. Does @Luke 15 show how we get recovered individually?
J.T. Yes. Instead of running hither and thither for satisfaction, as we are told they would do in Amos, it is coming to oneself and reverting to one's
{284}
history, to what God has been to one. The prodigal said, "Father, I have sinned against heaven". In what way had he sinned against heaven? I believe in not giving thanks to God for all that He had given him. The bounty of heaven to men is disregarded by men generally, in that they do not give thanks to God for it.
W.F.K. Does God use His goodness to bring men to themselves?
J.T. Yes. As soon as a man comes to himself, he reviews his history, and sees that things are not hopeless after all, because there is always some evidence of God's goodness. The prodigal, instead of going hither and thither and joining himself to another citizen, begins to think of the God he once had to do with.
A.J.D. He says, "I will rise up and go to my father". He turns to the right source.
J.T. Quite so.
C.B. It is a great thing to know that in the Father's house there is plenty.
J.T. The prodigal had light, and there is light amongst men, but they do not like to retain God in their knowledge. When God begins to work, the subject of that work reverts to that. The knowledge of God has never left this world, but it is a question of the state of man -- that he does not avail himself of it; when he comes to himself, he finds that God is not far from him. He is not far from any one of us. The apostle says, "The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart", (@Romans 10:8). How encouraging to find that "the word is *near thee*", and so is available for all, for the grace of God has placed it all around us.
A.P. That is most helpful, for although the prodigal was in the midst of the famine, there was plenty elsewhere, and he could visualise it.
{285}
W.G.T. He did not blame God for his difficulties, but recalled what his father's house had been.
J.T. He was blaming himself -- why should he be in that far country when his father had so much? The coming to himself helped him as to that point. Think of the bounty of heaven! Every morning it bestows something in the great variety of its goodness, and yet men do not give thanks. You will not see one man in a million giving thanks to God for his food, or for anything else he partakes of. Men enjoy the bounty of heaven, yet are utterly indifferent to God about it.
A.N.W. The prodigal took his portion and went into a far country, and dissipated it.
T.A. Then there arose a violent famine; but there must have been something of God with him.
J.T. Yes; it was what his father gave to him -- the property was divided.
T.A. What would that represent today?
J.T. What God has endowed men with. It says, "Because, knowing God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful" (@Romans 1:21); God is by that means shut out. But when God begins to work, then men revert to what is known of God by them.
Ques. Do you think the reduction he experienced helped him to come to himself?
J.T. Yes; man, as having given up God, has become degraded, like the prodigal was, but as the work of God proceeds, men come to themselves and think of Him.
A.R. The prodigal then says, "How many hired servants of my father's have abundance of bread".
A.F.M. Where would you place the gospel in this particular section of the chapter?
J.T. I do not know that you get it here; it is rather the effect of the work of God. The gospel
{286}
would be seen in the father's running to meet him and the provision the father made for him which was far beyond his expectation. The kisses and all that followed would be the gospel, but primarily these verses show the work of God in a man's soul that leads him to come to himself.
A.F.M. As in @Romans 2:4, "... the goodness of God leads thee to repentance".
J.T. Yes; there is nothing to indicate that anybody said anything to him in the far country. *He* came to himself and recalled what he had already known.
A.F.M. As a matter of fact, the famine was in the far country, and had to be experienced by him; there was no word of grace in the far country.
R.D.G. "No one gave to him".
J.T. The spirit of Christ, the spirit of giving, was not there.
A.N.W. I suppose the gospel was in the telling of this to the publicans and the sinners, who drew near to hear Him.
J.T. Just so; they were coming to hear Him.
A.J.D. Does not this young man's coming to himself show that when everything else fails, the work of God stands?
J.T. Yes; and it shows that without the gospel being formally presented the work of God is effective in a man's soul. It is in relation to what there may be in one's history with God; whether one is brought up by Christian parents or not, the work of God links with whatever light one may have.
A.P. The famine condition that God allows in souls is to make them feel their need; and would make room for the preaching of the gospel.
J.T. Yes; the work of God is particularly seen in the prodigal. It is not seen actively in the lost sheep or in the lost piece of silver, these are rather to bring out the interest of divine Persons in seeking
{287}
and finding; but the third case is to bring out the effect of the subjective work of God -- that it has a result without any outward presentation of light to the subject of it.
A.R.S. It was the gnawings of hunger that led the prodigal to come to himself.
J.T. If it had not been for the work of God in him he would have become worse and worse, so as to become desperate, but he did not become desperate, he came to himself. Then his history comes back to him, and in that history there was light as to what he had been overlooking and disregarding, and that begins to act on him. It is not what somebody told him, but what he himself knew.
A.R.S. Were it not for the work of God in him he might have destroyed himself.
J.T. Yes; the *work of God in him* is what the Spirit would emphasise; it operates to bring to light everything in one's history. God has not left Himself without witness, not only in doing good *to* men but also in what is actually connected with the history of men.
C.A.M. We would not think that Nebuchadnezzar would have thought of heaven, but after all he went through, at the end of the days he lifted up his eyes unto the heavens.
J.T. That is an illustration of the same thing. It was the effect of the work of God in Nebuchadnezzar's soul. The work of God showed itself also in Rahab. It linked her on with the light that was current, so that she knew about the drying up of the Red Sea before Israel, and of the destruction of the two kings of the Amorites. She was living in an environment where everything was against her, but the work of God in her triumphed, for it is always true to itself.
A.N.W. One of the thieves on the cross said, "Dost thou too not fear God?" (@Luke 23:40). He
{288}
had a sense of sinning against heaven; it was the effect of God's work in him.
A.F.M. The prodigal says, "I have sinned" -- not only had he sinned against heaven, but he says, "*before thee*". You remarked that in the first two parables there was no activity seen in the lost sheep or the lost piece of silver, but the prodigal goes back to his father with a full confession of his sinful course.
J.T. Yes; in the beginning of the chapter those who murmured said, "This man receives sinners" (verse 2). The publicans and sinners were drawing near to Him to hear Him. Why were they doing so? Why were they not going to the saloons and places of amusement? The chapter shows why, for it brings out the undercurrent of God's work in men, which leads up to repentance and the Father's embrace.
A.B.P. In several instances in the gospels the Lord says, "Thy faith hath saved thee". Is that a confirmation of the work of God that has taken place in the soul?
J.T. Yes. The publicans and sinners were said in our chapter to be coming near to hear Him. The opposers said, "This man receives sinners and eats with them". The Lord must take up that challenge, and the chapter unfolds what is going on underneath in men, and justifies His receiving sinners, who are subjects of the work of God.
T.A. Why did Nicodemus come to Jesus by night?
J.T. For the same reason that prompted others in whom God was working.
T.A. There must have been some feeling of famine in his soul.
J.T. "We know that thou art *come* a teacher from God", (@John 3:2). Such a confession was a sure evidence of the work of God in him.
A.F.M. Would this chapter be the Lord's justification of God in what He is doing?
{289}
J.T. Yes; the whole chapter is the justification of what was alleged; it is the explanation of what is going on in men, and is a rebuke to the opposers. Why should not the Lord receive sinners? Why should not the father receive the returning prodigal? Look at him now and see what a great difference there is in him; he "was dead and has come to life again, and was lost and has been found"!
W.B-w. His conscience had been at work, and his whole moral being was changed.
A.P. The servants¬ work of clothing the prodigal, etc does not come into view until the father had kissed him.
A.N.W. The Pharisees said, the Lord not only received sinners, but *ate* with them.
J.T. What a grand exemplification of that is seen later in the chapter: "Let us eat and make merry!" How perfectly suitable it was that they should have the eating, the music and dancing! It is a marvellous answer to the opposers, and shows what *God* is doing.
A.F.M. Do you regard the elder brother as a Pharisee?
J.T. He is just the opposer, but still in the place of outward relation to God; God owning that relation, too, and ready to bring him in also, in spite of his cavilling.
A.R. Is this chapter grouped with Ephesians -- sonship, and the father's house?
J.T. Yes; it is the greatest result presented in the gospel.
W.B-w. Is the result of this famine the bringing in of the Gentiles and the exposure of the apostate Jew?
J.T. Yes; it corresponds with @Acts 10.
R.A.L. What did the famine teach the prodigal?
J.T. It was used of God to remind him of what was in his father's house, of what he possessed already
{290}
as knowledge -- not new knowledge, but knowledge neglected.
E.B. The Gentile, as such, was never in relationship with God; then how did he know about the father's house?
J.T. The Gentiles are in relation to God as seen in @Romans 3:29: "Is he not (God) of the nations also?" God made a wonderful covenant with Noah, who was the father of Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and that covenant is not abrogated yet, for in @Revelation 4:3 God reverts to it.
G.McP. Cornelius, the Gentile, came into new environments.
J.T. Yes; but what is stated of Cornelius shows the work of God in him, and is the explanation of all that happened in @Acts 10.
C.B. The father's house is still on the earth, is it not?
J.T. Yes; the assembly answers to it.
W.B-w. I suppose the apostate Jew is still wandering from sea to sea as in Amos, because in the spirit of the elder brother he would not go in.
J.T. As to Cornelius, the point that the Spirit makes in @Acts 10:44 is what God is doing. It is not simply the preaching of the gospel, but what God is doing in souls. Peter is selected for this special service, and yet he did not lay his hands on Cornelius and his company, as he did to those who believed in Samaria. "While Peter was yet speaking these words the *Holy Spirit fell* upon all those who were hearing the word". Mark, it was not while they were hearing *Peter's* word, but the word of God. It is a question of God and the Gentiles; He virtually was receiving the prodigal.
C.A.M. There is nothing more wonderful than the work of God; on account of it, heaven rejoices because the lost sheep, the lost piece of silver, and the depraved sinner are found. There comes a
{291}
moment when there is the evidence of the work of God, and that is the moment which makes all heaven rejoice.
J.T. That is what the prodigal represents. In these three parables we have that side. The shepherd goes after the sheep, that is his side; the woman lights a candle and seeks the silver piece, that is her work; neither the lost sheep nor the lost piece of silver were doing anything, but when you come to the prodigal, he goes off and then the thought of his father's house comes into his soul without anyone saying anything to him.
J.S. Is that equivalent to quickening?
J.T. It is the work of God in the prodigal, and its effect. I am a responsible being, but in that responsibility I look back on my history, and see what God has been to me in all that history. Divine testimony has come into it, and the work of God will link on with that.
A.R. Cornelius had a history before Peter saw him.
A.R.S. Later, through Peter's preaching, he received the word of God, which, entering into his soul, gave light.
A.P. Although men may turn their backs on God, He never turns His back on them. It says, "But while he was yet a long way off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell upon his neck, and covered him with kisses".
J.T. God sees the movements of our hearts from the very outset of our exercises.
J.E.H. "He is not far from each one of us", (@Acts 17:27).
A.J.D. Would the "himself" of verse 17 correspond with what the apostle says, "I myself with the mind serve God's law", (@Romans 7:25)?
{292}
J.T. That is right. @Romans 7 is the great analytical chapter of scripture, and no one is in the assembly rightly unless he goes through it with God.
W.F.K. Whom does the "citizen" represent?
J.T. One in the ordered system of things. The government that man, like Nimrod, has set up without God. Nimrod was a rebel, as his name indicates, and yet, no doubt, he would make a great deal of citizenship -- his kingdom began with Babel; he followed the example of Cain, who built a city.
A.F.M. What would the swine suggest to you?
J.T. They would be representative of unclean men and women; persons apart from the regenerate power of God, who swallow down everything that is presented to them. There was something in the prodigal that would refuse such food. He has not the taste, or desire of the unclean, although his hunger urged him to fill his belly with the husks.
R.D.G. Many a man has a bad conscience in the theatre; he goes and yet is uneasy all the time he is there.
J.S. As soon as we revert to heaven and the father's house the famine ceases.
J.T. "I will rise up and go"; there is moral power in a man who says that!
J.S. That is by the Spirit's power.
J.T. It is the effect of the work of God. "I will say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee; I am no longer worthy to be called thy son"; there is definiteness in what he says to his father. The fruit of the work of God is beautiful in the eyes of heaven. God well knows it and the first evidence of it. So the Lord says in the first two parables, "Thus there shall be joy in heaven for one repenting sinner", and, "There is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner", (@Luke 15:7,10). That is to call attention to the work of God and how it affects the sinner. In the prodigal it reverts to
{293}
what he knew, and so he determines to go to his father and make a confession. The moral element is there, and every returning step he takes is delightful to heaven.
A.F.M. The determination to go to his father would be more than new birth?
J.T. Yes; because there is *light* in his history; he reverts to light in his history, and that is what moves him, but then when the father sees him and runs to meet him and covers him with kisses, you come to the gospel -- to what God is in Christ.
A.B.P. Is that reconciliation?
J.T. Well, it is, and more than that; for the prodigal comes in for more. Think of the father *covering* him with kisses!
A.J.D. Would you say there was a definite work of God in his soul, and that all the time that he was away from his father's house he was really not himself?
J.T. I do not think he represented a converted man when he left his father's house, but one who had been in an outward relation to God like the Gentiles, but God having begun to work in him, he comes to himself. What kind of man have I been? What has been my history? These are the questions he naturally would ask. Well, 'God has come into my history', he would say, and what a God! He has a house, and it is full of good things. That is the effect of the work of God.
A.J.D. Do you not think that there was a work of God in him when he left the father's house?
J.T. I think the prodigal represents the Gentiles, as having turned away from God. Then God begins to work with them, as seen in Cornelius and others.
A.F.M. Your allusion to @Acts 10 is good, because, as you were remarking, the same word 'fell' is used there, with regard to the Spirit, as it is used in @Luke 15:20.
{294}
Then Peter, earlier in that chapter, saw the sheet finally taken up into heaven again; would that not convey the thought of the father's house of @Luke 15?
J.T. Yes; it is the fulness of the blessing. The Holy Spirit fell -- mark you -- not on all those that were in the house, but on all those *who were hearing the word*. The moral element is there, so that there is attention to the word -- not Peter's word, although it was his literally, but the *word of God*.
A.P. Do you think the cherubim in 1 Chronicles, in their looking out, were waiting for this moment?
J.T. Well, that is the idea. Instead of looking down on the mercy seat, these additional cherubim stood on their feet and were looking outward -- their faces were toward the house.
W.G.T. The elder brother did not understand the grace of the father; he thought he should be punitive toward the erring son.
J.T. Yes, which shows that the Jew does not know God.
A.R. It must have been a remarkable occasion for the bondmen to see and to hear all this. The father says, "For this my son was dead and has come to life, was lost and has been found".
W.B-w. The prodigal had spent all. What had he to spend?
J.T. The knowledge of God and all that went with it. It is found in @Genesis 8 and 9, for instance. God blessed Noah and his sons, and entered into a covenant with them. That has never been annulled.
C.B. The prodigal arose and went to his *own* father.
W.G.T. His former share of the property was simply an allotment, and did not detract from the property the father originally had.
{295}
J.T. It was his share. The passage refers to what was known of God. @Romans 1:19 says, "Because what is known of God is manifest among them".
T.H. Wrath will fall from heaven on those who thrust the gospel from them.
J.T. That is right. It is already on the Jew -- the elder brother. But it is coming on *men* as such: "There is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness", (@Romans 1:18).
{296}
FAMINE OVER THE INHABITED EARTH
@Acts 11:27 - 29; @2 Corinthians 8:1 - 9
J.T. I believe these scriptures will furnish, in the active love shown in them in meeting a condition that arose, an occasion for touching on the culmination of our subject. It says, "Now in *these* days ..".. I think it is well to keep the thought of "these days" -- the days described in the verses preceding -- in mind, as if the new departure on the part of God in His work necessitated that work being tested.
H.S.D. Are "these days" days of great spiritual prosperity?
J.T. Yes; for the verses immediately preceding call attention to the very remarkable work at Antioch, and the care taken of it by Jerusalem in sending Barnabas there; and then the care taken by Barnabas in seeking out Saul, who with Barnabas laboured for a year in Antioch; and then, too, that the disciples were first called Christians there. It seems as though God would have the work tested by allowing this famine, to see how it would affect them -- how they would act under such trying conditions. Certain prophets went down from Jerusalem to Antioch, and this incoming famine was the burden of Agabus; it was a prophetic announcement which, I think, meant that God would lay it on the saints at Antioch in a powerful way.
A.F.M. Agabus signified it *by the Spirit*, which would give character and power to the announcement.
F.L. Would you think that the exigencies of the famine would promote, in a practical way, the breaking down of the middle wall of partition as between Jew and Gentile?
{297}
J.T. I think so. It would make way for the truth of the church as developed in Paul's ministry.
F.L. That is what I was thinking. The Gentile believers contributed to the temporal needs of Jewish believers, and this would tend to break down the middle wall of partition.
J.T. Yes; and in a most effectual way, a way that not even a powerful ministry could bring about so effectually.
T.A. Do you regard the present world-wide depression as something allowed of God to test the saints in this way?
J.T. Yes; it should be a test to our love. It has also been a test to us in another sense, for certain things have happened through it that have brought discredit to the Lord's name, alas! and we ought to feel this. But there is the other side -- the shining out of the divine nature through it, in meeting the need that has arisen.
I have thought that perhaps we may see something of the pearl of @Matthew 13, amplified in our subject, as seen in the heavenly city. It says, "And the twelve gates, twelve pearls; each one of the gates, respectively, was of *one pearl*", (@Revelation 21:21). We may see this one pearl at Antioch. There are other features connected with the gates; it says in verse 12, "... and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel". But the main thought of each gate is *one pearl*, so that you have the idea that if you saw one gate you would see a facsimile of them all. A pearl gate denotes what is local now.
A.F.M. Would that fit in with the scripture read: "For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sakes he being rich became poor, in order that ye by *his* poverty might be enriched",? The Lord sold all whatever He had and bought that one pearl.
{298}
J.T. So that the service rendered at Antioch to the brethren in Judaea would be the shining out of love in administration. The teaching of these two remarkable servants, Barnabas and Saul, led up to the administration of love, but it went beyond Antioch. It was administrative love that involved the whole church. Paul speaks of it in this way in @2 Corinthians 8:23: "... or our brethren, they are deputed messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory". It is not deputed messengers of the *assembly*, but of *assemblies*; that is, the local companies are seen acting together.
In @Revelation 21 there are twelve pearls, without saying anything more about them, and then each gate is one pearl; so that there would be conveyed in any one of the gates, the same idea as would be seen in *all*, but in a local setting, as applied to us now.
A.F.M. The gate, then, is the means for dispensing what flows out from the city, but locally now?
J.T. I think so; it is administrative love.
A.E.M-o. One acting in the light of the whole.
J.T. Yes. Any administrative act here in this city would be expressive of the love of Christ -- only assembly-wise. That is the idea of the pearl, and it would be in keeping with what was current, as of the pearl, elsewhere.
W.G.T. Would Barnabas be the administrative link between Antioch and Jerusalem?
J.T. I think he is the link of the great administrative idea beginning with Jacob's twelve sons; the golden thread of administration, being *carried right through*, whatever the vicissitudes of the way, is now seen operating in the first-formed Gentile company at Antioch. That is what God had in mind, and He would see that His thoughts are carried through. As seen practically, it came through Jerusalem, for the church there had "ears" to hear what God was doing elsewhere -- in- this instance, to hear the report of
{299}
what God was doing among the Gentiles. Upon this they sent out Barnabas, who is the link of administration, and through his great care for the work he sought out Saul as the kind of vessel suited for it; then we have the result in Barnabas's own ministry and in that of Saul; it says, "And so it was with them that for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd", (@Acts 11:26). Then we have this remarkable visitation of a prophetic nature from Jerusalem, calling attention to what was coming in the government of God, and causing those that were well off to take it to heart, and to determine to do something; and then the doing of it, and the using of Barnabas and Saul to take the gift to Jerusalem, so that this service is completed there.
F.L. The twelve sons of Jacob were reflected, were they not, in the Lord's choosing the twelve apostles; but then in the administrative idea in the assembly you have the principle carried through.
J.T. The idea of administration is conveyed in twelve, it being the numeral that denotes the saints coming under the hand of God in love.
C.A.M. So if God allows these trying conditions to come, it is because He has an abundant supply in His people to meet the need.
J.T. Yes; and it is well to see that after resolving to do a thing, they do it; that is to say, the brethren determined to do what was needed, and then carried out the determination.
J.S. Does this chapter show further movement on the part of the testimony in Antioch? Tidings regarding it had reached the ears of the assembly at Jerusalem, and they moved accordingly to support it.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. This feature of administration, having come into operation at Pentecost, as set up in the power of the Holy Spirit at Jerusalem, is carried through; the ears of the church there are open for the tidings of the work of
{300}
God. And then the assembly provides for the furtherance of that work, so that it should be properly cared for, and they send out Barnabas as being just the man for this service.
J.S. The way in which God acts in government, bringing in famine over the whole habitable world, is it for the furtherance of the testimony?
J.T. Yes; it comes after this great movement at Antioch, upon which Jerusalem sent out Barnabas, who later went to Tarsus to seek out Saul. Each of these movements must have taken a considerable time. Barnabas did not send a letter to Saul, asking him to come to Antioch, but went to Tarsus for him. The word 'found' would indicate that he had to be sought; but Barnabas, having found him, brought him to Antioch, where for a whole year they taught a large number in the assembly; then the disciples are first called Christians in Antioch. All these things happened before you get the account of Agabus and the other prophets coming down.
A.E.M-o. Do you suggest as a principle that we should ascertain the extent of need before we take up a collection for our needy brethren?
J.T. I do. I think there was order similar to that here. They had heard about the coming famine, and determined to send relief to the brethren who dwelt in Judaea. First they determined to send, and then sent; so that definite steps were taken in this service.
A.R.S. Do they not commence to get ready before the famine actually came?
J.T. Exactly. That is what you see in all the instructions of Paul. Preparation was made for need *known to exist*. Later a long period was covered in the preparation because Paul speaks about "a year ago", (@2 Corinthians 9:2).
A.R.S. Would you not see reflected in this God's care for His people anticipatively?
{301}
J.T. I think so; and thus, in the consideration of need, you are acting for God who cares for His people always, and brings His assembly into accord with Himself in this respect as in all others.
A.R.S. Those of the world are not aware of what awaits them until it actually comes upon them, but here the people of God knew about the coming famine through the prophecy of Agabus.
A.E.M-o. God did that through Joseph, too.
A.F.M. Would you say a word about this ministry of the prophets? They were not raised up in Antioch, but came down from Jerusalem.
J.T. I think it is to keep up the link with Jerusalem here, and it is well to bear that in mind at this juncture. Barnabas and Saul went up to Jerusalem with the gift, and then came back. In chapter 12:25 it says, "And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, having fulfilled the service entrusted to them, taking also with them John, surnamed Mark". They did not go back empty-handed, but with an addition. It was in view of keeping up the link, I think, with Jerusalem, and to emphasise the great principle of administration carried down through the ages and now seen in the most practical way in a Gentile city.
A.P. Would you say that the idea of Jerusalem and of the twelve is not at any time given up?
J.T. The Lord has the idea of the twelve still in His mind. His thought is to use us according to His pleasure in carrying it out.
A.J.D. This administration of bounty was special, was it not? It says, "They determined, according as any one of the disciples was well off ... to send"
J.T. Yes; it does not seem to have been a collection embracing all the brethren, but rather left to those who were well off; you see this operating amongst us sometimes. On the other hand the word
{302}
in @2 Corinthians 8 calls attention to "free-hearted liberality" in "deep poverty".
F.H.L. Does that not suggest individual exercise as to giving, as if famine conditions had come to the attention of the individual?
J.T. Do you not think that there is a difference between this and the end of @Acts 2, where no one regarded anything he had as his own? It was a sort of community in which the wealth of one was the wealth of all. But there is a new feature here; some of the disciples in Antioch are said to be well off, and are marked off in that way by the brethren, who would place upon them the obligation to love to minister to their poor brethren in Judaea, as if to say, 'You have the distinction of being well off, now is your opportunity of showing that love is operating in you'.
F.L. I suppose Barnabas's action would be well known to them in Antioch. He had sold his land and brought the money and laid it at the apostles¬ feet. That would be similar to what we get here.
J.T. Quite so. He sold the land and gave it *all*. But I think it is really Paul's ministry that we are under now. To make a community now, in its literal sense, would be disastrous to many of the saints, and I think that in this change under Paul there is divine wisdom. But if a brother has the distinction of being "well off" at the present time, under the government of God, need among the saints affords him an opportunity to show that divine love is acting in him. Such service is a privilege given of God. Agabus was sent down to Antioch to make known that there would be this need, and it gave the brethren who had means an opportunity to show that they were really affected by the love of God.
A.P. Who are the "they" that "determined"?
J.T. "And they determined, according as any one of the disciples was well off, each of them to send to the brethren, who dwelt in Judaea, to minister to
{303}
them". I think the "they" here would be the saints generally, but "each of them" is to preserve the idea of a distinction seen in those that God can employ for the expression of love.
A.F.M. Would not the *order* of things here be very helpful to us? The assembly at Jerusalem sent Barnabas to Antioch, then these prophets came down as spiritually directed, and then the contributions as put together were sent to the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul. The elders at Jerusalem rightly come in at the end.
J.T. It is all on the level of formal administrative action, and clearly shows that whatever distinction one may have, under the government of God, it should become a means of the expression of love, as setting forth the greatness of Christianity. Theophilus had a certain distinction, and this "treatise" of Luke would lead him to use whatever advantage he had to express divine love.
A.E.M-o. Do you take it that this was an assembly contribution?
J.T. It was. "They" refers to the assembly, but it is helpful to notice that distinguished persons are called to our attention in this passage, and in the beginning of chapter 13. In this passage attention is called to persons of *temporal* means, but in the beginning of chapter 13 five persons of *spiritual* means are named. In both cases it is a question of distinguished persons in the assembly, as adding to, and not detracting from it.
A.J.D. Would this show that those who have means are held subject to the call of the assembly?
J.T. Here *love* was acting. The beginning of verse 29 should be particularly noted: "And they determined, according as any one of the disciples was well off". The wording implies that all the saints were in this exercise and decision, but it was those that were well off that provided the sending.
{304}
A.N.W. And this special prophetic service is to incite them -- "Agabus ... signified by the Spirit", it says.
J.T. The beginning of chapter 13 says, "Now there were in Antioch, in the assembly which was there ...", The idea is that the assembly was in that city, and it has these persons at the end of chapter 11, and in the beginning of chapter 13, to distinguish and enrich it.
F.L. In chapter 20:35 of this book it is remarked that the Lord said, "It is more blessed to give than to receive". Why is it more blessed to give than to receive?
J.T. Giving would be in line with God; it is acting like God, acting in love, and that is the more blessed part to take.
J.S. After the money is given by the saints, we have to be careful how it is *handled*. There was wisdom in sending it up to the elders.
J.T. The matter of distribution in the early chapters of the Acts would seem to have been left to the twelve apostles. Barnabas, for example, laid the proceeds of his sale at the feet of the apostles with that end in view. Here, the spirit of administration shows itself at Antioch in their sending to the elders at Jerusalem by the hand of Barnabas and Saul. I think it is beautiful to see the link of administration as in their hand in all that journey up to Jerusalem!
A.F.M. Would Barnabas and Saul be messengers of the assembly, Christ's glory, in the same way as were others in @2 Corinthians 8?
J.T. They would; they acted in unity. This bounty of Antioch was sent by their "hand". Think of two *such* men travelling from Antioch to Jerusalem expressly to carry money for distribution among the poor saints there! How peculiarly valuable the money would be in *their hands*!
{305}
F.L. It would be "an odour of sweet savour, an acceptable sacrifice, agreeable to God", (@Philippians 4:18).
F.H.L. Does this peculiarly special collection establish the principle for our general monthly collection and administration?
J.T. I think so. As far as I see, all the instruction in connection with Paul's ministry had to do with need already determined.
A.P. Is it your thought that instead of determining the ministering to need after the collection is taken up, the ministering to such need should be determined beforehand?
J.T. Well, that is the order seen here. I do not think they knew just how much the need would be, but they knew it would be there when the famine arose.
J.E.H. They were told it was to be a *great* famine.
J.T. Yes; and no doubt they would act accordingly. I think what we may see here is the elevated ground upon which giving is placed; that it is not simply a matter of "charity", as they say in the world, but is put on a dignified level, especially as in the hands of two such men as Barnabas and Saul.
A.P.T. If our service is rendered in this spiritual and elevated way, the gold standard will always be maintained at its highest level.
A.E.M-o. The Corinthians, to whom the apostle wrote upon the fulfilling of their part in ministering to need, were evidently not well off *spiritually*, and so were not ready to give. He therefore puts before them the free-hearted liberality of the Macedonians which abounded out of their deep poverty.
J.T. Yes; Paul says to them, "But we make known to you, brethren, the grace of God bestowed in the assemblies of Macedonia; that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty has abounded to the riches of their free-hearted liberality", (@2 Corinthians 8:1,2). He brings forward
{306}
the Macedonian poor saints as an example, in order to stimulate the wealthy saints at Corinth.
A.P-f. Is there a principle involved in sending the assembly's gift by two?
J.T. The apostle Paul makes a great deal of the persons who carry the bounty. In the first letter to the Corinthians he says, "And when I am arrived, whomsoever *ye shall approve* , these I will send with letters to carry your bounty to Jerusalem: and if it be suitable *that I also should go*, they shall go with me", (chapter 16:3,4). We marvel at the amount of thought he gave to this subject, for it is remarkable that such a great servant should be willing to leave his invaluable labours in order to carry this gift, with other brethren accompanying him, to Jerusalem.
C.A.M. It seems to have been an exceptionally gracious thing for him to do; because in the beginning of Acts this kind of work was given to others by the apostles. But here Paul was ready to do it himself.
J.T. Two of the persons, Stephen and Philip, selected for that work were later taken up by the Spirit for greater service, as if God would specially honour them; and the apostles themselves, except Peter, were not much in *evidence* afterwards, though doubtless they were greatly used. It seems, therefore, that the Holy Spirit would call attention to this feature of service in Paul, and place it on a higher plane than seems to have been in the mind of the twelve in @Acts 6.
F.L. With regard to @Acts 6, one can very well understand that there would be observation by the saints, and that they might say, 'If such promotion came to Stephen and Philip, who, with others were entrusted with this daily ministration, there must be more in it than we thought there was'.
J.T. There is a great deal in the thought, as you can see from the use of the word 'treasury' both in the Old and New Testaments. It says, "And Jesus,
{307}
haying sat down opposite the treasury, saw how the crowd was casting money into the treasury", (@Mark 12:41). This shows what the treasury meant to Him.
A.J.D. Therefore, in handling monies in this way, there would not be any suggestion that certain brothers should take up this service because they happen to be financial men.
J.T. No; this is a spiritual matter; the gifts of the saints are an expression of love, which lifts them out of the rut of mere material things and puts them on the level of what is spiritual; so that what is material may become the suggestion of what is spiritual.
A.B.P. Would you say that Barnabas, in selling his land, etc., did it in the spirit of consolation? He was surnamed, "Son of consolation".
J.T. When he approached the altar, so to speak, with the price of his land in his hand, how beautifully priestly he was! The apostles would notice those hands carrying that money and laying it at their feet. Surely, those hands would be worthy to dispose of the money of the saints!
A.P.T. In @Acts 11 the Spirit of God refers to him as going to Tarsus to *seek out*. Saul. That is a nice touch. Barnabas did it; he was a true *son* of consolation.
J.T. He is a beautiful antitype of the golden taches of the tabernacle in linking up things.
A.F.M. Say a little about @1 Corinthians 16:1,2. There is a collection for the saints mentioned there, but it is provided for on the first day of the week.
J.T. You will notice that, apparently, the Corinthians had written to Paul about this matter. The expressions "but concerning" and "now concerning", found in this epistle are the usual forms of reply to some inquiry made. So he says, "... as I directed the assemblies of Galatia". They, also, were brought into this service, and it is the only
{308}
notice that we have of that fact. Those that were of the assemblies of Macedonia were also brought into this great service of administrative giving, and now the Corinthians were brought into it, too. Macedonia, Achaia, and Galatia were all brought into it, to do as Paul had directed; they were to be governed by the same general principles, only he brings in the first day of the week in 1 Corinthians, not in connection with the Lord's supper -- strange as this may seem -- but in connection with what we might think of as of very little account. The idea of that, I think, is to promote spiritual sentiment, the first day of the week being full of holy sentiment.
W.G.T. "In whatever degree he may have prospered", would link on with @Acts 11:29.
J.T. Yes. How practical Paul is! The giving is to be according to the prospering of God.
C.A.M. This is a very great subject, in view of so much entering into it. It would seem that this matter of spiritual sentiment is to touch everything I may have.
J.T. Yes; it must be *spiritual* sentiment -- not sentiment in the ordinary sense of the word, but such as the first day of the week suggests. When you think of all that happened on that day, it surely should promote giving.
A.F.M. You mean that this sentiment and giving should be found among ourselves and not simply applied to the Corinthians.
J.T. Surely; it was written equally for us.
A.E.M-o. So that your contribution might vary very much, according as your affections are moved. You might empty your pockets one Lord's day, and perhaps give less on another.
J.T. Yes. Love is most practical. We must not be rigid, but be open to its promptings; in which case one may be able to do more than one thought was possible.
A.P. In building a structure, the refinement comes
{309}
in at the end. Do you not get the thought of spiritual refinement here?
J.T. I think you do. @Revelation 21 has the great feature of refinement in it with regard to the city. There is adornment even in the foundations. But the gates are severally one pearl; the greatest idea of refinement is seen *there*. It is very suggestive, being an administrative thought. That chapter in Revelation presents the Pentecostal church, and therein is seen the excellence of the quality in the twelve foundations on which are the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. It would seem as if Paul must be alluded to in that "each one of the gates, respectively, was of one pearl".
A.E.M-o. While there is quality in the city, would there not be quantity, too? Think of the abundance of supply that will pour through those gates in the world to come! If we get a touch of that in our spirits now, there will be no lack amongst us.
J.T. I was touched by hearing F.E.R. say, on one occasion, that it was humbling to see the small amount that was put into the box. The idea of divine giving should be reflected from our side.
F.L. I was wondering whether we do not get a suggestion of dignity in Ezra's receiving the treasure and committing it to twelve of the chiefs of the priests; (@Ezra 8:24,25). The idea of administration in the chiefs of the priests would bring in the dignity of the priestly element.
A.P. It says that Ezra "weighed into *their* hand" (verse 26).
F.H.L. How does that fit in with the end of @Acts 4 -- those who had lands or houses sold them and laid the money at the feet of the apostles?
J.T. Well, it would all be on the line of administration. The apostles would represent that element to a young convert; he would see that God was
{310}
working in the apostles, and that they were representative of God.
T.A. I suppose if my other obligations are not righteously met as before the world, I should not put a contribution into the box?
J.T. God will not accept gifts from unrighteous hands.
R.G.D. Would setting aside the collection on one Lord's day in the month place the collections of the other Lord's days on a lower level?
J.T. I think not; I have no doubt that at Corinth and all those places referred to in 2 Corinthians they would have collections for the *ordinary* expenses. That would be their own local matter, therefore Paul said nothing about it; he was concerned about need elsewhere, and the promoting of love in its *universal* bearing -- love for all saints, which would bring us on to the lines of Colossians and of Ephesians.
J.S. The thought of the first day of the week is very suggestive. If we are in touch with God, we will act like God -- on the line of giving.
A.E.M-o. Paul does not suggest that on the first day of the week they should put money into the box, but that they lay by at home. Could not this be carried out among us? We know that a certain collection is to be taken up, say, a month hence for saints in need elsewhere, and so we provide for it.
J.T. Surely there should be preparation for such giving.
T.A. Is it not right also to consider need beforehand at the care meeting, and then to decide to give something definite towards it?
J.T. It is a question as to whether collections are to be regarded as meeting local need or expenses, or whether they may not also be viewed as taking account of special need at a distance. For instance, we *here* take up a collection regularly to meet local
{311}
expenses, but then we believe that these scriptures deal with special need and that it is right to have a special collection in view of such need. I believe that giving has been on a lower plane than God intended. These scriptures are to raise the question of giving to its own proper level; that whatever the gift may be, love is behind it, love which is of God, and is eternal in duration.
A.N.W. I was struck with what you said about our giving as in the light of Colossians and Ephesians. Very often one feels that our giving is as though it were gotten out of us, rather than on the high level of those epistles.
H.S.D. "God loves a cheerful giver", (@2 Corinthians 9:7). If what we give is not given cheerfully, it is better not to give at all.
A.P.T. It is always well to go back to the idea of gold. The apostle in speaking of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ says, "... for your sakes he being rich became poor, in order that ye by *his* poverty might be enriched", (@2 Corinthians 8:9). The gold is contained in "*his* poverty".
J.T. The beautiful thing is that these Macedonians are spoken of as being in "deep poverty", and then the Lord is brought in as having entered into poverty. It is a most touching thing that "for your sakes he being rich became poor". I suppose it would refer to the Gentile saints here. We get in @Psalm 34:6, "This poor man cried". The Psalms are full of the Lord's poverty; in grace He entered into those circumstances for us.
A.J.D. Is that the leverage in the soul that produces giving!
J.T. Yes. By bringing the Lord into it, we can see this principle of riches coming out in poverty; so that even if I am a poor brother I should never cease to be in the attitude of giving.
A.F.M. I suppose if we were to examine our
{312}
accounts for twelve months, we should find that we do not give the Lord even one-tenth of what we receive; and yet that was Jacob's standard.
J.T. Yes; giving out of *deep poverty* appeals to me very much. It brings in everybody, whether employed or not. Are you in deep poverty? Well, the Lord was; the Macedonians were, too; and yet it was with them that the principle of giving shone. Of course we can give only as we have, but what is stressed is that *a giving attitude* should be maintained.
C.A.M. It must be in the spirit of it, because you know -- just to make a practical remark -- it is evidently comparatively easy to give at times; but it is peculiarly difficult to do so today. But if you are *disposed* to do it, God takes account of that.
J.T. There is another encouraging thing. The quotation in @2 Corinthians 8:15 is from @Exodus 16, and introduces the manna. There is an unseen but effective working in what is stated there, for he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little lacked nothing. It is the unseen power of God operating. As soon as a brother takes the initiative of giving, then he gets some happening of God. Here, we will suppose, is an Israelite that gathered a lot of manna and went back to his tent, and yet after all, he had nothing over when everyone in his tent had eaten; and here is another Israelite who, for some reason gathered less, but in spite of this he had no lack! So with ourselves, there is the unseen power of God operative in material things on our behalf, so that there is an *equalizing*, for God acts on the principle of equality.
A.E.M-o. Would you say it is a very practical point for us, that whatever our income none of us should spend it all on ourselves; there should be a proportionate margin for God?
J.T. I think it is pure selfishness for one to think that what he has is little enough for himself. God
{313}
would seriously regard such an attitude, and the brother would not become enlarged. But if one takes the ground of *giving*, it will not be long before there will be the equalising. It may take time, but one will eventually prove the blessing of God. "He has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor, his righteousness remains for ever" (@2 Corinthians 9:9), and I cannot afford to miss that!
A.J.D. Why is righteousness brought in in connection with that quotation?
J.T. Well, it is righteous to give to the poor, and is obligatory on us all if we are to be like God whose righteousness is *manifested* "by faith of Jesus Christ towards all, and upon all those who believe", (@Romans 3:22).
A.E.M-o. "There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is right, but it tendeth only to want", (@Proverbs 11:24).
A.P. "Honour Jehovah with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase; so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy vats shall overflow with new wine", (@Proverbs 3:9,10).
A.N.W. When it is a question of caring for myself, the Lord would say, "Sufficient to the day is its own evil" (@Matthew 6:34); but when it is a question of caring for others, then He will tell us beforehand of the famine.
T.A. There is no mention made of the duration of this famine.
J.T. No; it is just stated that a great famine would come over all the inhabited earth, so that they were forewarned; and it works out, as the scripture in 2 Corinthians and also @Romans 15:25 - 28 show, to bring us into accord with God. "Thanks be to God for his unspeakable free gift", (@2 Corinthians 9:15). That is the great culminating thought, as showing the high level we are on.
{314}
A.R. Since it is the end of the subject in 2 Corinthians, is there not some reason for that?
J.T. I think it is to show the great stream of love going out from God and reverting to Him in praise. The saints are brought into accord with God.
A.J.D. What unspeakable gift is referred to in that verse?
J.T. I think His unspeakable free gift is left open; to define it might detract from it. Of course, the fulness of His giving is Christ, and the Spirit.
F.H.L. Is the box on the table in view of our acting like God?
J.T. Yes; I think it belongs there. There is no more practical way of showing your love than by material giving; anybody can see it. Though in @Luke 15 you reach the highest point of grace in the prodigal, the next chapter speaks of this very subject; we have the unjust steward, who came to see how he could use the mammon of unrighteousness for his own advantage; and then follows the rich man who disregarded poor Lazarus, and the doom he met! @Luke 16 is very solemn as over against the full height of divine grace in chapter 15.
A.P. Is @Luke 15 what gives colour to good stewardship?
J.T. I think heaven's bounty, the lavishness with which the prodigal was dealt with, illustrates all the love of God, and would affect the prodigal afterwards. He would say (and we have to carry the thought on), 'How am I going to act now, as having my father's goods? Am I going to waste them on myself as before?' The later teaching in Luke shows that giving is to mark the believer.
{315}
*Pages* 315 - 482 -- "*New York Readings*", 1934 (Volume 121).
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (1)
@Genesis 46:8 - 27; 49:1,2,28
J.T. For the account of the birth of the sons of Jacob we must revert to chapters 29 and 30. In those two chapters we have a record of eleven of them, and Benjamin's birth is recorded in chapter 35. Chapters 29 and 30 are important as furnishing the conditions into which the heads of the tribes are born; these conditions were very incongruous for the development of right family feelings and affections, for there were four mothers, two of whom were maid-servants. Obviously, God allowed all this unsuitability to show that He can develop love in spite of adverse conditions. I think it is well to bear this in mind, because the subject before us really involves the working out of love to a full result as seen in the heavenly city; so that we should not be discouraged when special contrariety arises, for God can work in spite of it -- even using it to develop love in His people.
What is particularly important in chapter 30 is that Jacob proposed to leave Padan-Aram when Joseph was born; that is to say, that there was one child in the family who suggested Christ. Joseph, in a sense, is the spiritual link between God and the family, so that there was spiritual movement as soon as Joseph was born. If we keep this in mind I think we shall get help all through this subject; it is Christ coming in in the type, and later actually. In Joseph there is movement and ultimate recovery to a spiritual standard.
F.L. With reference to what you said as leading up to love, would the word, "... I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau" (@Malachi 1:2), have a bearing?
{316}
J.T. It would indeed. That is where the work of God was, as over against Esau whom He hated.
A.F.M. Would you say that obedience is another feature that runs along with love? Jacob "obeyed his father and his mother" (@Genesis 28:7), in going to Padan-Aram, and therefore was a right father of these tribes.
J.T. Exactly. That comes out where Esau and Jacob are contrasted. They were both tested; Esau became exposed as the natural, but Jacob comes into view as the spiritual progenitor of these tribes; and this develops out of his obeying his father and his mother.
A.N.W. Would that verse, part of which you quoted in prayer, confirm what you say, "... bearing with one another in love", (@Ephesians 4:2)? The unity of the Spirit is worked out in conditions that are uncongenial to love.
J.T. Yes. The extraordinary conditions that appear at the birth of these children would call forth the necessity for bearing with one another in love; and so, subsequently in the Scriptures, you will find that there is great variation in the order in which the tribes are mentioned -- one put before others in certain instances, meaning that love being there, the tribes are capable of divine manipulation.
A.P. What about the conditions under which Benjamin was born?
J.T. That enters into what we were just saying. Chapter 35 is one of deaths and burials. At the birth of Benjamin, Rachel dies. The thought indicated in her is that she possessed the spirit of the mother. As Rachel died she called Benjamin, "Benoni", or "Son of my affliction". "Rachel weeping for her children" (@Matthew 2:18), identifies her, as mother, with the sorrows of Israel. Chapters 29 and 30 show that Padan-Aram was the seed plot of the tribes. The moral element enters into those chapters, very
{317}
much like ploughing -- there were adverse conditions to be met, and a bickering between the mothers to be overcome; but God was there in some sense, for He had not left Jacob. If there is one thing especially in which God is with a believer, it is in relation to his family. He promised to be with Jacob, and He was with him, but necessarily at a distance on account of his state of soul; still, the seed was being sown. The names given to his children would indicate the potentiality in them, the first-born is named "a son".
A.R. Rueben is born in adverse circumstances, for Leah was hated.
J.T. That would cause her most bitter exercise day after day, but Jehovah looked upon her affliction and gave her a son. Rachel was loved, but had no children at first; so that she did not escape balancing discipline -- a feature of God's school.
W.F.K. Would you say that Rebecca had spiritual instincts in sending Jacob to Laban?
J.T. In Jacob you have "wholly a right seed", (@Jeremiah. 2:21). Rebecca, his mother, was a remarkable woman; in chapter 27, in spite of her scheming in order that Jacob should be blessed, she says to Jacob, "On me be thy curse, my son!" The spirit of Christ was thus exhibited before his eyes in his mother's acceptance of his curse; showing how much Rebecca valued the purpose of God.
A.A.T. The twelve tribes are often spoken of as a nation in contrast to the other nations surrounding them; are you developing the family features rather than what pertains to them as a nation?
J.T. You do not get the word 'tribe' until you come to chapter 49; that is to say, we have to view chapter 49 from the standpoint of Moses, who in that chapter is dealing with the tribes. For the moment we are considering the sons of Israel as persons; later we shall deal with them as tribes. We are at the source of the river now, but shall see
{318}
it broadening out majestically as we proceed. It rises in a jungle, so to speak, but it gradually widens out. The lineage is traced down from Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca. The seed was there, as in chapters 29 and 30, and showed itself in time; but in those chapters the seed plot is full of weeds.
F.H.L. You get the full thought in the heavenly city; the names of the twelve tribes being inscribed on its gates.
J.T. Exactly; we see there what God brings out in that connection. The names are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. On the breastplate of the high priest the names were engraven according to the tribes. On the shoulder-pieces of the high priest the names were engraven in the order of their birth. They are loved as tribes, and supported according to their birth.
T.A. The collective thought is seen in the twelve names being in the breastplate.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that the sons of Jacob received such suggestive names under the mixed conditions mentioned; and the names were not changed, as if the value attaching to each one should remain.
J.T. Each name would furnish material for a spiritual address. First you have a son in Reuben; then hearing, in Simeon; then the being united, in Levi; and finally, praise, in Judah.
C.A.M. It would seem as though adverse conditions helped as to giving the names.
J.T. The circumstances of the birth furnished the name in each case, and they are intended as a background for the development of God's thoughts. God overrules evil conditions, and makes them work for good.
A.F.M. Would you say that chapter 46 represents the river to which you referred, as becoming defined?
{319}
J.T. Yes. You will notice, as we remarked, in chapters 29 and 30, we get a record of the names, and Joseph is the last mentioned, even coming after Dinah. And then Jacob moves; that is, the spiritual touch comes in at the end, and that is the link right through. In chapter 36 we have the generations of Esau given in full length. In chapter 37:2 we have: "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, fed the flock with his brethren; and he was doing service with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives". That is all you get in that chapter as to the generations of Jacob. As was remarked, in chapter 46 we have the river, but it does not come into view in chapter 37. It is just one son loved of his father, and he is feeding the flock in adverse conditions, for the conversation of the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah was damaging, but Joseph was an overcomer; he represents the generations of Jacob until we come to chapter 46, where the river, as it were, is taking form. All the sons of Jacob are there, but grouped under their mothers.
F.L. Reference has been made to @Revelation 21. What is the divine idea in bringing in the twelve tribes there?
J T. I think it is to maintain the links of the work of God. The heavenly city is the full result of the work of God, and they have their place in it. They represent the primary work of God in a collective sense, because it is a matter of what is collective; so they have their place, as angels, too, have theirs. The tribes were in God's hands, as the angels had been, in the maintenance of His government. The great idea of the city is government, but as the product of the work of God, and that work in its completeness coming into administrative service, so that the agencies He before employed are necessarily found there.
F.L. So it is the concentration of all the work of
{320}
God that has gone before, headed up in the heavenly city.
J.T. Yes. It is a solid, as we have often remarked, but not an abstract idea; as a figure, the city represents the work of God substantially.
W.B-w. The stream of love begins in Joseph.
J.T. Yes. In chapter 30 he represents Christ, though in a small way, but quite enough to move Jacob towards his country. Then in chapter 37 at the age of seventeen more of Christ is seen, so to speak. Indeed, he becomes a remarkable type of Christ, for he is loved by his father, who makes him a vest of many colours; and in that same chapter he tells his brethren of his dream and that their sheaves bowed down to his sheaf. He thus furnishes light in a collective way, in that the tribes bowed down. What a fine lesson it is, to learn to bow down to Christ. Then he sees the sun, the moon, and the eleven stars doing obeisance to him. What light shines in all this! Personally Joseph represents "the generations of Jacob"; but when we come to chapter 46 we have them all, but grouped under their mothers.
J.S. Jacob and Joseph stand out distinctly in chapter 37.
J.T. Yes; it is the suggestion of the father and the son. Jacob loved Joseph, and made him a vest of many colours, what follows discloses the light of God in that young man of seventeen!
W.B-w. Joseph's sheaf "remained standing". All the others bowed down.
J.T. The position the tribes occupy in the heavenly city shows the great objective to which God is working.
J.T. The city is the great end in view, as the gathering up of all His work. It is not an abstract thought, but a substantial one which a cube implies. It displays the fullness of God's work, but as measurable;
{321}
it is not love in Christ in infinitude, but love in the subjects of God's work. We see how it begins, typically, here. If we get our hearts touched with the thought of Christ in Joseph -- first as a babe, moving Jacob toward Canaan, and then as a young man, denoting Christ in supremacy, and furnishing light for all -- we shall be helped as we pursue this subject.
W.B-w. Why did you begin to read, in chapter 46, about the sons of Israel going down to Egypt?
J.T. Well, I thought we ought to see the river broadening out, as it were; They are all Jacob's sons, but grouped under their mothers; the number of the children of each mother is given separately, and then the total. They all went down to Egypt. As it says, "... with Jacob had they come", (@Exodus 1:1). Joseph and his family were already there. When you come to Exodus, they are in Egypt in relation to their father, there is no mention of the mothers.
A.R.S. Why do the groups of children get less and less as we go down chapter 46?
J.T. God's sovereignty enters into it. Leah was hated, and God took account of this and gave her a large number of children; she represents in a sense, the assembly, as over against Israel (Rachel), who is first loved but last obtained. @Genesis 30:22 says, "God remembered Rachel".
A.N.W. What element do the daughters suggest?
J.T. Just the family side. You have to distinguish between the family and the tribe, the latter being official and more extensive. The tribe involves rule. The word 'tribe' involves sceptre, or rod of authority.
A.E.M. Would you say that we now have a family introduced in Scripture that is to subsist according to God's will?
J.T. Yes. The promise as to this family was primarily to Abraham, who was to be a father of a
{322}
multitude. Abram and Isaac, we may say, are merged in Jacob. First, his name was Abram, which means "high father"; that is to say, moral elevation. One has to be morally elevated before he is worthy of children, just as a wife should learn to keep house before she is a mother of children; (@Psalm 113). And then Abram is called Abraham, "Father of multitudes". He was worthy of this change of name: "For I know him", says Jehovah, "that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoke of him", (@Genesis 18:19). That is the great idea of father, and this goes down to Isaac and on to Jacob, and all is merged in the twelve tribes. Abraham "dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise" (@Hebrews 11:9), which confirms what we are saying.
A.P. There was a scattering of the human family in Babel, and now God lays a foundation for gathering, in Jacob, on spiritual lines.
J.T. Yes. All the families of the earth are to be blessed in Abraham; God never loses sight of that. But the idea of gathering comes in in Judah, as we shall see: "And unto him shall the gathering of the people be", (@Genesis 49:10). This is, typically, Christ. In the final gathering the great principle seen in the twelve tribes will remain, for God never loses sight of it. Paul said, "... our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night hope to arrive", (@Acts 26:7).
T.A. The apostle James wrote his epistle to the twelve tribes.
J.T. Which shows they were in the mind of God at all times.
W.B-w. I notice in @Revelation 7, the sealing begins with Judah. The gathering principle would be seen in him as head.
{323}
J.T. That is what you might expect: "And Jehovah shall save the tents of Judah first" (@Zechariah 12:7); so that when He moves in relation to Israel by and by, He will begin with Judah.
W.B-w. Why did not Jacob move when Judah was born?
J.T. It was clearly a question of God's sovereignty; He waited for Joseph because Christ was presented in him. It is for us to look for touches of Christ in each other. When you get a touch of Christ in a brother, however many or few there may be in a meeting, you get a special link with God, and the result is a spiritual movement.
A.N.W. You would expect that, as the suggestion of Christ comes in so early through Joseph; but why does Christ come of the tribe of Judah?
J.T. It is again a question of the sovereignty of God, which Judah often represents: "Our Lord has sprung out of Juda", (@Hebrews 7:14).
W.B-w. Judah is over against the breakdown in Reuben, Simeon and Levi?
J.T. Yes; Reuben, the first-born, represents the natural side. "Thou shalt have no pre-eminence", Jacob says to him.
A.A.T. In this history, it seems to me quite acceptable to God to have four mothers and one father in a family, but in Christianity that does not seem to be countenanced. How do you explain that?
J.T. It exists, however, today. Christendom represents a variety of mothers, and this makes the work of God exceedingly difficult. Every system is suggestive of a mother; Roman Catholic, the Anglican, the Lutheran, the Greek, the Presbyterian, the Wesleyan, etc. Mother represents a system, as we learn from Galatians and elsewhere; and if that system is of man it makes the work of God very difficult. The Father idea is clear enough. God is recognised as Father in the systems I have named,
{324}
but the mother according to God is lacking. The mother in the true sense is the assembly (@Galatians 4:26), and no sect can represent the assembly. God's children may be, and are, in these sects, and the Lord knows every one of His own who is in these denominations, but then they have a great disadvantage because of the systems in which they are found. Yet God never lost sight of the tribes -- now the assembly -- and wherever His work is unhindered in a soul, that soul recognises the assembly as presented to him.
A.F.M. There is a strong element of bondage in these mothers, and if one has been brought up in a religious system, and would move out of it he has, so to speak, to "cast out the maid-servant and her son", (@Galatians 4:30).
J.T. Exactly; that is the language of Paul to the Galatians; we are sons of the free woman -- Jerusalem above is our mother. Jerusalem above is not exactly heaven; it implies moral elevation.
J.S. In the present difficult condition of things, you would seek to present some fresh feature of Christ that it might direct the people of God to Him, and thus to the assembly.
J.T. If you come to the Lord, He will tell you about the assembly; He will give you to understand that He loves the assembly, that it has the first place in His heart, and that He wants us as in relation to it.
A.P. Are the religious systems illustrative of the jungle you spoke of?
J.T. Yes. There is great difficulty in ministering now, because all these isms are in the way; yet God is working. Jacob represents the father side. No 'denomination' would be Christian if it did not recognise the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, involving the Deity of the Son; it would be apostate, such as Christian Science and Unitarianism. Every 'orthodox' Christian denomination recognises
{325}
the Father. Thank God for that! But the mother, in the true sense, is wanting. They have not that thought at all; not one of them has it. In view of this, room has to be made for the Holy Spirit who gives the idea of the unity of the saints: "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all", (@Ephesians 4:4 - 6) That is how the truth stands to which God has graciously recovered many of His own.
A.R. The first four sons of Leah bring out these features -- son, hearing, united and praise, the last two answering to Ephesians.
J.T. Then the fifth son, Dan, is judgment. That is an element so necessary always, but wanting in the "denominations" -- the power to judge and refuse evil. It says, chapter 49:16, "Dan will judge his people, as another of the tribes of Israel".
G.McP. Does Joseph maintain the link as being of the same mother as Benjamin?.
J.T. The moon associated with the eleven stars in Joseph's dream (@Genesis 37:9), indicates that in the mind of God the tribes had but one mother. Jacob says, "Thy mother and thy brethren".
F.L. What you say as to the many mothers represented in Christendom convinces us that not one of them is big enough to represent the assembly; not one of them is catholic and therefore does not embrace all. On that account we are obliged to leave the systems, so as to stand on a right basis.
J.T. The nearer you get to the Lord the more He will impress you with what the assembly is to Him: "Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it", (@Ephesians 5:25).
R.W.S. Does the mixed seed become wholly right? A river purifies itself. You expressed the importance of the seed being wholly right. Now, it is mixed.
{326}
J.T. The divine nature underlies the truth of the tribes and is sure to extricate itself. In @John 9, you see the man who had been blind, whose eyes the Lord opened, with no one to help him as he was challenged by the Pharisees; but he extricated himself, and stands out at the end as a worshipper of the Son of God. This well illustrates the work of God. The Lord evidently had purposely left him so as to bring him to this point.
A.R. Is that what you look for in spite of incongruities -- that assembly features should come to light in us?
J.T. Yes; you have hardly anything of the four mothers later. It is Rachel and Leah that build the house of Israel according to @Ruth 4. The two maid-servants are left out. The further on you get in the work of God, the more the true idea comes to light of the father and the mother; Jacob understands this, and says to Joseph in relation to his second dream: "I and thy mother and thy brethren", (chapter 37:10).
C.A.M. The mother heart of Israel seems to be typified in Rachel: "Rachel weeping for her children", (@Jeremiah 31:15).
J.T. Yes; Leah is not mentioned after Ruth, but Rachel is brought into the New Testament and merges in the great principle of the mother there.
J.T.Jr. Chapter 30 speaks of Rachel envying her sister. It seems that the handmaids became mothers on the principle of envy.
J.T. It shows, as we were remarking, the incongruous state of the mothers of these children, seen in the bickering and envying. One might ask, How can God develop anything out of that condition? We often hear such a remark made with regard to a meeting! It may be in a low condition, the brethren biting and devouring one another as in Galatia, but God can work love out to a result even there. Therefore
{327}
we must not be discouraged in such circumstances, although humbly feeling them as before God.
C.B. Is this river still flowing?
J.T. Yes; it is the work of God in His people, seen tribally, and now in relation to the assembly.
A.B.P. There is unity in the sheaves bowing down.
J.T. Yes; they "came round about and bowed down" to Joseph's sheaf.
A.B.P. The first thing Jesus did, according to Luke, after He had chosen the apostles, was that he descended with them. The first lesson He would teach them was how to go down.
W.G.T. This second dream of Joseph's is the complement of the first.
J.T. Quite; it brings in the father and the mother as well as the brethren. It is a heavenly view. One dream is the earthly view; and the other, the heavenly.
A.F.M. Why eleven stars?
J.T. Well, that was necessary from the fact that he was one of the brethren. I suppose it is Christ making up the fulness. He is the first-born among many brethren.
A.F.M. In @Revelation 12 the twelve stars were the woman's crown, and she was clothed with the sun. That would be Israel in another position.
J.T. The full thought of Israel as mother is in Revelation, but in Genesis Christ is owned as supreme among the brethren; with Him present nothing is lacking. The number eleven is emphasised at the endings of the gospels, but Christ being there, there is nothing wanting. After He ascended the need of the twelfth apostle was expressed.
J.S. Peter stood up with the eleven (@Acts 2:14), the number was complete.
A.R. The sheaf standing up represents Christ in resurrection, the sun, the moon, and the stars, the heavenly position.
{328}
T.A. Peter and John going up to the temple together would show the workability of love.
J.T. Exactly; a broken number is no hindrance to going on, for Christ makes up the loss, as in @Mark 9:8, "Jesus alone with themselves". He came up to the eleven on the mountain, and some doubted even there; He did not stop to question or correct them but went on. He "spoke to them, saying, All power has been given me", (@Matthew 28:18). Whether there be eleven or one, it matters not, for all power is given to Him in heaven and on earth.
A.P. Does not the fact that the twelve tribes are mentioned in @Ezekiel 48 show that the thought goes through even the very darkest days?
J.T. It does. Besides the idea of the tribes, each has a portion in the land, "And the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes of Israel" (verse 31). We are on the verge of all this now, being of the heavenly city; although living in a very dark day outwardly.
A.N.W. What did Paul mean particularly when he spoke of "our whole twelve tribes", (@Acts 26:7)?
J.T. Well, I think he had the concrete thought before him in some sense. He could refer to himself as of the tribe of Benjamin, and was serving God. Others of the tribes were serving God also.
F.L. Anna, in the temple, represents what is now called one of the lost tribes -- the tribe of Asher; showing that there is no tribe lost in the sight of God.
J.T. James wrote to the twelve tribes, not to imaginary ones.
A.A.T. Are those twelve tribes merged into the assembly?
J.T. The idea is in the assembly. Spiritually, it is a question of the work of God in its results. It is now a question of the unity of the assembly -- the body of Christ. James and Paul were in a transitional period. They spoke of twelve tribes, but we do not
{329}
now, save as typically representing unity proper to the assembly.
A.A.T. Israel will be carried through into the millennium as an earthly nation.
J.T. Yes; but it exists, spiritually, now. Paul speaks in @Galatians 6:16 of Christians as "the Israel of God".
A.P. Is it not just as possible to embrace all saints in our minds today, as it was for Paul when he embraced the twelve tribes in his affections?
J.T. That is the lesson. The saints, whether in the 'denominations' or not, belong to the assembly, and we must embrace them in our affections, although most of them are not gathered in the recognition of Christ and the assembly. In Josiah's passover "the children of Israel that were present" (@2 Chronicles 35:17), got the gain of the great occasion. We, in principle, send letters, as Hezekiah did, to others and invite them as far as able, but though they fail to respond we go on, through grace, and the Lord does not fail us.
T.A. There may be only two or three in a local company, but, in affection, they would embrace all.
J.T. Returning to @Genesis 49:1 it says: "And Jacob called his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, and I will tell you what will befall you at the end of the days". That is the responsible side -- Jacob and his sons; but then it says in verse 2: "Assemble yourselves, and hear, ye sons of Jacob, and listen to Israel your father". That is the spiritual side. Then in verse 28: "All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is what their father spoke to them; and he blessed them: every one according to his blessing he blessed them". We must bear in mind that Moses is writing this from the standpoint of the tribes, not simply the persons, although Jacob's sons are addressed. God blesses every one of the tribes. Although he speaks of apostasy in Dan, yet Dan is
{330}
blessed. That is a principle of great encouragement at the present time. Whatever exists as unsuitable, the assembly goes through in its entirety as blessed.
F.H.L. Is the suggestion of sons of a prince carried through from the beginning?
J.T. That is the idea -- the sons of Israel. Jacob got his name as wrestling with God, by it he was a prince. He obtained power with God and with men, so that the thought of tribes, as some of us may know, implies rule, a sceptre, or rod. It is a question of rule, but in a tribal or collective sense.
A.F.M. Why does Jacob refer to "the end of days"?
J.T. It is a prophetic outlook. God declares the end from the beginning, see @Isaiah 46:10, having blessing in view. Blessing appears three times in @Genesis 49:28, applying to each of the tribes.
A.P. Would there not be much opposition between the utterance and the fulfilment of this prophecy?
J.T. The details of the chapter show this. Each tribe is mentioned, and the details evidence much positive evil, but when the work of God is seen at the end -- the blessing is there.
W.B-w. In going through the wilderness, do you view the Israelites as tribes or rather in families?
J.T. Principally as tribes; the family idea subserves the tribal.
F.L. In connection with "the end of days", we might think of what the end of the prophet Ezekiel brings out, as already alluded to. Abraham could see "the city which has foundations" (@Hebrews 11:10), and Jacob had light as to what God was going to do.
J.S. Would the idea of tribe, meaning rule or sceptre, indicate the place Israel will have in the world to come?
J.T. I think so; the place they have in the city.
A.N.W. How does the use of the sceptre work out today?
{331}
J.T. It is the moral authority that God gives that is found amongst the people of God.
A.N.W. To deal with evil?
J.T. Quite so; what could we do without that authority?
T.A. 1 Corinthians would represent the sceptre?
J.T. Quite so; the power to maintain the rights of God.
A.F.M. Some of the twelve tribes are mentioned very discreditably by Jacob; these would have to judge themselves in order to take up positions around the tabernacle.
J.T. That would be the value of Jacob's ministry to hand the tribes on to the ministerial book. Genesis is the family book. Exodus is the ministerial book, but one book ministers to another, and Jacob ministers to Exodus; that is, the tribes came down with him. It says, "With Jacob had they come", (@Exodus 1:1). He brings them down, and then prophesies to them. The prophecy, with the other service he rendered them, was preparatory to the ministry of Moses. Spiritually it was for the tribes to judge and regulate themselves in the light of this chapter.
A.P. Is Numbers the working out of the idea of the sceptre?
J.T. Numbers is the kingdom of God, answering to Romans and 1 Corinthians; it is a wilderness position; that is to say, God is king in the midst of His people, and they are all around Him -- three tribes in the east under the tribal head of Judah; three in the south under Reuben; three in the west under Ephraim; and three in the north under Daniel You can see how the principle of rule is there, the blessed God Himself being in the midst of tribes.
A.P. Is the family idea the greatest and highest?
J.T. Yes; but in relation to administration it subserves the tribal thought. Characterised by twelve, the tribes represent the great collective idea;
{332}
that is, all formed in the divine nature and under God's hand for the administrative thoughts of His love.
A.A.T. The heavenly city is spoken of as the bride, the Lamb's wife, of which the saints form part today; why does the thought of the twelve tribes come in? -- we are not Jews!
J.T. Well, it is there; the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel are on the gates. It is a spiritual thought, and shows that God incorporates all His earlier thoughts in the heavenly city. We can take in these thoughts of the tribes, they are not foreign to us; we understand them even better than Israel ever did.
C.B. "For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly", (@Romans 2:28).
J.T. That is right, "but he is a Jew who is so inwardly ... whose praise is not of men, but of God" (verse 29).
A.P.T. Timothy is an example of a Jew inwardly; he is going to be in the heavenly city.
J.T. It is remarkable that in the address to the assembly at Philadelphia the Lord refers to the Jews in a spiritual sense: "... who say that they are Jews and are not", (@Revelation 3:9). In Philadelphia they are all true Jews, spiritually. They are able to take in all the divine thoughts set out in Israel and the tribes.
{333}
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (2)
@Exodus 6:14 - 16; 24:4; 28:9 - 21
A.F.M. It appears that there are not many references to the twelve tribes in this book.
J.T. Not many; the scriptures read, I think, cover the references fairly well; those in Numbers are more numerous. In Exodus the teaching relative to the tribes centres in the priesthood. At our last reading, we dwelt on Genesis, which gives, to use the figure, the source of the river. In chapters 29 and 30 we looked at the account of the birth of the sons of Israel in Padan-Aram, with the exception of Benjamin, who was born near Bethlehem. We noted that the circumstances of their birth were incongruous, and not such as would promote good family manners, feelings, and affections; for there were four mothers, two of whom were maidservants. We noted specially that *in spite* of these adverse conditions, God proposed to develop in the family of Jacob the greatest evidence of love. We also saw that they went down into Egypt grouped under the four heads of their mothers, but they went down as blessed; at least, Genesis speaks of their blessing. It actually took place in Egypt, but the setting of it is in Genesis; and that book deals with the three patriarchs and Joseph, and it furnishes us with the blessing of Jacob. He blessed the tribes; indeed, the first mention of the *tribes* is as *blessed*.
J.E.H. Would you say again what the thought of the tribes is.
J.T. Well, it alludes to rule, whether moral or official; what is worked out in them is the greatest thing morally. It is love under God's hand, and that, in the nature of things, eventuates in rule; it must be predominant. We see it fully in the heavenly
{334}
city; not only that it is officially the place of rule, but morally it is great enough for it, being predominant because of what it is, as having the glory of God, and coming down from God out of heaven.
C.B. Do we have the Israelites as representative of rule when under the heads of their fathers¬ houses?
J.T. I think that is what is worked out. The name "Israel" which Jacob acquired from God, has to do with rule, too; and so the idea of rule is seen both in himself and in the tribes also.
A.F.M. At our last reading we had the thought that Jacob hands on, as it were, the tribes to Moses, as blessed.
J.T. That is how the truth stands; they are blessed according to @Genesis 49. The links are clear in @Exodus 1:1: "These are the names of the sons of Israel". It also adds, "With Jacob had they come" -- showing that the link between the parent and the tribes is established. Then we should see that the subject is worked out in relation to the priesthood. Exodus is a ministerial book; the very existence and development of the tribes depends on the maintenance and continuance of the priesthood; everything in this respect centres in the breastplate.
W.B-w. It says, "And Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons", (@Genesis 37:3). Would that show love working in Israel as a parent?
J.T. Exactly; the golden thread of love is the thing that runs right through because it is of moral excellence: "... the greater of these is love", (@1 Corinthians 13:13).
W.B-w. Israel did not love Joseph only, but evidently Joseph had a special place.
J.T. Joseph is a type of Christ there. It says, "The Father loves the Son", (@John 3:35). Thence divine love works out.
{335}
A.A.T. You were speaking of rule. Is there a distinction between rule and administration?
J.T. They are allied. Rule is based on what is moral. Administration is the opening out and application of rule. @Psalm 1 is the basis of @Psalm 2; the former sets forth the moral qualities of a godly man; the latter, the official place that man has in Christ.
C.A.M. When God gave to Jacob the name of "prince", after the night of wrestling, it would involve the idea of rule, I suppose?
J.T. Yes; rule in one who is *able*, as having power with God.
F.L. You spoke of Exodus as being the mutual link between the priests and the tribes. In relation to Moses, in chapter 24:4, etc., his position there would be an exception, would it not? Would it bring in the thought of headship?
J.T. It is interesting to bring that in, as the subject should be taken on in that way, I think. With regard to the sons of Israel, their names are given, showing that they were in right relations with their father: "*With Jacob* had they come"; not Jacob with *them*. Then in chapter 6 the thought is to bring in the tribes, and give them a distinctive place in the mind. "These are the *heads* of their fathers¬ houses: the sons of Reuben", etc. Then the Spirit of God proceeds no further than Levi the third tribe, which corresponds to what we get in @Genesis 37 in connection with "the generations of Jacob", where the Spirit of God proceeds no further than Joseph for moral reasons -- as if nothing formative could be brought about in the tribes until Joseph was owned by them. Things hinged on Joseph as to their sustenance. They must all die unless Joseph is owned, and he *is* owned. In @Exodus 6 the Spirit stops with Levi for a similar reason -- that the priestly
{336}
tribe must be owned first, if the tribes are to be maintained.
J.E.H. Why are Reuben and Simeon brought in?
J.T. Because that is the order of the tribes. The Spirit of God works down the genealogical line until He comes to the priestly tribes, and then passes on to Phinehas, who represents, *par excellence*, the idea of the priesthood; the covenant with him was an everlasting covenant. The meaning of this is that before we can advance as Christians so as to stand in relation to one another before God, the priest must have his place. We must depend on the intercession of Christ in heaven in order to be maintained here in testimony.
A.F.M. Is that why in verse 26 it says, "This is that Aaron and Moses"? Aaron is first and then Moses.
J.T. That is right; in verse 26 it is *Aaron* and Moses, and in verse 27, *Moses* and Aaron, showing that the priest comes first.
F.L. The covenant with Levi is referred to in Malachi.
J.T. Malachi gives the ends of the threads about to be connected with the New Testament, and what is said commendably of priesthood corresponds with Phinehas.
W.G.T. The selection of Levi in @Exodus 6 would be in view of the breakdown.
J.T. That is right. The breakdown in chapter 32 brings him into evidence (verses 26 - 28): "And Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, He that is for Jehovah let him come to me. And all the sons of Levi gathered to him ... And the sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses".
W.B-w. His name means "joined". Things are joined. Is that what God has in mind?
J.T. Yes; the linking up of things. We see the practical application of this in that there can be no
{337}
answering to God in relation to one another aside from the priesthood of Christ.
A.N.W. Are you suggesting that in Exodus Aaron takes priority over Moses?
J.T. Moses has his own place, which is unique to him as a type of the Lord as Mediator; hence there is no restriction on him with regard to the tabernacle, but in the setting of chapter 6, which stresses the priesthood, Aaron is mentioned first.
F.L. So far as we know, Moses might go in and out of the tabernacle at any time.
J.T. Yes. @Numbers 7:89 shows that Moses went in freely to speak to God, and that God spoke to him. "And when Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with Him, then he heard the voice speaking to him from off the mercy-seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubim; and he spoke to him".
C.B. If God is to receive pleasure from us, it is according as the priest gets his place.
J.T. We need His support. He is "a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God", (@Hebrews 2:17), and gathers up all the saints in His heart. But in the breastplate, it is not the saints as in the order of their birth, but as in the counsels of God, which is a greater thought. It is greater that I am preserved in relation to the counsels of God than that I am preserved as one loved of God.
F.L. I was wondering whether you could help us as to the relative place of the head and the priest?
J.T. We do not get headship in Exodus. No doubt, the germ of it was in what Moses did in chapter 24. You get something of it in him, in Deuteronomy, but, as far as I understand it, we have to await David for headship.
A.N.W. Would "king in Jeshurun" suggest headship?
J.T. Well, it reaches on to it. Where Christ has
{338}
a place in the affections of the saints as in authority, we are very near headship. Kingship is not headship, but subserves it; the king *becomes* head, as in David, who speaks of headship in 1 Chronicles, addressing God Himself as Head.
C.A.M. Is it is not remarkable that in those days the priest was the greatest man?
J.T. He was, after Moses. In the expression, "Apostle and High Priest", the apostle comes first; that is from the divine side, to assert the divine rights.
A.N.W. Do we not turn to Exodus for the apostolic work of inaugurating the system?
J.T. That is right. The apostle introduces the system, and the priest maintains it; but headship, in a sense, goes beyond both. Headship is in the king. The "king in Jeshurun" establishes the basis for headship. It means that Christ is recognised by an *upright* people. Jeshurun means an *upright* people, and where you get that condition among the saints, you may look for headship.
W.B-w. In Exodus the twelve tribes have in view a system of administration. In Genesis the administration is through Joseph, but has not God in mind a system?
J.T. Quite so; our thoughts this afternoon ought to be in relation to the priest. In Genesis, Joseph is maintaining things; it is Christ in either case, whether in Joseph or in Aaron. For while Moses is the apostle, we have to regard the two persons as one in the antitype, and I have no doubt that the Spirit of God wishes us to understand this in the transposing of the names of Moses and Aaron in verses 26 and 27.
F.L. That is, you could not understand the apostle without the high priest, or the high priest without the apostle.
J.T. How can I be sustained in the presence of God without Christ in His sympathy and support?
{339}
He is "a merciful and faithful high priest"; the heart is thus assured -- "Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace", (@Hebrews 4:16).
A.R. So the book of Exodus does not give the external position of the tribes, but what is internal.
J.T. It gives just the inside workings. Numbers will give us, as it were, the hands of the clock, and Exodus the works of the clock; so that everything centres really in the breastplate.
A.N.W. Would you say a little more as to why Reuben and Simeon are mentioned, to arrive at Levi?
J.T. God would indicate that He has the tribes -- all His people -- in mind. As if He were to say to a Christian, 'I have you in mind for blessing, but I want you to understand that everything depends upon Christ'. This passage brings that out. Whether in Joseph, Moses, or Aaron, Christ stands out in relation to the tribes.
W.F.K. Has God in mind here to use Levi for rule and administration?
J.T. He has in mind to bring out the real priest; Phinehas stands for this later, but Aaron is the idea officially; he is Christ officially with the breastplate on His heart.
W.B-w. Did Moses revert to the priesthood when he built the altar at the foot of the mountain?
J.T. Well, that is seen in covenant, or love setting. The germ of headship is there, and what you will notice is that the priestly service is carried on by *youths*. It is to show that youthfulness marked Israel's beginnings; the *youths* are the priests in @Exodus 24. It is as though God would bring in the idea of youthful service into the midst of the great expression of love that is there typically, because the blood of the covenant is not only for sprinkling on the altar, it is in *volume*, having been put in basins. "And he sent the youths of the children of Israel, and they offered up burnt-offerings, and sacrificed
{340}
sacrifices of peace-offering of bullocks to Jehovah", (@Exodus 24:5).
F.L. There is nothing like it anywhere in Scripture.
J.T. Nothing like it. Too, the people were *willing*. They said, "All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!" and that sets Moses in movement. He took them at their word, wrote all the words of Jehovah, built the twelve pillars, and then sent the youths. It is a beautiful setting.
A.F.M. Do the youths here suggest the youthful character of the people, as of a new generation?
J.T. That is the thought exactly; the youthful side of things, and that is what you get, too, where God's love comes into the heart in relation to the covenant; it produces youthful freshness.
C.B. The people were willing, the pillars seem to answer to that.
J.T. It is twelve pillars, a visible testimony to the divine thought, which will go right through. *Pillar* here is the idea of something set up. These pillars represent what goes through to the heavenly city. It is a question of love developed in God's people under His hand.
A.R. After these offerings were made, Moses took the book of the covenant and read it in the ears of the people. I suppose it is not the law, but love.
J.T. It is a question of love; not so much the ten commandments as the *book* of the covenant.
F.L. With regard to rising "early in the morning", do you think there would be a suggestion of the resurrection day to make all this effective?
J.T. No doubt. Rising early, here and elsewhere, would imply that a great matter was on hand. What can be greater than the testimony of God? Half of the blood he put in basins and half he sprinkled on the altar. As in basins, the blood of the covenant is seen in volume; with this he sprinkled the people, they having said, "All that Jehovah has said will we
{341}
do and obey"; and according to @Hebrews 9 the book was sprinkled also. Then Moses, Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu went up; and they saw the God of Israel. It is a most wonderful chapter!
W.B-w. Would you link it on with the Lord's supper?
J.T. That is the setting of it, but it is not the shining of Moses's face yet; that comes into the Supper also; here the great testimony to divine love is seen in the volume of blood.
A.F.M. It is remarkable that based on all this, Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up and saw the God of Israel. This upward movement was not based on the Decalogue, but on that which foreshadowed the new covenant.
J.T. The terms employed are very beautiful -- "the nobles of the children of Israel", "the youths of the children of Israel", etc. The chapter, as you will observe, begins with: "And he said to Moses, Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship afar off". That is what is in the mind of God -- that we should go up and worship.
F.L. So as the Lord's supper is instituted there is the going up to the mount of Olives, and then the idea of ascension: "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend" (@John 20:17) -- all on the line of going up.
A.A.T. Is the climax when they see God?
J.T. Yes; they saw the God of Israel. What a wonderful privilege! And they ate and drank.
W.G.T. That would be the Ephesian position that we arrive at after the breaking of bread.
J.T. Yes; we are regarded as nobles there. But the covenant *precedes*. There is the thought of *going up* at the beginning of the chapter, but the covenant comes in before they actually go up; so we go up in
{342}
the liberty of the love of God and we are there in the dignity of sons.
W.B-w. What would you say about the youths here? Why not Aaron and his sons?
J.T. I think it is to bring out the character of the priesthood as in the freshness which the love of God produces and maintains.
F.L. Does priestly service require perpetual youthfulness?
J.T. It does. The holy city retains her youthful freshness. After a thousand years, she is "as a bride adorned for her husband". (@Revelation 21:2) There is no deterioration.
W.F.K. Does it teach us that there is no age limit to priesthood?
J.T. Yes; no age is prescribed either as to when a priest should begin or end his service.
A.B.P. What is the connection between this covenant and the everlasting covenant with Phinehas?
J.T. Well, the latter is the covenant of the priest. This is a covenant with the people. The twelve pillars denote the unity in the dignity of love which God works out in His people.
A.N.W. Wherein lies the difference between this and the new covenant?
J.T. This is a foreshadowing of it. In @Hebrews 9 this is treated typically rather than contrastively.
A.N.W. "All the words that Jehovah has said will we do" is the counterpart of our drinking the cup?
J.T. Yes. The "cup of blessing which we bless" (@1 Corinthians 10:16), involves *committal*.
W.B-w. Priestly service is to be continued in youthful energy to the end.
J.T. Yes; we are not to get old and fat like Eli, and fall backward; (@1 Samuel 4:18).
W.G.T. There are burnt offerings and peace offerings, but no sin offering. Would that be in keeping with the breaking of bread?
J.T. Yes; as we understand it now, by the Spirit
{343}
we can see great richness foreshadowed in this chapter.
A.B.P. Do we see this energy maintained in chapter 32 in Levi coming forward having greater love for God than for his natural relatives?
J.T. That is how it works out. Moses alludes to it in his blessing of Levi: "Who said to his father and to his mother, I see him not" (@Deuteronomy 33:9), showing that the father and mother were not in his vision. He views himself spiritually, taking sides with Jehovah the God of Israel.
A.R. What is offered up in this chapter is bullocks; I suppose there is significance in that?
J.T. Yes, largeness of appreciation of Christ is indicated, as we have often had it. It is to bring out what God found in Israel at the beginning; He says, "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land not sown", (@Jeremiah 2:2).
A.P.T. Barnabas was a Levite. I was just wondering whether there was in him a suggestion of the wealth that is here? He contributed to the great wealth that was already in the assembly; (@Acts 4).
J.T. His monetary contribution was, of course, valuable, but he himself was a greater contribution.
F.L. You had the breastplate a good deal before you?
J.T. It is the great central thought in the book as regards the tribes. What we have said is preliminary, but chapter 28 brings the tribes in in a unique way as according to their *birth*, their names being on the shoulder-pieces of the high priest; and then in the breastplate according to their *tribes*. I think what has been remarked ought to be specially noted, that the existence of the tribes in Genesis depended on Christ as seen in Joseph; and when we come to Exodus, we depend on Christ as seen in Aaron. Joseph was not a priest, but was a great provider. A believer requires to know Christ as the great
{344}
Provider; then he requires to know Christ as the antitype of Aaron, the priest, if he is to be among the tribes.
J.S. So in Genesis we have in Joseph a type of Christ among the Gentiles at the present moment.
J.T. That is right, as the great Provider; so that He provides for us and maintains us in everything for God.
J.S. Following upon that, you have the saints serving God in a priestly way.
J.T. Quite so. Exodus has the ministry in view. Genesis is the patriarchal book. Saints want to see that they are to serve God, but how? Christ must be brought in, and that is the teaching of @Exodus 6. God begins with the heads of the fathers¬ houses, and when He arrives at Levi, the priest, He stops. Thus if we are to serve God, we must know Christ as Priest, and our place in His heart.
B.T.F. How would you apply the thought of the tribes to the Christian now?
J.T. It is saints viewed in Genesis as a family, carried through in spite of adverse maternal conditions, and then provided for, typically, by Christ in the presence of the famine. He is the great Provider for the saints; otherwise, we should all die -- that is the idea of Genesis. Even Jacob would die and everything would be lost, aside from Joseph; but then, the next thing is -- Am I going to serve God, and be amongst those who serve Him? For this I must know Christ as Priest, and know that I have a place in the breastplate; not simply a place according to my birth on the shoulder pieces, but according to God's thought of me as set in relation to all the brethren.
J.S. If we are to serve God, as seen in Exodus, it means moving out of Egypt -- leaving this world.
J.T. Exactly; we cannot serve God in the world. That is pointed out at the beginning of the book;
{345}
Pharaoh would have Israel to serve in Egypt, but Moses said, We cannot serve in Egypt. God says, "let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness", (@Exodus 7:16). They were to serve God on the mountain in the wilderness; and so no one can serve God in the true sense who is related to a worldly organisation; he must leave it and go out of the world. The great general thought of God is, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". They were to serve God on the mountain and in the wilderness, but the balancing thought is that those who serve Him serve "as priests". What our brother remarked should not be passed over -- that we cannot serve God in Egypt. Exodus presents the ministerial side of the truth, and it means that if the saints are to be brought into the service of God, they must leave the world -- even the religious world.
A.B.P. Do you connect the intercession of Moses on the mount, when he was prepared to be blotted out of God's book for the people, with priestly service?
J.T. Yes; but it was more than priestly; it was sacrifice. He was prepared to sacrifice himself. He was priestly, but more a type of Christ willing to sacrifice as giving Himself for us.
A.N.W. He is the mediator.
J.T. Yes; he loved the people and would die for them. It is a fine thought; he was ready to be blotted out from the book of God for His people.
J.S. Does the book of Hosea refer to this section in Exodus -- "When Israel was a child, then I loved him", (chapter 11:1)?
J.T. Quite so. "And out of Egypt I called my son", it says. He was to serve God as son. That was a great general thought which involved the priesthood; so in Christ, the Son, the priesthood is secured.
A.A.T. Why do you speak of the wilderness in connection with service?
{346}
J.T. The idea is that we are to serve in a contrary scene. One of the greatest deceptions is that Christ is accepted in this world. Cathedrals, religious organisations, etc., all assume that He is accepted in this world, but He is not. It is a delusion. The idea is that we are to serve God in a scene where Christ is rejected.
A.P.T. In chapter 16, when they had just come through the Red Sea, it is said that when Aaron spoke to the people, they turned toward the wilderness and saw the glory cloud. Was that an indication of the mind of God for them?
J.T. It shows the effectiveness of the *priestly* service. They were thinking of going back to Egypt, and then Aaron spoke to them (typical of Christ alluring our hearts away from the world), and as he spoke to them, they looked toward the wilderness. It is a fine moment with any Christian who is inclined to go back to the world, when the service of Christ diverts him, and he looks toward the wilderness; but then, he sees more than the wilderness; he sees the *glory*. The wilderness is not worth looking at, except we accept it as the will of God for us. But the glory is worth looking at, as seen under the circumstances mentioned.
J.E.H. I suppose the wilderness becomes very irksome unless the glory of God is seen.
J.T. Quite so. As the hymn says, "In the desert God will teach thee What the God that thou hast found" (`76:6).
A.A.T. As a Christian, am I in the wilderness or in Egypt in my business?
J.T. Egypt, type of the world, becomes the wilderness. To illustrate: Here is a young man whose birth, upbringing, and start in business were in a certain place, and later God converted him; he did not change his house or office or mode of travel; he met the same people he had met before; in his view
{347}
these people are changed, but really the change is in him. The wilderness thus started for him; the change being not in the world but in him. It is conversion to God that makes the world a wilderness to him. As Paul says, speaking of the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, "Through whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world", (@Galatians 6:14). That is the idea, and we have to serve in those circumstances, as being immediately under reproach. Then "upon this mountain" (@Exodus 3:12), implies that abundant resources of God will be available. God will supply all you need; you do not need to go to the world's resources: for, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (@Genesis 22:14); that is what these books show; God provides so that His people might serve Him.
W.B-w. The death of Christ makes the difference. The Red Sea separates Egypt from the wilderness.
J.T. Quite; baptism is now accepted. I was illustrating the case of a young man being converted. He is baptised, and that is the gulf between him and the world, outwardly; but it has to be *maintained*, "we also should *walk* in newness of life", (@Romans 6:4).
F.L. So the types refer to literal and physical phases, but their application refers to a spiritual state of mind.
J.T. That is right; the change comes about in believers, not in the world.
C.B. I suppose the fact that He bears us on His breast collectively, would move us onward in this pathway.
J.T. That is what is before us this afternoon -- to grasp the idea of the breastplate -- the place we have in the heart of Christ; not only on His shoulders; as on the shoulders, we are viewed as belonging to the same family, and are supported there; but as on the breastplate, we are according to our position as the
{348}
*tribes*. The allusion, doubtless, is to the position of the tribes around the tabernacle according to Numbers.
A.R. It has sovereignty in view.
J.T. Yes; it is not a question there of birth, but of the ordering of God; that is to say, the saint begins to see that he is not only a child of God, but that he has a place in the counsels of God, and in the testimony according to divine ordering. This is hardly known amongst us -- that each has a place according to divine ordering in relation to the tabernacle of witness.
B.T.F. It would no doubt be God's ordering, taking into account the peculiar trials we have to meet here in serving God.
J.T. That is right. The tribes were arranged around the tabernacle. Judah had the advantage of being on the east toward the sun-rising, and Ephraim had the disadvantage of being on the west toward the sun-setting, but both positions were assigned by God who makes no mistakes; He knows you are there and will support you there. My position around the tabernacle corresponds with my position on the breastplate. I believe that is the setting of it.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that God emphasises our tabernacle position at the present time. It enters into the boundary question and that of our residences; that all should have a right setting in view of the coming of the Lord.
J.T. Numbers brings that into prominence Every young Christian should see that he has a place, not only in the counsels of God in heaven, but also a place here in relation to the testimony. This is developed in Numbers; what we get in Exodus prepares us for it: showing that God is taking account of us, in bringing in the priest, one man, typical of Christ, taken out from all the others.
C.A.M. In going on to Numbers in the exercises of our souls, we must have our Genesis and Exodus,
{349}
especially in relation to the priest. These books are thus in order, are they not?
J.T. That is right; so the word to Moses is, "Aaron thy brother", in chapter 28: "And thou shalt take thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons". Aaron had the breastplate; he is the outstanding man; and so Exodus prepares us for Numbers in that we see that God has taken out one man. Aaron did not take it upon himself; he was called of God, as we are told in @Hebrews 5:4 - 6 -- "And no one takes the honour to himself but as called by God, even as Aaron also. Thus the Christ also has not glorified himself to be made a high priest; but he who had said to him, Thou art my Son, I have today begotten thee. Even as also in another place he says, Thou art a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedec". His personal greatness is an outstanding feature in Hebrews, yet as saints we are to come into it, if we are to occupy a place in the testimony according to God. "We have such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens", (@Hebrews 8:1).
C.A.M. Does not the epistle to the Hebrews run on these lines almost entirely?
J.T. Yes; it brings in Melchisedec, whom we get in Genesis, but not here, showing the personal greatness of the priest early in the Scriptures before you get the functional side.
A.R. In @Hebrews 8 you get the full official side. In the previous chapters we have the Lord's personality in order that He may stand out in His greatness.
J.T. Quite so; chapter 2 presents to us the humanity of Christ -- One who could be touched with the feelings of our infirmities. Then we have the quotation from @Psalm 110:4 "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec". Viewed as a divine Person, He is "without father, without
{350}
mother, without genealogy; having neither beginning of days nor end of life", (@Hebrews 7:3). Melchisedec is thus "assimilated to the Son of God", in order to show that Christ is none less than a divine Person.
A.N.W. Would you say chapter 1 gives us His deity?
J.T. Unmistakably.
A.N.W. The reference to Melchisedec is another phase of it.
J.T. Chapter 1 gives His deity; chapter 2, His humanity.
C.A.M. The greatness of the Person is a basic thing before the other things are opened up in the testimony.
A.N.W. What does "without genealogy" mean to you?
J.T. He is not like Aaron; His priesthood does not hinge on parentage, "without father, without mother". The allusion could only be to a divine Person. Melchisedec is made *like* the Son of God, and so is just a type. Christ only is in the mind of the Spirit.
A.F.M. Going back to chapter 28, would you say a little more in detail about the shoulder-pieces?
J.T. They allude to the place we have as of the family of God: "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God", (@1 John 3:1). We are children of God. That is the idea, I think, of the names on the shoulder-pieces; but then the names in the breast-plate are of the same persons, viewed in relation to God's thoughts as to where each one is to be in relation to His testimony.
J.S. Hence, it is called the breastplate of judgment.
J.T. Yes, and the *tribes* are brought in. You do not get the word 'tribes' in relation to the shoulder-pieces.
W.G.T. Would Reuben have first place on the shoulder-pieces?
{351}
J.T. Yes; he, being the first-born, would have the first place there, but not on the breastplate -- Judah would have that, and the other two tribes with him. Reuben would come in on the fourth place on the breastplate.
A.P.T. Peter had no difficulty about the shoulder-pieces, but possibly he had some difficulty about the breastplate. He asked the Lord, "What of this man?" (@John 21:21).
J.T. @John 21 tells us that seven servants had gone fishing; they were not in the places to which they were assigned, but had removed from them. It is a picture of Christendom today. Thousands of Christians are not in their assigned positions. "I go to fish", Peter said. At early morn the Lord is on the shore, and at length brings them all again into relation to Himself. First, He takes up Peter and probes him as to his course. The secret of his denial of the Lord, as well as his going to fish, was that he was away from the Lord. He had love for the Lord, but he had a will -- "I go to fish" -- and so the Lord probed him thrice and then gave him work to do; virtually saying, I have not changed My mind about you; the position I had for you is still there, and you are to occupy it, and finally, to do what you said you would do -- die for Me.
It is beautiful to see him as brought into line with his assigned place in relation to the testimony. But everything was not clear to him. He said of John, "What of this man?" It is as if Judah, as set on the east side of the tabernacle, were to say, What about Rueben? What about Ephraim? What about Dan? Well, Jehovah would say to Judah, That is not your matter at all; your responsibility is on the east of the tabernacle; that is your place. So that John is taken care of; he knew the breastplate; he was in the bosom of Jesus and leaned on His breast; so there is no need of Peter asking about
{352}
a man like that, who knew his place. The Lord says, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee?" Whatever the Lord's will might be, He does not disclose it to Peter; but John has his place, and so has every one of us. The point is to *find* it; if I exercise my own will, I shall *not* find it, but go to fish instead.
C.B. Does not @John 17 suggest the breastplate?
J.T. It does, and shows what the Lord thought of His own. He prayed for His disciples, and also for us, as He said, "I do not demand for these only, but also for those who believe on me through their word; that they may be all one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou hast sent me", (@John 17:20,21)
{353}
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (3)
@Leviticus 24:5 - 9; @Numbers 1:1 - 4; 2:1 - 9
J.T. One hopes that the brethren noted the allusions, at our last reading, to Joseph in Genesis as the provider on whom the existence of the tribes depended; that is to say, aside from the great provision made by Christ as gone into heaven, there would be no Israel of God today -- no saints existing at all. That is a great general thought applying to all saints.
Then another representation of Christ is indispensable, that of High Priest, which implies that for any part in the service of God or the maintenance of His testimony, there must be sympathy and support -- that is Exodus.
At this reading we will consider Leviticus and Numbers. The verses read from Leviticus remind us of something tangible in the tribes. Their names are not given, but we are to understand by the *twelve* cakes that the tribes are contemplated, and this can be readily followed if we understand what has already been considered. The saints are to regard themselves as having an *inside* place; not a place merely in a theoretic way, but in a tangible way, so as to be appropriated as food. The type is of fine flour baken into cakes with frankincense on them upon the pure table before Jehovah. They were, as set before Jehovah, a memorial to be food for the priests. Aaron is still in view, not now in relation to the breastplate, but to the tribes seen inside as bread. These cakes are typical of men after the order of Christ, whom God provides for *Himself* inside.
A.F.M. The cakes were all of like weight and covered with frankincense. Would that suggest the
{354}
saints being equal as before God in the acceptance and grace of Christ?
J.T. That is what I understand it to be. There is perfect uniformity.
F.L. What is the thought of "a bread of *remembrance*" in this connection?
J.T. I suppose it is that which recalls Christ to God as Christ was here. I do not understand remembrance in this connection, save that it is to recall Christ: "It shall be a bread of remembrance, an offering by fire to Jehovah", so that it was severely tested by the fire. The saints are viewed inside after the order of Christ, but as under the heading of twelve. Everything here is most excellent of its kind. There is the fine wheaten flour baken in cakes of two-tenths and set in rows on the *pure* table; and there is *pure* frankincense put on each row: it is an offering by fire to Jehovah.
C.A.M. The light that shone on it was *pure*. Immediately preceding this the candlestick is spoken of.
J.T. Yes; you are struck with *quality* here, as is fitting in the holy place; there is *pure* beaten olive oil, and the *pure* candlestick, *fine* wheaten flour, the *pure* table, and the *pure* frankincense.
A.N.W. Why is this type so briefly presented in Exodus?
J.T. It is just the shewbread or "bread of the presence", in @Exodus 25, without the idea of the number. It is more abstract there. The Spirit of God awaited Leviticus to present the more concrete feature; that is, God in His sanctuary is contemplated as approached by His people. As they approach Him according to His thought, they become delightful to Him, and He, so to speak, retains them inside. God, according to @Hebrews 10:22, is waiting for His people to draw near. "Let us draw near"
{355}
the writer says, and as we draw near, God is pleased with us and retains us within.
A.R. Is that why you get the idea of order -- arranged continually on the Sabbath? What God finds in us, as already seen in Christ?
J.T. Yes. The sabbath day suggests something to God -- that He has found rest in Christ. He rested on the seventh day and was refreshed, and now He has inside that which is after Christ, and in relation to Christ, which He rests in.
F.L. Would there be a sort of anticipation in the sabbath, of the first day of the week?
J.T. The connection would be in what is *weekly*. God rested and was refreshed on the seventh day. It is only a relative day in @Genesis 2:2. It is called "the seventh day". God blessed it and rested on it, but it is not called the sabbath until @Exodus 16.
J.S. God must bring in a redeemed people before the sabbath is formally named.
J.T. Exactly; it is preliminary to the ark and Christ having a place, and implies that God and His people in the wilderness had something to rest in, for it comes in immediately in connection with the manna. Now we often misquote the words of the Father: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3:17), by saying -- *all My delight* -- but the "all" is not there. God was leaving room, I believe, for the incoming of the saints. They now come under His eye as after Christ and are equally pleasing to Him, in relation to Christ. I believe that idea enters into this; the cakes were arranged on the sabbath. The word 'arranged' alludes to the beautiful order that marked Christ personally, but that order is also true of the brethren as formed after Christ by partaking of His nature. We are thus contemplated in the epistle to the Colossians, and every step we take as we draw near is delightful to God. Leviticus begins
{356}
with the idea of approach. God speaks "*out of the tent of meeting*", with a view to the saints drawing near in the fragrance of Christ. It does not say He spoke to Moses "in the wilderness" in Leviticus, that is how *Numbers* begins. "Jehovah called to Moses and spoke to him out of the tent of meeting", in Leviticus.
Then if anyone will present an offering, whether a bullock, or sheep, or goat, or pigeon, God sees him as clothed in the beauty of Christ, denoted in his offering. We read of the "steps" (@1 Peter 2:21), of Jesus; but Leviticus provides for "the footsteps of the flock" (@Song of Songs 1:8), as they draw near, and God is pleased with every movement. Whether you come with a bullock, a goat, a sheep, or a dove, each is suggestive of Christ, and indicates to God *what you are*, and that of which you are full.
That is what enters into this subject of the shewbread; God says, I will retain you, so to speak. It is "the children of Israel" representatively here; the assembly (those who form it) is seen before God inside. They are together in love as the result of the work of God. The number twelve -- six cakes each in two rows -- indicates that the saints are contemplated as formed in love entirely for the pleasure of God, as corresponding with Christ before Him. How delightful they thus are to Him!
A.F.M. Is that why you have the words, "It is an *everlasting* covenant" -- the thought of *abiding* before God?
J.T. An expression of that kind indicates something that God is pleased with, that He is going to retain. Allusion was made to the "pure beaten olive oil", "the pure table", etc. The *quality* of the things is emphasised. Then the next paragraph speaks of what is the very opposite of that -- a man blaspheming the Name, which shows how quickly the enemy may affect the people of God after they are
{357}
seen in the most blessed relation with Himself. In verses 5 - 9 they are seen inside, after the order of Christ; outside (verses 10,11), they are seen striving with each other, and blaspheming the Name. The reviler illustrates the unchangeable badness of the flesh.
C.A.M. @Acts 26 shows that whatever the outside setting might be, the apostle always had in view what was inside; that there was that priestly service going on in its entirety.
J.T. Yes -- "our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night"; like Anna the prophetess, in @Luke 2.
B.T.F. How would you define the *inside* and the *outside*?
J.T. The *inside* and *outside* are an instructive suggestion: The subject properly begins with the tabernacle, where God has a sanctuary, or secret place, where He resides. His people are to approach to Him there, and as they come He is pleased with them: "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, and having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart" (@Hebrews 10:19 - 22). That is the thought. God would have us near Him, in entire suitability to Himself within. *Outside* is the sphere of profession characterised by the world, or the world itself. Today the position of the faithful is *outside* the camp, but *inside* the veil.
Ques. Would *inside* be illustrated in the prodigal son?
J.T. It is very much like it. The father was pleased with every step the prodigal took as he wended his way back to him. @Luke 15 does not say, 'Let us bring in', but, "Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it" (verse 22), because the prodigal himself conveys the idea of the house, which is
{358}
immediately seen after he is there. The music and the dancing are inside, but the elder brother was outside and would not go in; there is the *inside* and the *outside*.
F.K. Are we responsible to eat in "a holy place"?
J.T. You have in chapter 10:12 - 14 a *holy* place and a *clean* place. The priests were to eat in a holy place and in a clean place. Here it is "a holy place". Holiness and cleanness in our associations are stressed. It is an important matter, because many Christians are eating in unholy places, instead of in sanctified places.
H.S.D. Is this not like: "For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one", (@Hebrews 2:11)?
J.T. Yes; correspondence in sanctification between Christ and the saints.
A.N.W. Would you mind distinguishing between "a holy place" and "the holy place". Why is one defined and the other not?
J.T. "The holy place" would be the inner sanctuary, next to the holiest; "a holy place" is more *general*, but as in the wilderness, you could only find it in the tabernacle. We have to understand these things spiritually. In this sense the Christian is not only to eat, but to do so in holy associations. Eating in a holy place is the great idea to get into the soul; but where are you going to find it? The tabernacle represented these associations.
A.F.M. Would the court answer to the holy place?
J.T. Yes, anything inside the divine enclosure would be holy. "A clean place" might be outside; see @Numbers 19:9. When place in this respect is not defined, it is for us to find it, for it exists.
A.R. Would you say a word about eating this kind of bread? We often speak of feeding upon Christ, but how do we feed upon the twelve loaves?
{359}
J.T. I am to apprehend and appropriate *that kind* of humanity: "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", (@1 Corinthians 15:48). I can appropriate that Christ is heavenly and that the saints are heavenly. Again: "Both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one". (@Hebrews 2:11) The appropriating of this great fact is *food*. The epistle to the Hebrews helps greatly in relation to the types; as you peruse that epistle you get spiritual instincts and intelligence. The types open up a wonderful field. Hebrews is introductory and hardly gives the inside view, although in *principle* all is contemplated in the epistle. As inside not only do you see Christ, but the saints too, and God sees them there. In Ephesians we are quickened with Christ, raised up together and made to sit down together *in Him*.
C.A.M. If you go that dedicated way you would understand this wheaten flour.
J.T. Quite. You see it in Christ and in the saints. We have to learn to take account of the saints abstractly in this way.
A.B.P. Why did David say the loaves were after a manner common?
J.T. Because the shewbread had just been replaced. David was, as a type of Christ, more a priest than Ahimelech. David's remarks were made to satisfy the mind of the priest. But as *he* was now rejected and persecuted, all in connection with Saul's system was "common"; "the more so" (@1 Samuel 21:5), alludes to this, for the words show that something besides the fact that they had been replaced made the loaves of the shew bread common, compare @Luke 6:1-5.
F.L. The two wave-loaves of the previous chapter, (@Leviticus 23:17), are not spoken of as eaten. I was wondering what the difference was.
J.T. They represent the saints, too, but are
{360}
baken with leaven. The unburnt part of meat offerings belonged to the priests. The shewbread is the saints viewed entirely apart from what they are in the flesh, I think.
A.P.T. Is it in line with Ephesians: "holy and blameless before him in love", (@Ephesians 1:4)?
J.T. Yes, "*before him*". Then, in Ephesians, we are also made to sit down in the heavenlies *in Christ*.
J.T.Jr. Does not 1 Corinthians view us as unleavened and leavened at the same time?
J.T. Yes: "According as ye are unleavened", is abstract; (@1 Corinthians 5:7). In view of the fact that leaven was working there, it is wonderful that God should so speak. It is a great leverage in the soul to take in the abstract idea of how God regards us -- like Balaam's vision of the tribes, he sees them from the top of the rocks, and how beautiful they are!
B.T.F. Regarding the abstract idea, what is descriptive of the soul inside, should it not be true of one outside?
J.T. John views the believer in his "mixed condition", and also abstractly, as born of God: "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves", (@1 John 1:8). Our actual condition down here has to be admitted. As remarked, the wave-loaves that were brought from the houses of Israel were baked with leaven -- the leaven was owned to be there. That is not an abstract thought, but a practical one -- leaven was there, but rendered inactive by the action of the fire; but in 1 Corinthians, "Ye are unleavened", is an abstract view of the saints. They are entitled to regard themselves in that way through the death and resurrection of Christ. John's first epistle says that one born of God "cannot sin", and that as Christ "is, so are we in this world", (chapters 3:9; and 4:17). To maintain ourselves in this condition in the assembly requires the exercise of the power of the Holy Spirit.
{361}
F.L. There is a sudden change in 1 Corinthians from the actual state of responsibility to what we are in the sight of God according to purpose; "ye are unleavened" is abstract in that way.
J.T. Quite; it is a great thing to be able to hold yourself, even for a moment, in the sense of that -- that you are unleavened.
A.F.M. It is as in that state that we are viewed in the assembly as over Jordan.
H.S.D. Is that in connection with new creation?
J.T. Yes. It is one thing to get the light of the abstract idea and another thing to maintain yourself in it. The Holy Spirit enables you thus to hold yourself.
G.McP. Would "a man in Christ" suggest the abstract idea?
J.T. Yes. Paul, as in the third heaven, was consciously abstracted from what he was in the flesh. He says, "... but of myself I will not boast", (@2 Corinthians 12:5). He contrasts himself (that is, as in his condition of flesh and blood) with what he was in Christ. The idea of the abstract is that you are able to regard yourself in one state, or connection, apart from other conditions whatever they may be.
C.A.M. This is not a visionary thing, but real, although out of sight altogether.
A.R. Is not the idea of the twelve loaves in the holy place a concrete thing?
J.T. God is intimating what Leviticus means, and what He has in those that draw near Him.
A.A.T. Where does the thought of food in the twelve cakes come in?
J.T. It is the idea of something that you appropriate and enjoy. Eating is a figure of appropriation in a spiritual way. In @Leviticus 11 many creatures are used as figures of what we may appropriate. They represent the work of God, and what is not the work of God. The clean animals represent true Christians.
{362}
They are the subjects of the work of God. What enjoyment there is among the brethren in this sense! The very thought of godly, spiritual men and women rejoices your heart.
J.S. What is set forth in the measure two-tenths, and then in the position, two rows of six?
J.T. It is God showing that there is manipulation according to His wisdom inside. Order according to God (@Colossians 2:5), is seen in the two rows of cakes. The frankincense is on each row, indicating the fragrance of life. It is God delighting in the order and love that He sees in the saints as quickened with Christ.
A.P.T. Is that why it does not say "one-fifth"?
J.T. Just so. It is *two*-tenths; that is the idea where you get such divisions, it is God opening up the thing. You get *more* out of it, as it were.
W.B-w. There are those answering in the way of responsibility to it -- the actual testimony down here in the saints.
J.T. That is right, what the saints are inside, under God's hand. They are to be arranged. In Exodus the cakes are called shewbread; here you have their order and excellence. Leviticus is the saints coming near to God, and He is indicating how He regards them -- what they are to Him, and how He loves to have them before Him. The Lord says, "Come and see ... and they abode with him that day", (@John 1:39).
C.A.M. A tenth is suggestive of what is for God.
J.T. That was the idea in Jacob. So that two-tenths is *full testimony* to the saints¬ correspondence in nature with Christ.
A.F.M. I suppose we may view this section in the light of the earlier offerings of the book, which Israel brought; each offerer had the sense of the value of the offering in his soul and this would be like a culmination of that.
{363}
J.T. Yes; these twelve loaves represent the whole -- the excellence of what God has in the saints. As it says, "... his inheritance in the saints", (@Ephesians 1:18). How great a thing it is! Now we may go on to Numbers, which is not an inside view, but an outside one of the same people we have seen inside.
J.S. They are to be outside as a result of being inside.
J.T. It is the same people as in Leviticus, only outside now to bear the responsibility of the testimony in the wilderness.
C.A.M. God starts with the inside; I think sometimes we try to get the outside right before the inside, but Leviticus comes before Numbers.
J.T. Quite so; the Lord speaks of going in and out; (@John 10:9). If we must contend with cold, outside conditions, we should enter into them *warm*.
In @Numbers 1 it says, "Jehovah spoke to Moses *in the wilderness*". We should specially notice that. He "spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai in the tent of meeting". God is virtually saying, "You are in wilderness circumstances and I know it". What God wishes to convey to everyone here today is that He knows how adverse our circumstances are. The book of Numbers is intended to encourage us in this respect.
J.S. So we now view the movements, typically, of a heavenly people.
J.T. That is right. In @Numbers 15, you get the instructions regarding the "ribband of blue".
F.L. This speaking here was just one month after the setting up of the tabernacle; so that in this short period the meaning of the tabernacle would become emphasised and defined to the Israelites.
J.T. Giving them an opportunity to draw near to Jehovah during that period. "And Jehovah called to Moses and spoke to him out of the tent of meeting",
{364}
(@Leviticus 1:1). That is, the tabernacle is seen as set up and God is calling His people to draw near to Him. The date of the book is not given.
G.McP. Would the ribband of blue on the garments suggest that there is a confirmation *outside* of what was *inside*?
J.T. Yes; you get the heavenly colour in Numbers. How very comforting it is that God, in opening up Numbers, speaks *in the wilderness*. Showing that He would be in it Himself with His people, and that He knows exactly what our circumstances are.
W.F.K. Why is it the wilderness of Sinai? Does it suggest the government of God?
J.T. I think so; it is the place of the assertion of divine rights.
J.S. So that time and place are prominent in Numbers, movement being in view.
C.A.M. It is a sort of working out of the truth in this book. You do not have the inside place in the tabernacle, but in the wilderness. There is history seen there. In the history of our souls, I suppose, God takes account of every day.
J.T. He does. This is the book that tells you about the encampments of Israel; all are written down; (chapter 33). The account is very touching. It is in Numbers also that Israel communicates with Edom as "thy brother Israel", and gives an account of himself. He now has experience with God and speaks of it feelingly; (chapter 20:14 - 16).
J.S. Knowing God thus, we can approach men sympathetically, as Israel did Edom.
J.T. If you approach them in that way you will affect them, if they are to be affected. Edom was not affected, but had a fine opportunity of helping Israel. Israel says, "We are at Kadesh, a city at the extremity of thy border". They knew exactly the territorial position and were able to speak of their history a long way back; they could speak of how God sent
{365}
an angel and brought them forth out of Egypt. Numbers presents a people, not only privileged as *inside*, but a people who have had experience with God in a world of contrariety, a God who in His faithful love has brought them through all difficulties.
A.F.M. They said they would go through by the highway; that was an important point; and that they would pay for the water they drank.
J.S. Would that not show moral qualifications for spiritual warfare?
J.T. What we see at this juncture, i.e., at the end of the wilderness, is that Israel are now *men*. Paul says, "Quit yourselves like men; be strong", (@1 Corinthians 16:13).
W.B-w. Does it now show us, too, that as we get experience we learn not to fight with our brethren, whilst there are certain people we are to fight with?
J.T. That is a good point. Those who are in the position of brethren, we are not to quarrel with, but to give them a full account of our history, as showing that we are not mere professors. Israel says, in principle, "I have been through things with God. I have been in Egypt, but God has taken me out of it. I now wish to go through on my own feet on the highway". That is the testimony God would have us render to our brethren today, whatever their association.
W.B-w. The Amorite was a different matter. He was a usurper in the land of Canaan.
J.T. Quite so. It is important to distinguish between those you are, and those with whom you are not, to fight.
W.G.T. It was eleven days¬ journey into the land by way Mount Seir. Would that be the way to go?
J.T. Yes; but Israel had, at this time, (chapter 20), been forty years in the wilderness. Had their journey taken only the eleven days, they could hardly have spoken to Edom with such intelligent feeling.
{366}
A.F.M. This section, chapters 1 and 2, furnishes a numbering for military service.
J.T. That is the first view of the tribes you get in Numbers. It is the military side; they are numbered for military service. "Twenty years and upward", is an important word for all young people here. It includes older ones, too, but the young ones are especially in view. God is calling upon every one of them to be a soldier.
A.F.M. What does the age of twenty indicate?
J.T. I think it is manhood, but not *mature* manhood. It has in view those who are converted and have the Spirit. *Only* such can show their pedigree.
A.P.T. Is it conscription?
J.T. Yes. It was not voluntary or optional with any Israelite.
J.H.E. Twenty is twice ten. Ten is responsibility.
J.T. In children twelve is the age. The Lord was seen in the temple, speaking, at twelve. It is obvious that people at the age of twenty have come into manhood or womanhood. They are not up to thirty, and so are not fitted for Levitical work, but they are fit for the army. They are confessors of Christ, and have an assigned place in the army.
W.G.T. The age of the Corinthians in the first epistle would not be much more than twenty.
J.T. It was not even that. They were babes, (chapter 3:1). But Paul said to them, "Quit yourselves like *men*; be strong".
J.S. Having moved through Exodus and Leviticus and coming on to Numbers, would the believer be in the conscious knowledge of having the Spirit?
J.T. I think so. A person has all of his faculties developed at twenty; this age would therefore imply that believers having the Spirit are contemplated here.
A.C. According to what you have said, the military side would come before the Levitical.
J.T. That is right. The former includes believers
{367}
as they receive the Spirit and confess Christ; now each is enrolled in military service, having an assigned place. There is nothing more practical than this. Of course, all believers are in view, but "twenty years" denotes that one has reached manhood, spiritually.
F.L. He knows his Commander-in-Chief, but otherwise may need much instruction.
W.G.T. Do the *fathers¬ houses* refer to local companies?
J.T. Yes; that identifies the person in a family way. Then when we come to chapter 2 he has to take his place in a wider sense. He is not only known by his father's house, but as in a camp of three tribes he has a wider sphere. There are four sets of three tribes each in chapter 2.
F.L. Corresponding to the breastplate.
J.T. That is what I thought. The *outside* position is according to what we are *inside*.
A.R. Would we have the gain of the shoulder-pieces in chapter 1 and of the breastplate in chapter 2?
J.T. Pretty much. Chapter 1 includes every saint, and chapter 2 refers more to where I am as set by the will of God.
Ques. As in testimony here?
J.T. Yes. My position in the testimony here is as fixed as my position in the land.
W.G.T. Reuben has fourth place according to chapter 2.
J.T. That is right. As you read the breastplate you begin with Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun; these are on the top. The next row would be Reuben, Simeon, and Gad; the third row would be Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin; and the fourth row, Dan, Asher and Naphtali. It seems clear that as the names on the breastplate were according to the twelve the tribes would be in the order in which they were set in relation to the testimony, and not according to the birth of the children of Israel as on the
{368}
shoulder-pieces. The wilderness position would be specially contemplated in the breastplate, as the shoulder-pieces and breastplate do not appear to be mentioned later.
W.B-w. God looks at our place in Christ, and this corresponds with our place in the testimony.
J.T. That is right. The inside and the outside thus correspond.
W.G.T. The same principle would work out in the twelve apostles.
J.T. Yes. We scarcely get mentioned more than the work of Peter, James, and John. There is not much stated of the others, but we may be sure that every one had his own assigned place in the service.
A.B.P. By the same reasoning, would you say Peter's name would be in the first foundation of the wall of the heavenly city?
J.T. I suppose so. The order is, "first Simon, who is called Peter", (@Matthew 10:2). It is remarkable that we do not get the actual names given in the breastplate. It is just a general reference to the names of the children of Israel, but it is *according to the twelve tribes*; not according to their birth. For the order of the names upon the shoulder-pieces we go to Genesis; but as the tribes were reconstituted in the sovereignty of God, it is clear that the breastplate would be in correspondence with this.
C.A.M. After the captivity certain things had to wait until the priest stood up with the Urim and Thummim. Could you apply that today?
J.T. I think so. Christendom during the middle ages was a conglomerate state of things. Christians were all in human organisations and their pedigrees were not clear, but now a priest has stood up, so to speak, with the Urim and Thummim; that is to say, Christ has come in and made all clear. The original order of God has been restored, the true priests brought to light, and the levitical service re-established.
{369}
Fellowship enters into all this. People ask why every Christian should not break bread; but then what about the pedigree? This book is ignored in such a question. Generally spiritual pedigrees may be determined, but some need the Urim and Thummim. Around some persons there is a cloud, and special discernment is needed.
The Urim and Thummim now implies the presence of the Holy Spirit as free among the saints. Thus there is true priesthood and hence power of discernment, so that people do not escape. Paul says, "Of some men the sins are manifest beforehand", (@1 Timothy 5:24). There is generally no difficulty about those. "Some also they [the sins] follow after". Thus we are to "lay hands quickly on no man" (verse 22). Great care is needed. Sins may exist, but they are covered over.
A.P.T. In the case of Simon Magus, hands were laid on him suddenly.
J.T. That is a case in point, but Peter discerned him.
C.A.M. It is remarkable what discernment Peter had.
J.T. He discerned Ananias and Sapphira also.
W.G.T. Eleazar was to inquire for Joshua "by the judgment of the Urim before Jehovah", (@Numbers 27:21).
J.T. Inquiry by the Urim and Thummim makes things clear. It is understood among the saints of God where true priesthood is.
A.P-f. Do you refer to persons seeking fellowship as needing a pedigree?
J.T. It says, "And they declared their pedigrees after their families, according to their fathers¬ houses", (@Numbers 1:18).
A.P-f. What is that today?
J.T. Well, one, to be recognised, has to show that he is a believer having the Holy Spirit. At Pentecost this must have been manifest in the three thousand
{370}
that were added in one day. Of course, the Urim and Thummim were present and unhindered. "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you" (@Acts 2:38), was Peter's word. What a day it was -- here were three thousand people all indicating the Spirit of Christ in their movements!
A.F.M. Would the meaning of the words Urim and Thummim -- light and perfection -- afford help in connection with discernment?
J.T. Yes; as we see the Urim and Thummim in Christ, and come into accord with them, our discernment will be keener.
A.P-f. What should you look for in a believer who desires to break bread?
J.T. I should look for the evidence in him of the Holy Spirit. Of course, things precede that -- repentance, remission of sins, and baptism; but a Christian wanting to be numbered among those in the fellowship of God's Son ought to have the Holy Spirit.
What we may notice here, in addition to what we have been remarking, are the twelve "princes of the tribes ... heads of the thousands of Israel" (@Numbers 1:16), that are mentioned. These twelve men are as representative of God as are the twelve cakes inside, but are, of course, typical. Jehovah says, in verse 4, "And with you there shall be a man for every tribe, a man who is the head of his father's house". A man who *is* -- not one who *should be*, or who *is officially*, but who *is*. It is the man himself; and then it says, "These were those summoned" (verse 16); according to the footnote in the New Translation it is "those who were habitually called to undertake the matters of the assembly". These are capable men, representative of *conditions* essential to the order and safety of the assembly. Heaven, as it were, knows them and regards them. These men are representative of moral weight and power amongst the saints.
A.P.T. Your thought in bringing these twelve men
{371}
before us was not to limit it to *twelve*, but what is expressed in the idea universally? Those that may be received to the breaking of bread next Lord's day are of equal interest to Christ in their sphere locally as the assembly universally.
J.T. That is right; there is but one fellowship, which as to administration work locally. There is a link between these men out amongst the tribes, and what is inside.
C.A.M. You are looking on the tribes in this connection, as twelve tribes speaking of the saints in a universal way, rather than looking on any local company of people?
J.T. The instruction is in seeing how love in *many*, works. There is spiritual intelligence in unity in the administration of divine things. *We* have to leave aside the *mere number* twelve; it is a type. God wishes to convey to us that He looks upon us formed in love so that He can manipulate us at His pleasure; none of us will resist. We will just bow and accept "the good and acceptable and perfect will of God", (@Romans 12:2). These twelve men knew that, and any time they were summoned they were ready, as men of experience, formed in the divine nature. They think not of themselves, but of the welfare of the saints, and of what is due to God in His assembly. They are "expressed by their names", (verse 18).
J.T.Jr. Does all this apply in every local meeting?
J.T. Surely. The book of Numbers takes up the local and general side. You find in 1 and 2 Corinthians the antitype of Numbers. There is more about the tribes, in Numbers than in any book. The subject in this respect is important because it is the outside position where there is to be divine control. God would say to us, "If you are not governed by love, I cannot do anything with you". In @1 Corinthians 13 it says. "... the greater of these is love". Love is set forth like a picture for everybody to look at in that
{372}
chapter. It is the "way of more surpassing excellence" (@1 Corinthians 12:31) *shown*!
C.A.M. It would never do to lower the standard, because this is the day of love. We must not lose sight of the twelve tribes.
J.T. Exactly. Paul held to that when he spoke of "our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night", (@Acts 26:7)
{373}
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (4)
@Numbers 7:1 - 17; 84 - 89; 13:2 - 4, 27 - 34; 14:1 - 10
J.T. At our last reading we noted that the tribes were seen around the tent of meeting, evidently corresponding to their names on the breastplate, affording a picture of the kingdom of God -- God dwelling in an authoritative way among His people. Much follows in relation to that, especially as to the Levites, but chapter 7 teaches us how the position of the testimony is augmented by the wealth and intelligent unity that marked the tribes at the beginning, typical of Pentecost. It is a wonderful chapter, containing 89 verses. Then chapters 13 and 14 show the other side of the picture; the tribes, represented in the twelve men that are sent up, have the opportunity to see the land. It says in @Hebrews 4:2, "But the word of the report did not profit *them*, not being mixed with faith in those who heard". We have the unbelief of the saints seen, tending to disrupt the whole thought of God; so that the positive and the negative sides are before us now, and the bright relief with regard to the latter, in Caleb and Joshua, would represent a *remnant standing for God* so that the thought of God is secured, and the tribes go into the land, notwithstanding the unbelief here so flagrantly manifested.
J.S. Over against the general unbelief, the *glory* appears.
J.T. That is how God secured His end. Where there is a link in however few, as in Caleb and Joshua who held to the right thought, God will stand by them. The position here is analogous to our own.
J.S. General declension marked the public body.
J.T. Yes; the last verse read was that the whole assembly lifted up their voice, and cried. Refusal of
{374}
the testimony became general. The unfaithful testimony of ten spies brought out the general unbelief that existed.
W.G.T. Would chapter 7 correspond to Pentecost, and chapters 13 and 14 to the general declension?
J.T. Yes; in a general decline, God has recourse to His own resources, coming in Himself in glory to support the remnant.
W.B-w. Chapter 7 has the testimony in the wilderness in view, the anointed tabernacle.
J.T. Yes; it indicates the work of the Holy Spirit in the saints, so that the testimony is everything, particularly the altar; the minds of the princes are on the line of *sacrifice* in the dedication of the altar.
W.B-w. Would you link chapter 7 with @Exodus 40, where the tabernacle was set up?
J.T. Yes; it fits in there. There were twelve days devoted to the offerings of the princes, which opens up the great thought before them. It shows what wealth was there in intelligent unity, a wealth that provided discriminately for the Levites, as well as for God Himself. The dedication-gift is the great feature; the gift for the Levites is additional.
A.F.M. Does this chapter suggest the unity of the tribes, in what the princes offered?
J.T. I think so; you will notice the date: "And it came to pass on the day that Moses had completed the setting up of the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and hallowed it, and all the furniture thereof, and the altar and all its utensils, and had anointed them, and hallowed them, that the princes of Israel, the heads of their fathers¬ houses, the princes of the tribes, they that were over them that had been numbered, offered". It was their own initiative, it was not required of them. They offered on *that day*, and God was pleased with it and accepted it of them. During twelve days the princes offered, each on his
{375}
day; all this indicates the delight of God in this particular offering. You will notice the titles of the offerers: "The princes of Israel, the heads of their fathers¬ houses, the princes of the tribes, they that were over them that had been numbered". There is no doubt as to who they were.
C.A.M. In this princely setting, the saints are *equally* wealthy.
J.T. Yes; it seems to be that. They are representative men, and so what is presented denotes the condition of the tribes at the beginning -- the day on which the tabernacle was completed and anointed.
A.A.T. Are you associating that with Pentecost?
J.T. I think Pentecost is the antitype. There was beautiful unity with spiritual wealth and power on that day.
H.S.D. I suppose Barnabas would suggest a prince.
J.T. He would, indeed.
A.N.W. Do you take Pentecost to be the answer to the Lord's request in @John 17:20 - 22: "That they may be all one"? He says, "And I do not demand for these only, but also for those who believe on me through their word; that they may be all one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou hast given me I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one".
J.T. Pentecost answered, in principle, to the Lord's request for unity in His own, but not literally, for all who should believe on Him through the word of the apostles were not there. But great stress is laid on the wealth and unity manifest at Pentecost.
A.F.M. Would you think the offering in verses 3 - 9 was lower in character than what was offered later for the altar? Why was this more material one placed first?
J.T. It is on a lower level, and corresponds with
{376}
our giving in a material way to the support of the Levites.
A.F.M. The Lord's servants.
J.T. Yes, financially or otherwise; it is not equal to what follows, but fits in here as showing that the Levites were on the hearts of the princes in approaching God at the dedication of the altar. These princes had the general support of the testimony before them, and although the first offering is on a lower level, so to speak, than the second, it is of essential importance. The offerings for the Levites, however, are not included in the aggregate. "The dedication-gift of the altar" is more spiritual, typically.
F.H.L. Are not the princes representative in a peculiar way?
J.T. They are representative of the tribes here, but on moral grounds. Their gifts, therefore, indicate the general state of Israel as the tabernacle was anointed.
J.S. Not on an official ground, but what they were morally.
J.T. They are official in a sense, but not exactly like the Levites, or priests. They denote spiritual and moral power *acquired*.
J.E.H. Yes, wealth would be the result of what they were morally; that is to say, a prince is a man that has acquired power, like Jacob. "For as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed", (@Genesis 32:28).
A.A.T. At the beginning, we can see that these princes had their place, but in a day of breakdown, such as today, would you expect to see them?
J.T. Yes; the maintenance of the things of God always hinges, very largely, on such men, who show that they have to do with God, like Elijah. You have no mention of him until he appears in service; but according to James, he is a man of prayer, and that gave him power. He could say, "There shall not be
{377}
dew nor rain these years, except by my word", (@1 Kings 17:1). He had acquired that power with God, secretly. We do not know whom God may be raising up now, but one may be sure He has His men as need arises; it is a question, not so much of gift, as of moral power to lead amongst the saints. A leader according to God is one who has initiative and goes before the saints, as the ark did in the wilderness. This is much more than "suggesting a subject" and taking a lead in a Bible reading.
Ques. Do you not think these princes offered in the light of the whole assembly?
J.T. They did; it is a most remarkable expression of unity. There is no evidence of premeditated arrangement, although actually there may have been this; but they spiritually represent saints living in many parts, not in the same town. It is general unity expressed in the most substantial way; all had the same apprehension and appreciation of Christ. The work of God in various parts of the world is seen in this way.
A.F.M. I suppose it is really as these princes purposed in their hearts, so the result came out in this peculiar unity.
J.T. Christ being supreme in every heart, unity is bound to prevail in what we offer.
A.R. That is what takes place here; they come from every point of the compass to one centre.
J.T. Today we have to spread that over the whole world. These men were at different points of the compass in relation to the testimony, three from the standard of the camp of Judah, three from Reuben, three from Ephraim, and three from Dan; thus in the antitype they represent the saints universally.
F.M. I was just going to refer to the early part of Acts, as to whether certain men that came to light correspond with these princes; those in chapter 6, for instance.
{378}
J.T. They do. All through Acts you have such men coming into evidence. For instance, when Paul was about to sail to Syria after his work in Asia, Macedonia, and Greece, it says, "And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater (son) of Pyrrhus, a Berean; and of Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius and Timotheus of Derbe; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus", (@Acts 20:4). These would be great men, *spiritually*. They witnessed the fruit of the Spirit's work in their localities through Paul, and accompanied him from Greece. They represented the rich results of the work of God in their respective localities. Each is mentioned in this connection. As was remarked, Barnabas was a signal instance of a prince. He laid at the apostle's feet what would provide wagons for the Levites, but he was also possessed of spiritual wealth available for the assembly.
J.S. Peter standing up with the eleven would show the unity of the *twelve* at the outset.
J.T. Yes; it was observed by the crowd that heard him preach that those who stood with him had something also; the converted ones spoke to the *eleven* as well as to Peter, showing that they had discernment. Hence where God works with souls there will be discernment as to the divine provision made, whoever the vessels may be.
A.B.P. Peter and John *had* something: "... but what I have, this give I to thee", (@Acts 3:6).
J.T. The needed wealth was there; that is the idea.
R.D.G. Is it not significant that each wagon was offered by two princes?
J.T. Unity is also expressed in that. Two princes offered a wagon, and *each* one a bullock. Note that these bullocks were not to be sacrificed; but to draw the wagons through the wilderness, as burden-bearers, like the Levites were.
{379}
F.M. Would the deacons appointed in @Acts 6 be on the level of @Numbers 7?
J.T. Yes; the seven men full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom were marked by princely wealth and power. Their *service*, of course, was not to offer to God, but to minister to the temporal needs of the saints; that is, they ministered what others gave. In this there is a link with the early part of @Numbers 7, only the princes provided the oxen and wagons themselves. They were *givers*. Those at Antioch who were "well off" determined to give, and they gave, but they sent it to the elders in Jerusalem by the hands of Barnabas and Saul, who served as deacons.
A.N.W. What is the practical benefit in the recording of this perfect condition of things, if recovery of it is not to be expected?
J.T. There is recovery *in principle*. I think recovery is through the glory appearing, compare @Numbers 14:10,16 - 19, and kindred scriptures. Philadelphia is a remnant, no doubt, but then the Lord clothes it with the *whole thought*. "I also will keep thee", (@Revelation 3:10) He says. So that if we break bread today, we break bread in the light of all the tribes, so to speak; that is, the whole church. We do not break bread in relation merely to ourselves. We should never lose sight of all the saints. The loaf represents the whole church.
A.P. Here there is just *one* altar dedicated.
J.T. "Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of Jehovah came saying, Israel shall be thy name; and with the stones he built an altar in the name of Jehovah", (@1 Kings 18:31,32). He had the whole thought of Israel in mind.
A.B.P. Does the Lord suggest the need of princely service in @Luke 10:37, in saying, "Go and do thou likewise"?
{380}
He had provided the oil, and the wine, the beast, and the two pence.
J.T. Exactly; he would effect princely bounty and mercy in the neighbour.
A.P. What do you make of the fact that two wagons and four oxen were given to the sons of Gershon, and four wagons and eight oxen to Merari?
J.T. Moses did that, Jehovah having generally directed it. It is a distribution of wisdom; in the curtains Gershon had a lighter burden to carry; these were not so heavy to carry as the boards, pillars, etc. Merari had the heaviest burden; there is consideration in wisdom and in love to provide more for a servant according to his work. If a man has to take a long journey to reach the field of his labours, you would give him more money than to one going a shorter distance; that is the way this type works out. The saints ought to think of these things as interested in the work of God. Thus although the first part of the offerings here are not on the level of those for the dedication of the altar, still they are of great importance because you cannot expect burdens to be carried unless you help the carriers. In other words, if we wish the work of God to prosper we must provide these material things for the workers.
J.S. It is the principle of equalisation of the burden.
A.F.M. What about the sons of Kohath?
J.T. Their burdens were lighter, literally, than those of Gershon and Merari. They were to carry, "upon the *shoulder*", the holy things pertaining to "the service of the sanctuary". It typifies that part of our service that is more spiritual; it is almost priestly; in fact, the Kohathites are called *priests* in carrying the ark over Jordan.
A.P. Would the fact that the wagons were covered allude to the idea that in ministering to
{381}
servants, we have in mind much more than the fact that they have need? It is a *covered* wagon.
J.T. Yes; they are fully cared for. There is also a certain secrecy attached to Levitical service implied in *covered* wagons.
W.F.K. Do the things the princes bring suggest the death of Christ?
J.T. They do. The fine flour mingled with oil is the humanity of Christ. The "oblation" is His perfect manhood, but offered to God -- the fire bringing out its perfection. It is *mingled* with oil -- not *anointed* . There are two silver vessels; one of a hundred and thirty shekels, and the other, seventy, containing the fine flour; and one golden vessel of ten, which is full of incense. What is offered in these vessels alludes to the humanity of Christ, but the animals refer to the burnt offering, sin offering, and peace offering.
A.F.M. What is the difference between the silver and the golden vessels? The latter contained the incense.
J.T. I suppose, as has been often remarked, the silver alludes to the Lord effecting atonement in His holiness and rights of love. The cup of gold is a very much smaller vessel; it denotes Him as from the divine side -- Man, but His Person is implied. It is what He is *inside* for God -- incense.
C.A.M. How very suitable this gift was at this juncture!
J.T. It is a remarkable presentation of the work of God coming out in intelligent unity.
F.H.L. Would the fact that they were all equal suggest that the Spirit of God would take what is of Christ in us all, and put a perfect valuation on it?
J.T. Yes; God would show how His work develops in unity. What is offered denotes, typically, a wonderfully mature and full apprehension of Christ. God, at the beginning, thus shows what *He* can effect.
{382}
Even if failure came in afterwards, as it did, alas! He has established that point. It is human responsibility that leads to the failure, but God shows what He can effect. What we see here did not last long either in the type or antitype, but in it God makes clear that He can effect His great thoughts. In spite of human failure either in Israel or the church, all the divine thoughts are yea and amen in Christ. If these can be maintained for a month or a year, they can be maintained eternally.
W.B-w. Why does it take twelve days to get the offerings completed?
J.T. I think God is so pleased with the procedure that He would spread it out. Every one of these men deserved a day, all their hearts being, typically, full of Christ, and each offering being identical.
A.N.W. The Spirit had His own pleasure in each, for He repeats the procedure twelve times over.
F.M. It is very remarkable that it all comes to light without any appeal being made for it.
J.T. This feature should mark us all; it brings out the spontaneity of the work of God, and shows how the subjects of it are regulated by the light that comes to them. There was no irregularity, but perfect unity, expressed in the appreciation of Christ in certain of His varied glories as Man; He is seen here in His personal excellence as Man and in His great sacrificial features.
W.B-w. Would you say it would take great power in a prince to keep God engaged for a whole day, as seen in each of these offerings?
J.T. We may thus learn how God's beloved Son engages His heart; and not for one day only, but for eternity.
A.P. Psalm 119:164 says, "Seven times a day do I praise thee". Would that suggest a whole day?
J.T. Quite; it is the *perfection* of the service.
{383}
God intends that He should be sustained in the affections; the morning and the evening lamb (@Numbers 28), had the same value; and the same accompanying offerings.
A.B.P. Would not the wrestling of Jacob all night result in his being for the pleasure of heaven all day?
J.T. There is very little done amongst us unless there are men that wrestle with God. The man that does so is sure to be for God's pleasure. Jacob was conscious of this as he poured the drink offering on the pillar at Bethel.
A.R. In the oblation offering coming before the animals -- does it suggest that each man corresponds with Christ here in manhood?
J.T. It does; not as men often talk about Christ, and put Him above all other men and the like, instead of seeing that He is an entirely new order of man. Cain's offering was a meat offering, but he did not have the accompanying sin offering; but these men had all the offerings. Whilst each prince was himself occupying God and His people for the day, it was Christ really, presented in this four-fold way.
J.E.H. Do you think the glory of the tabernacle system as set up was fully entered into by the princes, spiritually, and that they were thus equipped with wealth and ready to offer?
J.T. You cannot say much about what they understood; but at Pentecost the saints understood, and so knew what they were doing. The types do not present the substance, but the shadow.
R.A.L. Typically, do we bring the sin offering at the Lord's day morning meeting?
J.T. You could not be there aside from it. If it were a question of our approaching God with respect to our sins, you would have to bring the sin offering first. As applied to us, they are taken up in the reverse order of that in which they appear in Leviticus; the order of the sacrifices in Leviticus has the divine
{384}
appreciation of Christ in view. The meat offering is first here (@Numbers 7), showing how full these men were of appreciation of Jesus as Man.
A.F.M. Say a word about the place which Moses occupied in verse 89.
J.T. Well, I think the aggregate of the offerings from verse 84 to the end of verse 88 is remarkable. First you have each man's offering by itself, then the aggregate -- called "the dedication-gift of the altar". It is, I think, to show that God is pleased with this aggregate of so much wealth in unity. It is not a lot of wealth presented by one man, and a little by another, but wealth in intelligent unity. And Moses went in to speak, but *God* would speak under these circumstances, because delighted with the scene; and that is what I understand to be the value of spiritual ministry early in the assembly as convened; it stimulates the worship of the saints. Moses intended to speak, but God spoke first, and in *majesty*; Moses "heard the voice speaking to him from off the mercy-seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubim". It is God speaking according to all that He is in Christ. This no doubt indicates the manner generally of the divine communications to Moses.
C.A.M. Say a further word about ministry coming first.
J.T. Well, ministry may be right at any time in the assembly, but a word like this, where God is pleased, often floods the hearts of the brethren so that the worship is augmented.
J.S. The worship would thus be on a higher level.
F.M. In the last clause of the verse, "... he spoke to him" -- Moses spoke to God.
A.F.M. Does Moses, in this case, represent a brother? I mean in application to us.
J.T. It would be authority. It is remarkable that in the end of Exodus, as the glory filled the
{385}
tabernacle, Moses could *not* enter, which would mean that authority is not necessary, because after the glory fills the tabernacle, it means, antitypically, that the saints are filled with glory. You do not need authority there. It is not that Moses's authority is set aside, but it is not needed under such circumstances. If the saints are filled with glory, there will be worship. Here God speaks first; then Moses speaks.
A.A.T. Is that how God communicates His mind today?
J.T. This is the principle of His speaking, as conditions please Him. Sometimes He has to rebuke us; but where the state is pleasing to God, then you get something in the way of direction for the assembly.
A.A.T. But through a brother?
J.T. Of course; the Spirit, as here, speaks through the saints.
J.S. A word *directly* after the breaking of bread would be quite in order.
F.H.L. In chapter 8:1, Jehovah spoke to Moses specifically.
J.T. If we counted up the number of times in which Jehovah spoke to Moses, they would be very impressive. The last clause of chapter 7 does not say *what* Moses said. It is just the fact that Moses had liberty to speak in the presence of the majesty presented, for God had set him free.
A.A.T. Why did He not communicate through Aaron?
J.T. He did in some cases, but Moses is the apostle. There are communications through Aaron that refer to *priestly* authority, but generally God speaks to Moses and the speaking through him is clothed with divine authority, like 1 and 2 Corinthians.
A.N.W. Is there any significance in the fact that the name of the divine Person speaking is not mentioned? It says, "Him" twice.
{386}
J.T. It is, I think, to bring out the majesty of the occasion; like @Colossians 1:19: "In him all the *fulness* was pleased to dwell". The fulness represents the Deity without this being stated.
G.L. How does the prayer meeting compare with what we are speaking of?
J.T. Prayer is made at the golden altar. The ground for this would be in the golden cups full of incense.
F.M. You made a reference to a word in the assembly. We have thought that a word should be given only when the meeting is rather low, but here it would seem there has been a very good expression of the fulness of the hearts of the saints Godward, and now He wants to say something to us.
J.T. That is the thought. There is nothing low about *this* position; it is on a very high level, typically.
C.A.M. Do you not think in connection with that we might be over anxious to take part in a morning meeting; whereas, it would be more profitable to hear a word from God, giving a sort of key to what He would engage us with?
J.T. That is right. The passing of the bread, the cup, and the box requires prolonged silence, especially in a meeting of sixty or seventy, and this necessitates spiritual power. The *memorial* does not require any activity; it is a *calling to mind* of Christ, which requires silence in power, and I believe this gives the Holy Spirit an opportunity to effect a condition of readiness for divine communications. God would speak and give great impulse to the procedure of the worship.
A.A.T. At that moment?
J.T. Yes; it is the assembly; we sit there in the freedom of sons. Of course, a word might be right later in the meeting too, but I think if the conditions
{387}
are suitable, God would give a word to stimulate and regulate our minds and affections.
A.F.M. You mean directly after the elements were passed around, there would be liberty for a brother to arise and communicate the mind of God.
J.T. I think so; if done in a priestly way, without prolonging it, it would have a very great effect. Brevity helps, as in all participation in the assembly.
C.A.M. I take it the speaker would be brief, inasmuch as he would he impressed by the wealth that was there, and would make room for it.
J.T. Here the first prince that offered would understand that *eleven others* were to follow! God would have participation in the assembly spread out, all His sons being, normally, delightful to Him. He knows the wealth is there and would have it expressed in variety. The wealth is in the whole company, not only in those who take part audibly.
A.P.T. Is Nahshon indicative of one who gives a good lead? He is first in the order of service.
J.T. Yes; he represents one who understands that his position is given sovereignly -- a most important matter in the assembly. It is remarkable, in this connection, to see how the names of the offerers are emphasised.
W.B-w. Would you say the dedication-gift for the altar was higher than the gifts to the Levites?
J.T. I think so; the latter are not included in the aggregate. Verse 84 says, "This was the dedication-gift of the altar, on the day when it was anointed, from the princes of Israel". Then you have a list of their offerings, which does not include the wagons or the burden bullocks.
C.A.M. I want to ask as to the box in the morning meeting: Would it be right to bring that into the first part of this chapter?
J.T. I think so. This chapter is a warrant for the box as standing in relation to the Lord's supper.
{388}
A.R. It is put on a high level. In verse 3 it says, "They brought their offering before Jehovah", and at the end of the verse it says, "... presented them before the tabernacle", Then it says, "Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, Take it of them, and they shall be for the performance of the service of the tent of meeting, and thou shalt give them unto the Levites".
J.T. Jehovah's acceptance shows the value of this gift. It was evidently a question as to whether it should fit in here. Moses, it seems, waited, and Jehovah says, "Take it of them". I suppose that is the kind of hesitation there has been about the box. Jehovah says, "Take it of them". It is worthy of such an occasion -- these burden bullocks and covered wagons. It is not quite up to the level of the dedication-gift that alludes to what is *entirely spiritual*, typically.
A.P. The standard of measurement with regard to the dedication is a little different -- "according to the shekel of the sanctuary".
J.T. Yes, and the material, silver and gold, is different from wagon material. There is nothing said as to the size or quality of the wagons, nor of the age of the oxen. I think God would have us to differentiate between what is *excellent* and what is *more excellent*. The dedication-gift is *more excellent*; it is the highest order of giving; it is worship. The vessels are *full*, too.
C.A.M. Besides, there is no thought of meeting any need, or any kind of requirement, in it.
J.T. No, it is spiritual wealth yielded to God in the spirit of sonship. The priests, of course, got their portion out of these offerings; and in that way, the whole system was being ministered to.
A.P. Would you say, possibly, that there will not be any need for the first part in eternity; whereas, the substance of the dedication-gift will go through?
{389}
J.T. The gift, of course, is the fruit of love. The love behind it will go through; only this expression of it will not go through. There will be no need for it there, but there will be the need of ministering to *God* there.
A.F.M. The notices, I suppose, enter the administrative side of the assembly, and the box would stand in that relation.
J.T. Just so; what the box contains is administrative, it is to provide for Levitical and other needs.
C.A.M. In principle, we are not ready to go to heaven, to have part in the assembly in the true sense, until that side of the position is attended to.
J.T. That is right; righteous obligations must be met. The epistle to the Romans says nothing about going to heaven; it is a question of righteousness -- how believers are adjusted as to it and how it is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after Spirit: Then we can go up, compare @Psalm 15.
A.B.P. Judas Iscariote, (@John 12), brought in the thought of the poor having need, when the affections of the saints (represented in Mary) had been drawn out to the Person of Christ.
J.T. Consideration for the poor has its own importance, but it should not be introduced when the saints are engaged in worship. Thus the collection is rightly at the threshold, so to speak, of the assembly. We know the Lord did not neglect the poor, but He would not allow Judas to divert those present from Mary's service by bringing in the subject of their need.
F.M. Would this be in keeping with the wilderness position?
J.T. Quite; this is the wilderness book. But while the external position is the wilderness, we are in the precincts of the sanctuary -- in it indeed- -- -and, spiritually, what is presented enters inside. At the end Moses went in. God speaks *there*, and Moses speaks to Him. Then, chapter 8, we have the lamps
{390}
lighted over against the candlestick. The quality and beauty of the candlestick are in evidence. How fitting it is after the instruction about the tribes and their relation to the tent of meeting, the Levite's service, the purging of the camp, the law of trespass, the law of jealousies, and the law of Nazariteship, that this should come in. This wealth accrues from all these exercises. In the next chapter the Spirit of God goes back to the Levites again, and they are presented as a wave-offering to God. You can understand it from this chapter. The saints are worthy to be presented to God; they are so full of wealth. Chapter 7 is full of Christ seen in the offerings.
W.F.K. Why does God speak from the mercy-seat, which was on the ark, from between the cherubim?
J.T. It would denote mercy; the ark is simply Christ personally as Man here; and then the cherubim are God's judicial attributes. It is a wonderful combination entering into this setting, and gives character to the speaking.
H.S.D. It inspired the heart of Moses with liberty in approaching God. The mercy-seat is there.
J.T. That would allay what might cause fear -- "perfect love casts out fear", (@1 John 4:18).
F.M. After all this the passover comes in (chapter 9); why is this?
J.T. It is to rebuke any who are neglectful as to the divine requirements. Such are amenable to discipline. It also makes provision for those who may be weak or hindered by circumstances. The passover is the groundwork of everything and God would insist on it, for He would have all His people near Him and in the spiritual wealth of which we have been speaking. No one should be absent. In @Acts 2 they were *all* together in one place; none was absent. That is to secure the unity. There is much neglect
{391}
and carelessness amongst the people of God, which He would rebuke. Chapter 9 is to this end. If will is not active a provision of mercy is made, so that one can keep the passover in the second month instead of the first.
F.M. But if one deliberately stays away and says, 'It is no matter to me at all', the Lord is displeased with him.
J.T. He is cut off from his people. Here it is what you are *not* doing -- you are not partaking of the passover. You are not attending the meetings, so to speak, owning with your brethren the rights of God.
R.D.G. Would you say that since Pentecost the aggregate has never been equal to the standard?
J.T. In a general way you may say that. I would not exactly say "since" Pentecost, because the closing verses of @Acts 2 cover a comparatively long period. The Ho]y Spirit gives a description of the conditions among the saints in Jerusalem, to which the Lord added.
{392}
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (6)
@Numbers 24:2 - 5; 26:52 - 56; 30:1 - 5; 31:1 - 6
A.N.W. You remarked that this book yields more instruction than any other as to the tribes. Is this because it is a wilderness book?
J.T. That is the explanation of what was said; it is in the wilderness that love is tested, and the gist of our subject is love. We are under the hand of God so that He may manipulate us and use us as He pleases. These wilderness circumstances supremely test our tribal relations. In chapter 26 they are taken account of for the inheritance; "according to the names of the tribes of their fathers shall they inherit"; it is the *positive* side of things -- the testimony that came in early in the book. The spies brought down the tidings of the land, but the testimony was not received in faith -- not mixed with faith (@Hebrews 4:2); so that instead of entering into the land then, they had to remain thirty-eight years in the wilderness. In chapter 26 *another generation* is in view.
F.L. In this way we are led through Romans, Colossians, and Ephesians -- the wilderness and the land; the testings and responsibility, and then the purpose of God.
J.T. Romans fits in with Exodus and the early part of Numbers; indeed, Romans may be said to take us to the end of the wilderness; whereas, Colossians is *entering* and Ephesians is *in* the land. Romans furnishes us also with light as to the land, and this is in view in @Numbers 26. We are called according to purpose in @Romans 8 28; "are led by the Spirit of God" in verse 14; and the challenge in verse 33 is, "Who shall bring an accusation against
{393}
God's elect?" These scriptures allude to the types in Numbers, from chapter 21 onwards.
A.P. Is it not much more difficult to maintain the idea of twelve when there is opposition?
J.T. We prove that in a practical way, and one effort in opposition is generally to break up unity; but throughout Scripture you have the thought that the twelve tribes must be carried forward, and love will see that this is done. The exercise should always be to have the saints stand *with* the truth, that none should be lost through the enemy's efforts.
A.F.M. I suppose we get great help in chapter 21 as to the power that is on our side in view of reaching the point before us in chapter 24.
J.T. The princes seen in chapter 7 as possessing wealth and disposing of it in unity are now seen in chapter 21 as digging the well, showing that something more was needed than what they had done earlier. Changed circumstances require arduous means, so that the saints may be in them according to God. Digging is attended with great labour, but love is equal to every exigency of the wilderness; it never fails. The princes as digging under the direction of the law-giver, show they are not independent of divine rule.
F.L. Would there be the suggestion in chapter 7 of the wealth we inherit? In chapter 21 it is exercise in relation to a new condition of things.
J.T. Yes, Israel had come into much wealth at Sinai; but now, the brazen serpent having come in, the flesh is seen as needing to be dealt with effectively. It stood in the way, hindering the blessing. The digging refers to this -- all typifying what we get in @Romans 8, and it may be taken to represent the readiness with which those who are spiritual do what is needful for the saints. It is one thing, as in the possession of wealth to be dispensing it to others, but another thing to be *digging* for them. Love takes on
{394}
the most onerous kind of work, as may be required.
J.S. Is it a question of what the people arrived at spiritually in @Numbers 21; the water was there, but they had to dig for it?
J.T. Water is seen to be there *always*: "For they drank of a spiritual rock which followed them: (now the rock was the Christ)", (@1 Corinthians 10:4). But @Numbers 21 brings out a new feature. Typically a new state has come -- "Ye are not in flesh but in Spirit" -- and so the old has to be set aside; hence the digging of the well; it is the removal of that which hinders the action of the Spirit. The word 'Lawgiver' there means that spiritual men will do the most exercising kind of thing under rule, and not in independency.
A.F.M. To dig for water by using *staves*, would be very exercising work.
J.T. The word here translated 'staves' indicates experience with God, that is, what one leans upon for support in his walk.
A.N.W. Unity is there also, for it says the princes digged the *well*. There is *one* well.
J.T. They are successful, too; Israel's song shows the princes had reached the desired results. The allusion is to the removal of what hinders the free action of the Spirit in believers.
J.S. In connection with what lay ahead of them, I suppose new resources were necessary.
J.T. Yes; the entrance to Canaan was imminent, and now they had power to move forward from one point to another with no evidence of any hindrance; (@Numbers 21:19,20). At length they reached "the top of Pisgah, which looks over the surface of the waste". At this vantage point they were able to take account of all that God had been to them in the wilderness. Earlier Moses was to smite or speak to the rock, but here the task is of digging under the direction of the lawgiver.
{395}
J.S. Would it refer to the hidden resources of the Spirit?
J.T. I think so. We begin to clear away what hinders the free action of the Spirit. Balaam's prophecies bring out what God is to His people in a hidden way, corresponding with the action of the princes. Satan discerning that he cannot overcome or hinder us from moving on, because of the unhindered activity of the Spirit in us, attacks us in this way, for there is no hope of his impeding our progress. Believers are here seen in type as having power to go forward by the Spirit in them. The Christian at this juncture has discovered his power and is going into the land on his own feet, as it were. The enemy's attempt to overcome us by a frontal effort is useless, so he has recourse to hidden means, and Balaam is his instrument; but God is ever greater than Satan and defeats his efforts. Balaam was an unregenerate man who suffers for his sins later, but in the meantime he brings out what God is for His people; One who can turn even such a bad man as that into a means of pronouncing our blessing. He failed to bring an accusation against God's elect. In the passage we read Balaam does not again seek for enchantments; he "saw Israel dwelling in tents *according to his tribes*"; and then "the Spirit of God came upon him".
A.F.M. Does the order in which they appeared to Balaam in tents according to tribes correspond with the place they had in the breastplate?
J.T. That is what I understand. In truth the intercession of Christ above nullifies the devil's efforts. @Romans 8:34 corresponds. In the vision of the Almighty, Balaam sees Israel as God saw them, they are dwelling in tents according to their tribes. The Spirit of God having come on Balaam, he sees as God sees. It was not his primary thought to bless Israel, but God compels him to do so, and
{396}
he gives up enchantments. He sees Israel dwelling according to his tribes. That is why I thought this passage contributes to our subject. It is the Israel of God from this point of view, and the order in which they are seen by Balaam.
J.S. Do we see here the triumph of love in bringing them to this -- Israel dwelling in this order?
J.T. Yes; they are not disconcerted through the vicissitudes of the wilderness. They came out of Egypt five in rank and are now going into the land in tribal order. The Spirit is not said to have been upon Balaam before, but now that he abandons his enchantments and sets his face towards the wilderness (where Israel was), the Spirit of God comes upon him and enables him to see the people in the vision of the Almighty. There is nothing in a way so encouraging as seeing, as we do here, how God can overthrow our greatest enemies apart from us.
A.P. Is there not much in the book of Revelation to support that, for instance, in chapter 7 -- the holding in check of the four winds? The people of God evidently knew nothing about that.
J.T. "If God be for us, who against us?" (@Romans 8:31).
A.F.M. Do you regard this utterance of Balaam as illustrative of what we are in Christ or in the Spirit?
J.T. It is the Romans position; we are in Christ there, but we are also in the Spirit. "In Christ" is status, but "in the Spirit" is power. "Balaam the son of Beor *saith*". The footnote in the New Translation helps as to the word 'saith': it has the significance of an oracle. Balaam proceeds: "... who seeth the vision of the Almighty, who falleth down, and who hath his eyes open; how goodly are thy tents, Jacob, and thy tabernacles, Israel". Now that he has definitely turned towards Israel the Spirit speaks through him.
A.R. God puts words in his mouth; but in the
{397}
light of @Numbers 21, does not the Spirit enable us to speak?
J.T. Yes; Israel sings to the well there, but chapters 22, 23, and 24 are to bring out the truth that God is *for* us, that He overcomes every obstacle or enemy against us.
F.L. "But thanks to God, who gives us the victory", (@1 Corinthians 15:57).
J.T. Exactly; in @Romans 8 the apostle is triumphant. "We *more than conquer*".
T.A. The position of Israel here typically is, "*Ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit", (@Romans 8:9).
J.T. Yes; Israel is viewed here abstractly -- according to what they were in the purpose of God. Balak would henceforth know; he would see by what happened how God was with Israel, and hence they could not be overcome.
C.A.M. It is an immense thing to lay hold of the fact that there is a mighty power available to the saints that nothing can overcome.
J.T. That is what we are to learn from these three chapters. You are ready for them now in that you have come to realise the power in yourself. The digging of the princes means that you have come to find your feet in spiritual power.
J.S. Are the people now viewed as in the Spirit, like @Romans 8?
J.T. Yes; that is the position. "There is then now no condemnation" (verse 1), and "ye are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you" (verse 9).
J.S. With regard to Israel, there might be a tendency to discredit conditions in the camp; whereas, here we see the prophecy of Balaam in favour of the people as they dwell according to the tribes.
J.T. That is right. We are too ready to speak negatively about them. If you apply the antitype, normally, what is inside is pleasing to God. Christians
{398}
who recognise the Spirit fulfil righteousness, whether in their houses or in their assemblies. They are as delightful inside as they are outside if love is active. This section of Numbers contemplates the presence and work of the Spirit in the saints. Thus in principle, at least, what Balaam says here corresponds with what the saints are practically.
A.F.M. In result, these people can now be numbered, as in chapter 26.
J.T. They are numbered after the question of Balaam's efforts against them is dealt with; and also a later effort through "the counsel of Balaam". The latter was met by Phinehas -- not princes now, but a priest who deals with the working of the flesh in its hideous efforts through social links; chapter 25. Then in chapter 31, *all the tribes* are brought into this great conflict with Midian. This attack, which Phinehas settled *morally*, is now met to the complete overthrow of Midian -- the instrument Satan had used.
Now between chapters 25 and 31, you have the numbering for the land in chapter 26, and the morning and evening sacrifices, etc., in chapters 28 and 29 -- the latter showing how God is considered for by us. Then the question of vows in chapter 30, and the war against Midian by the tribes. That is the order of the truth of these chapters.
F.L. It is really dealing with a new generation. The old having gone, and now "all things are become new".
J.T. Romans lays the basis for that -- a new generation in the Spirit. That is what is in view in @Numbers 26.
A.F.M. It is a great thing in our histories when we are able to take account of ourselves in that way; as not in the old but in the new. We are a good deal hampered by the flesh, but we should allow the Spirit to work in us and form us so that we are with Him
{399}
in what God has wrought, as it says, "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation", (@2 Corinthians 5:17).
W.B-w. Is there a difference in these positions? In chapter 22 Israel encamped in the plains of Moab; here in chapter 26, it is by Jordan near Jericho.
J.T. We are now very near Canaan. That ought to thrill every heart. See how God has brought us through! All this is preliminary to going in.
W.B-w. Why do we have Phinehas the priest in chapter 25?
J.T. To call attention to the *priestly* side; without the priestly state there is no possibility of going forward.
J.S. Why is it a thousand for each tribe; chapter 31?
J.T. It would be a full representation of each tribe. Then Phinehas with "the holy instruments" would call attention to the priestly side; not so much officially, because Eleazar was still the high priest, but the *reality* of the priesthood in a young man, answering to: "Youthful lusts flee, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart", (@2 Timothy 2:22). We cannot get on without this element -- of holiness involving power to overcome.
J.S. Marked by spiritual vigour.
J.T. Also skill in dealing with evil.
W.B-w. Phinehas becomes a military man.
J.T. In chapter 31 he represents the priestly element in war, because we are so prone to be natural and to allow natural feeling in conflict. The overthrow of the Midianites should be complete on the lines of holiness and yet, as the chapter shows, there should be nothing lost that is of value in Midian. The spoil is enormous and everything that can be used in the testimony of God is preserved through this war; the chapter is a very remarkable one.
{400}
A.N.W. Will you set the thought of this vow in its place -- chapter 30?
J.T. We have spoken of chapters 25 and 26. Chapters 28 and 29 refer to what is due to God at this juncture. Are we lovers of God, and hence provide His offerings every day? The principle is: Can we consider for God a whole day, a whole week, a whole month, and a whole year? Chapters 28 and 29 stand together. Chapter 30 is a question of whether we are men and women, so to speak; whether we are quitting ourselves like men; that is to say: Am I as good as my word, or am I a mere covenant-maker and covenant-breaker?
A.F.M. It says, "Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay", (@Ecclesiastes 5:5).
J.T. This is a very important part of the truth because we are so fickle, so mean in making a covenant and not living up to it.
A.A.T. Did Hannah make a vow in connection with Samuel?
J.T. She did; she is a good illustration of a person who keeps a vow. Her husband did not say no to it. It is a question of whether a woman's father or husband says no, or is silent as to her vow. It applies to the general profession -- people are baptised and profess to partake of the Lord's supper in Christendom and God does not say no to them, but lets it stand. The position for the whole of Christendom is a solemn one -- the vow, so to speak, is allowed to stand, and they are responsible.
F.L. We are brought back to the covenant every Lord's day. The thought of this should stir us up as to how far we are faithful to the covenant of God.
J.T. We have already seen in @Exodus 24 how God entered into covenant with His people and how they accepted it, and entered into it too. @Numbers 30 is to bring this home to us. God says, as it were:
{401}
You have been baptised and have partaken of the Lord's supper and I have not forbidden you, all that is involved in it stands. There is no escape for Christendom, there is no escape for any of us if we are untrue to the covenant.
J.S. Do you view social and religious conditions in Christendom as set forth in Moab here?
J.T. Quite. We have to understand how to go to war with the Midianites and how to get the spoil. One would urge the brethren to read chapter 31, it is a remarkable chapter, the detail with which the instructions are given as to what is to be kept and what is not to be kept for use; the things that are kept are passed through fire and water; and then it ends with an enormous spoil in which Jehovah participates. The spoil we have today from wars similar to this is very great.
W.B-w. Are we responsible to get those spoils?
J.T. I think so. It is a question of the revival of the truth of the assembly. Phinehas represents what *one man* may do. The war is extended, including all the tribes. God used one man, at first, but when the warfare is entered into, the whole assembly is involved; it is a question of taking what is of God out of hands in which it should not be.
A.F.M. Who does Eleazar represent?
J.T. Eleazar is the official priest, or Christ personally, but Phinehas is the element of priesthood in the youth. There is no hope of our success aside from holiness in the young people; that is, power to deal with the flesh. One man is used to deal with things morally, but you cannot confine the testimony to one man; it is Christ and the assembly -- all Israel, including Moses and Eleazar. That is the ground *we* are on now. It is the full position.
F.L. That is what the Spirit of God signifies in Malachi, this position of Phinehas and what follows.
{402}
J.T. Yes. It is in Malachi you get what God commanded Moses for "*all* Israel".
J.S. Reverting to the warfare, does it set forth the fact that all Israel takes part, representing what we should do in a universal way in relation to the testimony?
J.T. That is the idea. It is the wide position that we are on. Chapter 31 is most important as showing what great results may accrue to us in dealing with Midian; that is, all social things that are so destructive to spirituality amongst us. It is seen full-blown in the Protestant denominations, especially in the Anglican system.
W.G.T. Do you regard Midian as a class as better than Amalek?
J.T. Well, they are more respectable people, as we say, Amalek would not succeed where Midian would. It is a question of social distinctions. The Anglican Church corresponds throughout with the world in its social gradations. And yet there is -- or, rather, was -- in that system much that was of God. Amalek is specially a wilderness enemy. It is Satan operating in the flesh, attacking especially the hindmost, all those that are lagging behind among us, see @Deuteronomy 25:17,18. Amalek is the kind of enemy that attacks Christians who rarely attend the meetings, who are on the edge of the camp -- stragglers and weaklings. But Midian is the social side. Phinehas slew a prince of Israel and a princess of Midian, in jealous zeal for Jehovah.
A.A.T. Midian then stands for social distinction.
J.T. Yes. The Midianites were distinguished in that way. Kings and princes are specially prominent in their history. Here *five* kings of Midian are said to have been slain. They were also marked by much jewellery.
A.P.T. Is the attack of Midian more frontal than that of Amalek at the rear?
{403}
J.T. That is right. Amalek's would seem to be a harassing sort of movement. He will not succeed where there are spiritual people, but where there are unspiritual people; the opposition of Midian is against a spiritual people. The Spirit typically had been recognised by Israel. This may be true of some, and yet they make much of distinctions in the flesh. Satan can work very successfully in such an atmosphere as that. Christendom, as we said, is largely built up on such distinctions. Those in the revival of the truth a hundred years ago had to face this opposition. It was just the world and all that goes with it christianised; both status and education had a place among Christians.
A.P.T. In chapter 25 Midian came in by the front door, as it were. It says, "in the sight of Moses and in the sight of the whole assembly", whereas Amalek would get in insidiously, or by the back door.
F.L. Mr. Newton taught in Plymouth that the Spirit of God in this age would work through gentlemen and not through the poorer classes.
A.F.M. Tell us how all this spoil could be taken from the Midianites, and yet become serviceable for God and the people of Israel.
J.T. The great religious bodies that existed, say, a hundred years ago, were possessed of a great deal of wealth. The Church of England, for example, had nearly all the truth professedly, and so had the Presbyterians. The idea is to get all that was possessed by these bodies and bring it through the fire and water; that is, all is to be purified by the application of the death of Christ. Any element that tended to damage Israel must be destroyed; all else must be saved. That is, I believe, the meaning of the great spoil in this chapter.
A.F.M. They had not right thoughts about the sonship of Christ, for they held that He was begotten before all worlds as well as in time.
{404}
J.T. The thought of His sonship they have, but beclouded by the error you mention. Generally, they had nearly all the great features of Christianity.
A.N.W. The truth of the Lord's sonship was not totally unknown a hundred years ago.
J.T. No; it was held in the eighteenth century, and certain men early in the nineteenth century had it, too, and it has been held from time to time ever since.
A.P. They had it in the first century!
J.T. That is the most important fact. There is no assertion of our Lord's sonship either by Himself or the apostles other than what is involved in His incarnation. As far as Scripture shows, Paul was the first to announce Christ's sonship and he "preached" Jesus, that He is Son of God; (@Acts 9).
C.A.M. This action of the water and the fire has been going on through all these centuries.
J.T. I think it has been more drastic during the last one hundred years than in any period since apostolic times. God has been applying the truth of the death of Christ by the power of the Spirit either as fire or as water. The warfare with a thousand out of each tribe did not take place at the Reformation; it did not come to light there. There was no proper recognition of the assembly at that time. "The wars of the Lord" would, of course, include the Reformation, but the type before us goes further. It is a very formal matter carefully ordered under Moses and was his last battle. Full official divine authority, tribal unity, priestly intelligence and holiness mark this conflict; and the results are in keeping with the forces employed.
A.N.W. Say a little more as to why a thousand men are secured from each tribe.
J.T. I think it would mean that the saints are to be secured as of the assembly. That is, to get them in relation to the working of love. The assembly
{405}
today is the divine formation for the working of love, corresponding with the tribes of old. So we seek to get our brethren for the assembly, that is the idea; and we are to move together as of the assembly.
W.B-w. We are lined up locally.
J.T. Yes, and generally, too. The order of combat is universal.
J.S. The spoil we have today is the deliverance of God's people from these systems.
J.T. That is right. We want to get them all, and God's terms are water and fire.
A.F.M. What about the water? I can understand the fire.
J.T. Fire is more drastic; both refer to the death of Christ. The two figures are for differentiality as to certain elements that are recovered. We are to snatch people out of the fire, hating the garment spotted by the flesh. It must be hatred of evil *because it is evil*, and has to be judged drastically as we rescue from it what is of God. Fire would destroy garments, while water would cleanse them; but fire will not destroy gold but purify it.
W.B-w. "Harassed the Midianites". Why harass them?
J.T. Do not let them rest; now it is by the steady ministry and practice of the truth.
J.T. Harassing is ordered in chapter 25, but in chapter 31 it is *avenging*. God hates what the Midianites represent. Our feelings as to evil are generally shallow.
J.W.D. In what way would warfare such as you get in @Ephesians 6:12 be different from this? It says, "Because our struggle is not against blood and flesh ... but against spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies".
J.T. That is in Canaan.
J.W.D. What form would that take?
J.T. Midianitish warfare is Corinthians. The
{406}
Midianitish element had got in at Corinth. Ephesian warfare is in the land; the instruction as to it is largely as to *armour*, but there is power to strike out in a positive way with the sword of the Spirit and in the gospel.
Ques. Would the house of Stephanas represent Phinehas?
J.T. Just so.
J.S. "Come out from the midst of them, and touch not what is unclean", (@2 Corinthians 6:17).
A.N.W. Referring to our brother's question, do chapters 23 and 24 give the character of Ephesian warfare? It was of a "spiritual wickedness" character.
J.T. *God* is doing the fighting there. It is a phase of wilderness conflict. Numbers is the wilderness; the conflict in the land is Ephesians.
A.R. What is the idea of the gold in the end of the chapter being offered up to Jehovah and then being put into the tent of meeting as a memorial (verses 48 - 54)?
J.T. It shows how our place with God is enhanced by such spoil from conflict. It is a memorial of the children of Israel before Jehovah in the sanctuary. Thus the saints become greater practically through such conflict; we are consciously richer in the assembly through it.
R.D.G. The spoil of Gideon from the Midianites became a snare to him.
J.T. Just so, this is brought into the sanctuary by Moses and Eleazar; but Moses and Eleazar were not with Gideon, and things were on a much lower ground in Judges. The sanctuary is scarcely alluded to in that book.
R.D.G. How would that apply today?
J.T. If you do not devote the spoil of conflict to God, the flesh will take pride in it, and it will become a snare.
{407}
There are one or two things more that ought to be noted before we close. First, the daughters of Zelophehad claiming their inheritance. This is an important subject, coming in after the second numbering of the people; they came forward to claim their inheritance, and in doing so, confessed that their father died in his own sin, that he was not in the band of Korah, and so was not a party man. Jehovah says, "The daughters of Zelophehad speak right". (@Numbers 27:7) There were five of them and their speaking brought in a new law, or principle, in Israel, which honoured them in this way.
J.S. How would you apply that now?
J.T. It is seen in God distinguishing persons who value what He gives, for He has His own way of distinguishing us. These women ask for a possession among the brethren of their father, and Jehovah accordingly establishes an ordinance that if a man die and leave an inheritance and there is no son, his daughter should have it. Here these daughters valued it, and they should have it. That is, what comes down to us as from God we value, and He says we shall possess it.
J.S. The claim being by women would represent the subjective element.
J.T. Yes. They claimed it, and God valued their claim. In the last chapter of the book the heads of the tribe to which these women belonged said in effect, "This is not balanced, our tribe will suffer". I mean, you get the idea of a tribe valuing itself, so to speak; that is to say, a Christian valuing the place he has in the counsels of God, does not want it impaired or minimised. He is not like Benjamin, who became almost annihilated through his folly. The tribe of Manasseh wanted to be maintained according to God, so that another principle arises in that chapter, that these women who came in for the inheritance must marry within their own tribe;
{408}
they must not go outside; it might be said the tribe was selfish, but it was not; it is love working to keep things as God would have them, according to His counsels.
T.H. The "self-building up in love" of the body in @Ephesians 4:16 -- would that correspond?
J.T. It would. The thought of God in the body is apprehended and we build accordingly.
A.F.M. So they marry in their own tribe; is that not an important word for us today?
J.T. Yes; it is a very fine ending for the book of Numbers. In chapter 1, they are numbered; in chapter 2, they are set around the tabernacle militarily; in chapter 7, their princes are seen in their wealth in unity offering for the dedication of the *altar*, that is, their minds are set on *suffering*. It is a beautiful setting for the start in the wilderness. Then you have the spies, one from each tribe, their testimony as to the land coming in -- the gospel of heaven, as we might say; "the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ", (@Ephesians 3:8). The spies brought down that testimony, but it was not received. Then the princes are seen *digging*; that is, they resort to other occupation to meet the new exigency in the wilderness. There must be water in this way, not by speaking to the rock, but by digging; that is, to get rid of what hinders the Spirit when Satan attacks through Balak. It is a question of accusing God's elect. At that point the beauty of Israel comes to light in the vision of the Almighty, as if God would say, 'How lovely they are!' Thus instead of cursing Israel, Balaam is forced to bless them "altogether". The next thing is, Can Satan corrupt the saints through the flesh? Yes, he can, and uses Balaam who taught Balak to cast a snare before the sons of Israel. All that is dealt with by the tribes militarily, but by a limited number; not six hundred thousand, but twelve thousand; that great
{409}
conflict secured immense spoils, so that the saints are enhanced by it in the tent of meeting.
Then, the inheritance is a collateral thing. The saints, at this point, as having recognised the Spirit, begin to value Canaan. The daughters of Zelophehad show they want a place there; they did not want to lose anything of their inheritance; and the tribes, as answering to the mind of God, are preserved intact in the last chapter.
{410}
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (7)
@Deuteronomy 27:11 - 14; 33:1 - 29
F.L. Do you see anything in the groupings here -- the first six tribes are connected with blessing and the other with cursing?
J.T. Yes; the first six, connected with blessing, are more distinguished; these stand on mount Gerizim; they are Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph and Benjamin. The second six stand on mount Ebal: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali; and are inclusive of the children of the maidservants. The moral point is that the acceptance of the responsibility as to blessing and cursing is equally divided. We are prone to put responsibilities on certain ones and to lighten them on others. The passage would teach us that all are to share the responsibility. The matter is in our own hands, as it were, God had brought us to the point of the blessing. The people are to say, "Amen" as the Levites read out the cursings; the blessings are not given here. The mountains were over against each other, so that the geographical setting is remarkable spiritually. The viewpoint of this position was toward the going down of the sun. The allusion to it might help us; it says, "And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah thy God hath brought thee into the land ... toward the going down of the sun ... beside the oaks of Moreh", (chapter 11:29,30). That is the position indicated by Moses, which they could view across the Jordan before they entered the land. The link is with Gilgal and the oaks of Moreh, so that, spiritually, the geographical surroundings are most advantageous; and as having entered they were to go there at once and put the blessing on mount Gerizim and the curse on mount Ebal. Then the
{411}
people were to say, "Amen". But the blessings are left out, sorrowful to say, as if the failure of the people is indicated at the outset; that is, the law perfected nothing, it awaited the Lord Jesus to come in and accomplish redemption before we could have the blessing. But still the blessings were in the mind of God, for the first mention of the tribes in Genesis is that they are blessed, as we see in chapter 33 of this book; they are blessed and are viewed thus.
F.L. Does not the selection of the first six for blessing suggest that the blessing is held in reserve for Judah, Levi, and Joseph are in it, those whom the sovereignty of God has marked off for blessing?
J.T. The beginning of chapter 27 makes provision for the blessing; even though it is not immediately, it will be there. That is, "And there shalt thou build an altar to Jehovah thy God, an altar of stones". "And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly" (verses 5 - 8). The presence of the burnt offerings and the peace offerings and the rejoicing, alongside the writing of the law points to the securing of the blessing, however distant.
F.L. So the last chapter of the Revelation refers to the "root and offspring of David"; would that follow out what you were saying?
J.T. Yes; our Lord sprang from Judah, so there is a guarantee in those tribes of the fulfilment of the counsels of God.
A.F.M. Would you mind referring to the next chapter, where there are four references to blessing and cursing dependent upon obedience? It says, "If thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of Jehovah thy God" (verse 2), etc.
J.T. It is brought in there less formally. The ground on which the blessing is is generally stated; but prominence being given to the curse is very sorrowful as pointing to what actually happened, in that the curse fell on the Lord Jesus. This is emphasized
{412}
to draw our hearts to the One who was made a curse for us.
W.B-w. There is another idea in verse 2 -- "Thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaster them with plaster: and thou shalt write upon them ...". Do you link these two thoughts together?
J.T. I think underlying all that is what God had in mind as to His people. The stones not being hewn or squared by human means would refer to the saints as the work of God. The plaster would be the side of our exercises as affording writing material. The stones underlying refer to durability or permanency. Although the curse actually happened, it is met in Him who became a curse, but it is emphasised in this chapter so that our hearts might be drawn to the One who bore it for us. On the very mount of the curse, Ebal, the blessing is secured through the offering of Christ in type, and the permanency of that on which the writing is to be is indicated. The saints themselves as in the new order of things are the expression of the mind of God. Then the writing is to be legible, or "very plainly" written.
W.B-w. All by way of the altar -- is that the idea?
J.T. Exactly; there is no sin offering mentioned but the burnt offerings and the peace offerings, showing the perfect devotedness of Christ to the will of God, and the consequent result of peace amongst the saints and rejoicing before God. The blessed thoughts of God for His people are very plainly seen on this mountain of the curse. Although the cursings are mentioned, the blessing is infallibly secured. Man, as in the flesh, undertaking the carrying out of the will of God, must incur the curse, and Christ only could meet it.
A.N.W. Why are the sin offerings omitted?
J.T. I think to bring out the devotedness of Christ. It is the bright side of things, understood
{413}
only by the Lord Jesus having come in; this happy state of things was in the mind of God for them.
A.F.M. Would chapter 33 be the great answer in blessing to Jesus having borne the curse?
J.T. Yes. It is the mind of God now corresponding with the stones that were plastered.
F.L. I was wondering whether the burnt offerings and the peace offerings are illustrated in the recovery of Benjamin at the end of Judges? The curse was there, but then Israel is in a humbled state; they approach God with burnt offerings and peace offerings and then get their brethren; but there is no sin offering.
J.T. Burnt offerings and peace offerings without sin offerings would imply that sin *has been* dealt with -- that the saints are now occupied with Christ according to what He is in effecting the will of God, we being brought into this.
W.B-w. We usually look at the land of Canaan from the side of purpose, but here you are speaking of responsibility.
J.T. The moral element must enter into the idea of purpose, for Canaan typifies what we enter into now rather than heaven in the future. We must not omit the moral element. The purpose of God is not like Eden in innocency, the moral element is there. This applies even eternally: "Then the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him that God may be all in all", (@1 Corinthians 15:28). The moral element is never out of view; it only enhances what Christ was here as Man. The cross is the great witness to the moral side and everything is held on that principle. In the eternal state there is no more curse.
T.A. It says in @1 Corinthians 16:22, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha". Would you connect that in any way with this scripture?
{414}
J.T. Yes. The idea of curse thus comes home to one; if God has brought us into blessing, as He has, it is in a collective relation. The idea of the land involves this, but how is it to be held? As Moses looked across Jordan, these two mountains stood out, as it were, in the very centre of Canaan, and Israel were to divide themselves according to this scripture, the one taking the position on mount Ebal and the other on mount Gerizim, standing to bless or to curse; and the people were then to say, "Amen". So it is quite evident that God was saying to them, as it were, 'I have brought you to a land flowing with milk and honey, but it is to be held on the principle of obedience'. The law as the assertion of Jehovah's rights was to be plainly written on the plastered stones. And the fact that the curses are so prominent points to the *need* of the Lord Jesus coming in so as to sustain them all, in order that the land should be held on the ground of the fulfilment of moral obligation.
A.F.M. What would be the reference to the sun going down? It would not be simply a matter of a point of the compass.
J.T. Well, it was that, but it is a remarkable form of expression. The view from where Moses stood would be right toward the west, where the sun went down. They entered from the east. If they entered from the west the outlook would be toward the sun rising, that was the position of Judah in relation to the tent of testimony, and is the means of the fulfilment of the will of God. There is hope in the sun-rising, but if I look toward the west the sun is going down. How is that to be met? Well the Lord Jesus went down, but He arose.
C.A.M. The line of responsibility has just two issues, either blessing or cursing. God puts our responsibility and His purpose together in a remarkable way.
{415}
J.T. God would bring us to this point; He has brought us to the blessing in a collective way -- because the idea of the land and eternal life involves our relations with one another. That is the form it takes now, but how is that to be maintained? We are in the very centre of Canaan here, between these two mountains, and the tribes are divided, and in their amens they express their obligation, as committing themselves. Thus the land is to be held on the principle of obligation to God.
A.B.P. Do you have the sun-rising in @Luke 2:32? I was thinking of "a light for revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel". It was like the sun coming in in all its strength.
J.T. And then going down. Simeon points to His going down: "And even a sword shall go through thine own soul", (chapter 2:35). The Lord Jesus was to go through death, and Mary would feel it. We really approach things from the east towards the west. There is the full shining of the sun, but it is going down, and Moses sees it going down, and the tribes are to carry out this order between these two mountains in that connection.
F.L. When Mary wept at the cross, she would see the going down of the Sun.
J.T. But what a glorious rising! So that the going down precedes the rising; the rising sun is the Sun that went down.
J.S. Our outlook toward man is either the blessing or the curse, there is not neutral ground.
J.T. Just so: "To the one an odour from death unto death, but to the others an odour from life unto life", (@2 Corinthians 2:16).
J.T.Jr. We get that thought in @Romans 6:23, of death and life; "The wages of sin is death; but the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord".
{416}
J.T. A man of faith like Caleb here would say, "Knowing the people as I do there is nothing to expect but the curse".
F.H.L. The altar was at Ebal.
J.T. Exactly -- where the curse is to be; so the blessing is secured in spite of the curse being there, but you can understand a man like Caleb being there, and that he would say, 'I have been forty years with the people and I know what is there, and if it is a question of our responsibility, what can we expect but the curse?' But then he would say, 'Look at this altar and at these stones, look at this plaster, what does all this mean?' Faith would see something there that God had in His mind; *we* can see it now.
A.P.T. In @Joshua 8, when this is brought about, the ark is present.
J.T. Yes. There the *people* come first; it says, "And *all Israel*, and their elders, and their officers and judges, stood on this side and on that side of the ark". "There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded which Joshua read not before the whole congregation of Israel, ... and the strangers that lived among them", (@Joshua 8:33,35). The blessing and the curse are read.
W.B-w. Would the gift of the Holy Spirit come in here? In Acts the Holy Spirit is given to all who *obey* Christ, who, as the Sun, went down and rose again. The Holy Spirit is given on the principle of obedience.
J.T. Exactly. The ark on mount Ebal comes in in Joshua; it is not mentioned in Deuteronomy in this connection. Joshua brings in the ark, and the people were on this side and on that side of it, so you have a new setting of things now; that is, the fulfilment of everything depends on the *ark*. That belongs to the book of Joshua, which we shall consider later, please God. It is important to see the
{417}
position the ark has when this commandment is carried out.
A.B.P. It is said of Jacob that as he set out for Padan-Aram he reached Bethel after the sun went down. As he returned we find a reference to the sun-rising, after he is adjusted, having wrestled all night -- is there any connection?
J.T. I think so. He wrestled till "the rising of the dawn". (@Genesis 32:24) I think the sun going down is Christ going into death. John gives the names of those who were at His cross and His grave, including Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus. They had to do with that. It is a mark of distinction that the work of God in these two men shines at the Lord's burial -- as the sun went down. Mary of Magdala saw where He was laid, and was occupied at His tomb very early in the morning, while it was still dark; as yet she had not faith in a risen Christ; for her the Sun had not yet risen.
A.F.M. In Mark's gospel Mary of Magdala, with others; came to the sepulchre, the Sun having risen. I suppose Mark would emphasise the *early* resurrection of Christ.
J.T. Yes. The Lord did not remain any longer in the tomb than was necessary; by the way the facts are stated you get the suggestion that there is no delay.
J.S. Referring to Mary, are there not many beloved people of God just where she was -- "while it was still dark" (@John 20:1)? They do not see things *clearly*.
J.T. Yes, and there is no doubt that the darkness remained with her until the Lord calls her, "Mary!" She had said to the angels, "They have taken away my lord, and I know not where they have laid him", (@John 20:13). There is no light in that. Then, supposing that Jesus was the gardener, she says, "Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him" (verse 15). The dark part still remained with her, and I think that is the case with many Christians.
{418}
A.F.M. They need to hear Jesus call them by name and to recognise Him as "Rabboni".
J.T. What you notice in Mary of Magdala is that she does not investigate. There are thousands and thousands of Christians who do not "prove all things" (@1 Thessalonians 5:21); they take in certain features of the truth, but are in darkness as to other features; whereas Peter and John investigated, they entered into the sepulchre and *believed* -- because of what they saw.
A.P.T. The two on the way to Emmaus were in unbelief.
J.T. "We thought", they said; they were in darkness really.
F.L. Much teaching in Christendom is expressed in "I know not where they have laid him"; that is their attitude.
J.T. Whereas the normal Christian says, "We know the Son of God has come".
A.N.W. Are you putting Peter and John ahead of Mary, in @John 20?
J.T. They are not ahead of her in devotedness and affection, but there are many who, like her, have devotedness and affection for the Lord, and yet are suffering from being in darkness. There are others who have light and investigate; they have Bible readings, written ministry, and look into things; but nevertheless they go to "their own home". I think that is the way the matter stands. There is a certain balancing between them. I think Peter and John have been discredited somewhat unfairly; for they made investigation at the Lord's tomb; Peter entered into the sepulchre and took notice of the cloths. If the Lord had been stolen, the wrappings would not be there, or if there, would not be in an ordered condition. Christ having been raised by the power of God, the cloths would be just as they were on His body, there would be no change in their position. That is what Peter found, and
{419}
evidently believed, John entered in and "saw and believed"; that is, he believed because of what he saw inside the tomb, not simply that it was empty of Christ, but because of the orderly condition of the cloths and the handkerchief.
A.F.M. Peter would be ahead of John by the fact that he entered the tomb and investigated.
C.A.M. According to @John 20, John was the first *confirmed* believer, and that is just in line with his gospel.
J.S. Whereas Mary required further adjustment.
J.T. You would have said, if you had been her: I think I will ask Peter and John something about this matter. These are brothers, why not ask them about this great matter, as to what they saw in the tomb? There is no evidence that she made any inquiry, or that they stayed to help her either. That is how matters stood. There are many devoted people, who go off on missionary work; and they get results. There are also brethren who go in for Bible readings, but they do not get in touch with one another and so certain darkness remains with them. The Lord sees the heart of Mary and calls her by name; she gets that honour, and the message which they did not get.
F.H.L. Say a word about Thomas.
J.T. He came in after the Lord had been in the midst of the disciples and refused *their* testimony. He represents a class; he is neither of the Peter and John class nor of the Mary class. He says, "Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails, and put my finger into the mark of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe", (@John 20:25). He neither accepts the testimony of circumstances -- which marked Peter and John -- nor the testimony of persons who had had the Lord in their very midst. And he is making terms; there are a lot of people
{420}
like that; they are hard people to deal with. They come to the meetings, but make terms.
J.S. They say, "Show me".
J.T. They put the responsibility on you and make the matter very hard.
A.P.T. What is in your mind in saying, "They went to their own homes"?
J.T. The light should be taken to the saints -- it is to shine in the temple. What anyone has from God belongs to the brethren. The two who went to Emmaus were on a path of unbelief, but they came back in an orderly way with light in their souls. They did not go to their natural connections, but "found the eleven, and those with them gathered together" (@Luke 24:33) and made known the light received. It was to Mary's credit that she remained at the sepulchre. Peter and John going to their own home are in contrast to her.
Ques.. Even if the saints are defective in taking in the truth, the Lord adjusts?
J.T. He does. She remained at the sepulchre, and the Lord revealed Himself to her as risen.
J.S. She remained in the place of divine operations.
Rem. Even if we all have not the ability to take in the truth like John and Peter, He is equal to adjusting us.
J.T. If we let Him. The dark part remained a good while; she said, "They have taken away my Lord"; and clung to that right up to the time when the Lord spoke to her.
J.S. She would be guilty of the same thing of which she accused others: "Tell me where thou hast laid him, and *I will take him away*", (@John 20:15).
J.T. Why should *she* take Him away? Of course her thought was to care for the precious body of the Lord; but she was in unbelief as to His resurrection, and there was a corresponding want of balance in her words.
{421}
W.B-w. What did John actually believe?
J.T. The fact that it is left open is significant. The resurrection of Christ is, of course, in view. Characteristically, he believed the testimony so far as it was there, so far as the sepulchre afforded evidence of it.
A.F.M. What would the handkerchief folded by itself indicate?
J.T. Peter would inquire in his mind, "Why should this be?" And his conclusion would be that some reverential hand had done that -- some hand that had great regard for the Person that laid there. The idea of headship also would enter into it. Peter would think of it in that way.
A.F.M. Whose reverential hands would they be that folded the handkerchief?
J.T. Mary would have an inkling of whose they were as having seen two angels sitting, one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. Angels had attended the Lord in Gethsemane and they are now in His tomb; who but one of them would have folded the handkerchief? If Mary and Peter conversed about it afterwards, that undoubtedly is the conclusion they would arrive at.
A.N.W. Why did the Lord favour Mary of Magdala at the sepulchre and not Peter and John?
J.T. Love is the greatest thing. He values our affections and the instinct that goes with them. She remained where there was likely to be something more. Here it is instinct; the Spirit tells us that she turned backwards after the angel spoke to her. Why did she do that? We would have thought that she would have been intensely interested in those heavenly beings but something diverted her from that. Then the Lord says, "Mary", and she turned round, it is not that anyone told her. I think the allusion is to the instinct of the divine nature.
A.B.P. These various features coming out show
{422}
how necessary the "whole twelve tribes" are to bring out the complete work of God.
J.T. In view of what we have been saying we are led to the consideration of the whole twelve tribes as blessed, but not merely in an arbitrary way as Jacob blessed the tribes, but in their characteristics. Everyone has characteristics that indicate blessing.
W.G.K. Does Moses represent the Lord in blessing the assembly?
J.T. Moses would represent the Lord in authority as "king in Jeshurun", as recognised in affection by a righteous, or upright, people.
W.B-w. Would this, "rose up from Seir" and "shone forth from mount Paran", be the idea of the Sun shining?
J.T. Yes. Certain settings are in view. First, we have: -- "Jehovah came from Sinai, And rose up from Seir unto them; He shone forth from mount Paran". He *came*, He *rose*, and He *shone*. It is a remarkable thing that the divine shining is in wilderness settings peculiarly, as in mount Paran; that is the way through the wilderness toward Canaan the people had begun to move. The cloud stood still there in the wilderness of Paran after Sinai; (@Numbers 10:12).
W.G.T. Moses would have the wilderness in view entirely.
J.T. The land is not mentioned here. God came from Sinai, which is a question of His rights over us. He rises up from Seir, which would point to the nearest way into the land itself. It is an eleven days¬ journey that way; as if He were to say, 'The way in is short and in My love for you I would have you go that way'. It alludes to the Spirit. As we are in the Spirit, wilderness distances vanish. The Red Sea
{423}
and Jordan are thus the one death of Christ for the saints. The wilderness, short or long, is needed because of the flesh in us.
A.R. Is that what God intended at first in @Numbers 13?
J.T. Yes, rising up from Seir seems to be God indicating the way in, it is like a great beacon light showing the way in.
W.G.T. *Shining* would be grace there, not law.
J.T. It would be grace -- what God is to us in the wilderness.
F.L. "And he came from the myriads of the sanctuary".
J.T. There it is the Lord amongst His people, holy myriads, really the priesthood -- the saints viewed in priestly trim where God is worshipped in holiness.
A.F.M. "He loveth the peoples", which, according to the footnote, is "tribes". They are seen now as *loved*.
J.T. Balaam thus saw them in their tribal setting in the wilderness.
G.McP. Would this correspond with what we have in @Ephesians 2:10: "We are his workmanship"?
J.T. Exactly; only Ephesians views us in the land.
W.B-w. Why does it say that "Jehovah came from Sinai"?
J.T. Mountains are symbols of strength and elevation.
W.B-w. The idea of bringing them up on these mountains would be to take them above the deserts.
J.T. It is moral elevation and is the way God operates. How above the level of man He is! So that at Sinai He says, "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself", (@Exodus 19:4). He is now proposing terms, wishing to enter into covenant relation with His people. Sinai is a
{424}
question of His love viewed in that way. Mount Seir is as if He were to say, 'I will shine as you go in' -- the shining way Paran is what He will be to you *on the way* because, according to these verses, it is the middle of the journey.
A.F.M. There is thus every encouragement for us to take up our heavenly position as the tribes.
J.T. If God has, so to speak, brought us into tribal blessing, let us put on the features indicated: Levi says to his father and mother, "I see him not". This is a most important side of the position -- to cut away from what is natural and take my place in relation to God's purpose. Levi fitted into his place; this negates all that is natural and it is on this that blessing practically hinges. God loves the tribes; that is, the saints in relation to each other in love according to His ordering. He looks at them as Balaam saw them according to His own setting, and the blessing here means that every tribe is characteristically answering to the mind of God; not simply in place around the tent of meeting, but each having his own characteristics -- that is, the work of the Spirit in the saints is contemplated.
J.T.Jr. Would you get this shining and the shining of the face of Moses when he came down from the mount linked up with 2 Corinthians?
J.T. Just so. Divine shining is always a question of what God is.
T.A. Is it necessary to be in fellowship to have a tribal position?
J.T. It is; that is implied in earlier typical teaching. I suppose it is one of the greatest things for us at the present time, if God has brought us into any little bit of blessing, to see it in the tribal position; thus we answer practically to the mind of God. The first setting of the tribes is in the breastplate and then their position around the tabernacle;
{425}
that is Exodus and Numbers. But Deuteronomy is more than that, it is what we are as of the tribes characteristically.
C.A.M. It would be a great thing to get hold of that. It would seem as if it were a distinct thing in the mind of the Lord at the present time.
J.T. If God has brought us into blessing He wishes us to take up tribal features and relations. Let the saints take up the part God has assigned to them apart from natural relations, whether father, mother, wife, or brother, or sister. All that is wiped out by what is seen here in Levi. Thus there will be no rivalry or clashing with each other. It is a question of the sovereignty of God and His work in us. The tribal position is God's ordering, and is sustained by the high priest. In this sense the saints are peculiarly on the heart of Christ. What is intended in the tribes is worked out from that position.
J.S. We are to move on relatively in respect of our brethren.
J.T. Yes. Every tribe has its setting. For instance, Reuben: "Let his men be few". They are not in a mass, they are orderly and living, so that you can count them. Every one has distinction. "Let Reuben live, and not die". Life always distinguishes its subject.
H.S.D. The stones in the breastplate would be all of different colours.
J.T. That is another point. Instead of names you have precious stones. It is a remarkable thing, you get the number of the tribes but not individual names. A precious stone represents and distinguishes each one.
J.E.H. The difference in the stones would correspond with the different references we get to these several tribes here -- different features.
{426}
J.T. That is what comes out, everyone has his own distinction. The first idea is *life*: "Let Reuben live and not die". And then Judah: -- "Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah, And bring him unto his people" -- he is not to be isolated, or with others than "his people".
A.F.M. I was wondering whether one person could not be marked by each of these features, as being the result of the history of the soul?
J.T. Normally every Christian bears all these features. The chapter is a constructive setting out of the work of God in its results in all the saints.
J.S. How do you view Moses here?
J.T. He would represent Christ as "king in Jeshurun". Not simply as King on the throne, but King in the affections of His people. He, as proved in His wise and gracious rule, is loved by His people.
A.N.W. "All his saints are in thy hand". Who is the "thy" and the "his"?
J.T. I suppose, Jehovah. It is a question of whose hands the saints are in. We know they are in the hands of the great Shepherd of the sheep -- in the hands of Christ.
W.G.T. "And underneath are the eternal arms". Would that be the same thought?
J.T. That is more general -- referring to God.
A.P.T. "Yea, he loveth the peoples". Love in activity, exercised all the time. Is that the way you look at it?
J.T. Exactly. The footnote would indicate that He alludes to the tribes -- the saints viewed in this way; although the original word is not the ordinary one for tribe, but it has this meaning. The setting as in this chapter rather confirms that it refers to the tribes.
{427}
A.P.T. Going back a bit -- Moses in speaking to the people said that God did not take them up because they were great, but because He loved them. We are taken up on the principle of God's love.
W.G.T. The Corinthians did not answer to the "king in Jeshurun".
J.T. They did not give Christ His place, but the second epistle would show that they were coming to it.
A.F.M. "And they sit down at thy feet". Is it like Mary as sitting at the Lord's feet? Is the "thy" Moses or Christ?
J.T. The Spirit has Christ in view. The introduction of Christ explains many pronouns in the Old Testament. John uses pronouns referring to Christ as Man and passes on to speak of God by the use of the same pronouns without mentioning any names -- showing how fully the Person was in his mind.
{428}
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (8)
@Deuteronomy 33:6 - 29
F.L. What is the contrast between the blessing of Moses and the blessing of Jacob?
J.T. The blessing of Jacob is parental and contemplates the *general* history of the people, including the bad as well as the good. Even apostasy is noted; still the tribes are all blessed and go through. @Genesis 49 is a prophetic announcement; though the tribes had no history as *tribes* at that time. The word 'tribes' appears first in @Genesis 49:28, where it is said they are blessed; the blessing would come in in spite of what would happen. Jacob's sons and their immediate families had histories, of course; but the tribal history had not properly begun; therefore the chapter is, in the main, anticipative. This blessing in @Deuteronomy 33 is after they had had a long tribal history in a scene of contrariety, and they are seen as blessed characteristically; that is, after the wilderness history -- showing that God can bring us through. The blessing here is regardless of what *had* happened; the blessing of the saints viewed from the standpoint of the purpose of God. In @Genesis 49 it is generally in spite of what *would* happen. Deuteronomy brings out what God has done. "What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23:23) The chapter presents what God had been to Israel and what they had been to Him, and, founded on this, the thoughts and desires of the Mediator for the people.
A.N.W. That explains why, in closing, he eulogises the God of Jeshurun.
J.T. That is the idea, the God who loves an upright people. His people are that characteristically; so that this chapter is the victory of God in His people
{429}
after the wilderness journey is over. It looks backward; that is to say, it contemplates what has happened, that nothing has been passed over; but still, the saints are blessed. It is a question of the Spirit in us, so that after the well is celebrated in @Numbers 21, they move on from point to point until they come to Pisgah, from which "the surface of the waste" is viewed; that is, it is a retrospective view.
F.L. I was wondering why Simeon is left out in this chapter?
J.T. I suppose it is to test out our stamina, as to whether we can stand being left out; I mean, the work of the Spirit in us enables us to accept being discounted; that God has His full number without me, which is a searching thing. Of course, other things enter into it. When we come to the next book we find that Simeon is not left out. He has a place in Canaan.
F.L. Simeon is not left out in @Revelation 7, but Dan is.
J.T. I suppose the same sort of thing might come into it. Dan would say, 'I deserve to be left out'; he having first set up tribal idolatry; but he is not really left out. When you come to @Revelation 21 the names of the twelve tribes are there, and Dan must be one of them; when the twelve tribes are mentioned without being specified by name, they are regarded as all there, as in the breastplate. They are not specified by name on the breastplate, but they are all there. In this respect we must always keep @Genesis 49:28 in view: "*All these* are the twelve tribes of Israel".
F.H.L. That is in principle what we must all learn -- that the time may come when we may be left out in this way. Simeon is the first mentioned on the mount of blessing (@Deuteronomy 27:12), but here he is left out.
{430}
J.T. It tests you if you are left out, or if you seem to be ignored at any point. One has often found that if you are with God you can say, 'God can get along without me'. He will on an occasion do this, but He brings us in in His own time. If I am omitted at one time, God will bring me in to my advantage at another.
C.A.M. We might overrate our service, but we cannot be left out characteristically, can we?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. "All these are the twelve tribes of Israel", and the blessing is that wherewith their father had blessed them; "the gifts and the calling of God are not subject to repentance", (@Romans 11:29).
Levi and Joseph get the greatest mention here. These variations express the mind of God and it is for us to understand. In almost every full mention of the tribes there is variation from what appears elsewhere. It surely is a question of God's seeing everything, so that if Reuben is in his family place, as here, you may expect that there is some reference to what marked him in this connection. "Thou shalt have no pre-eminence", was earlier said of him; (@Genesis 49:4). That is not lost sight of, so that here it is just "Let Reuben live, and not die". There is an allusion, I suppose, to the poverty of the tribe, spiritually.
W.G.T. His history under Moses was not much to his credit, any more than his history in Genesis. He is also linked up with Korah's rebellion.
J.T. He does not seem to have gained much. Many start out well; others start out ill. Reuben did not start out well; his history at the outset was discreditable, and under Moses he did not prosper much, spiritually; then he settles down on the wilderness side of Jordan, as content to be *there*.
A.F.M. Simeon and Levi in Genesis have "instruments of violence"; here, Levi comes out in a
{431}
wonderful way. Would it show that recovery had come in?
J.T. The history of the wilderness is in view -- what has been gained. Reuben did not gain much; whereas Levi gained immensely. He came out well in a crisis. It is a question of how a brother gets on in a crisis. Levi shone well in a crisis; that is what is alluded to here.
F.L. Reuben in the wilderness seemed to show the haughty pride of the first-born in linking himself up with Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.
J.T. That should be noted. An alliance of that kind comes where there is proximity to one another; that is to say, meetings near each other linking on in a sectional way lose the universal side. Reuben had an advantage in the wilderness. Next to Judah, he had the best place; that is, the *south*. But instead of profiting by it, he lost ground and joined up on party lines with Korah.
C.A.M. That is very sorrowful; so that a man having an advantage is not always the most reliable. We might lay hands on such a man as having this favour; but it would be a mistake.
J.T. Quite; you have to wait and see. It says: "Lay hands quickly on no man". "Of some men the sins are manifest beforehand ... and some also they follow after. In like manner good works also are manifest beforehand, and those that are otherwise cannot be hid", (@1 Timothy 5:22 - 25).
T.A. Barnabas made a wonderful start, but he did not continue.
J.T. Quite; but apparently he got back again. God may give us a good start, as under favourable circumstances; as young men, for instance, who were brought into relation with Paul and listened to his oral ministry. God gave them an advantage; whereas others have had to get on without it and have been obliged to work out their own salvation in this
{432}
sense. God gave Reuben an advantage which he did not profit by. This is a warning. Those who led in dividing the saints in 1890 had been companions in service with Mr. Darby.
F.H.L. Did not Reuben show the spirit of a brother more than the others at the outset in connection with Joseph?
J.T. Quite so; he did; he and Judah showed *some* feeling, but this did not clear them of the guilt of selling their brother.
W.G.T. Would it be the fruit of Reuben's lack of energy that his men were few?
J.T. According to the footnote in the New Translation, "few" implies that they are countable. They are *men* ("full grown") worthy of count; let them be this, was the desire of Moses. This seems the meaning. "If any one love God, he is known of him", (@1 Corinthians 8:3). Such would have a place in the divine reckoning. If Reuben is to live, let him have *men*; let them be persons of known character who are worthy of mention. Although having the advantage of being first-born, Reuben had failed seriously in his youth, and Jacob said to him, "Thou shalt have no pre-eminence"; and he lost the birthright -- all this would enter into Moses¬ prayer for him.
A.F.M. Would "live" here be something like @Romans 8, living in a potential way?
J.T. Quite; living actually, instead of dying. The Lord said to Simon, "Thou shalt be called Cephas (which interpreted is stone)", (@John 1:42). That would mean that the name would express him in the character of a living stone.
A.P. Scripture indicates that those who have spiritual life are few. "For narrow the gate and straitened the way that leads to life, and they are few who find it", (@Matthew 7:14).
J.T. Evidently the idea is not that you should have only a few men, but that they are to be worthy
{433}
of count, like the one hundred and twenty "names" in @Acts 1.
A.P. Is the teaching here in the way of spiritual characteristics, progressive in these twelve tribes?
J.T. I think so; the teaching is constructive. The first thing is life. You can understand that in its application to ourselves we are to live and not die. Then the next thing is -- "Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people, may his hands strive for them; and be thou a help to him against his oppressors". That is like one in fellowship, brought to his people. All these features apply to every Christian.
A.F.M. This is not addressed to individuals simply, it is rather collective.
J.T. Yes; they are really features of the saints as a whole.
A.P. Are they not features that should mark any locality, or the people of God at any time?.
J.T. I think that is just the idea. These features ought to mark us so that we live; we are brought to our people; we are on spiritual lines; as in fellowship we are priests unto God; then, in Benjamin, we are loved of God. God dwells amongst us; He dwells between Benjamin's shoulders.
W.G.T. How would the voice of Judah be known among us?
J.T. It would be the voice of need -- prayer. Constructively, this fits here, leading on to Levi. There is much prayer from Judah -- David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Daniel, Jabez and others of that tribe in the Old Testament were marked as representing the voice of Judah. Also our Lord Himself. Judah suggests the gathering idea: "Bring him unto his people".
A.F.M. Is there not great lack of what is priestly?
{434}
Do not these verses, with regard to Levi, set out wonderful thoughts of what should mark us as priests?
J.T. Yes; they deserve special consideration; and we should have clearly in our minds what has been remarked, that this chapter alludes to earlier history, and so to the way that Levi shone in a crisis.
C.A.M. The word 'characteristic' that you used is of great help in looking at this chapter. The truth is worked out in a sort of review, so that the people have actually shown that the tribes are, in some sense, what is stated.
J.T. These traits, we may say, have come out already; but are to be enlarged; whatever is of God that has come out in your earlier history, however little the measure, this chapter shows that it is to be enlarged. The fulness of the divine thought is in view; that you should increase more and more; that is what the true Levite would see in this. So that you have -- "And of Levi he said, thy Thummim and thy Urim are for thy godly one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah; who said to his father and to his mother, I see him not, and he acknowledged not his brethren, and knew not his own children; for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. They shall teach Jacob thine ordinances, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thy nostrils, and whole burnt-offering upon thine altar".
All these things have come out, you might say. Now the next thing is: "Bless Jehovah, his substance, and let the work of his hands please thee; crush the loins of his adversaries, and of them that hate him, that they may never rise again!"
{435}
There is a prayer in this instance attached to the blessing.
A.P. One of the great moral qualities of Levi was that the natural was disallowed in him at a very crucial moment.
J.T. Yes. This is seen in @Exodus 32; he slew his own brethren.
W.G.T. Why is his proving by Jehovah connected with Massah?
J.T. Moses and Aaron were tested at Massah and Meribah; (@Exodus 17; @Numbers 20). Levi would be represented in them. Such testing develops priesthood.
C.A.M.. The fact that there is a prayer in the blessing shows that there is more to follow. As you said, these things are to be enlarged.
J.T. It is looking on to perfection. Every man of God is looking for more for God.
F.L. Would not what is said of Levi be to emphasise the great importance of the priestly function?
J.T. Exactly. What is in view is his service Godward, not the carrying side. It is what is for God, for the nostrils of God, also the burnt offering, so the highest priestly service is contemplated. Besides, Israel was to be taught by Levi, "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they seek the law", (@Malachi 2:7). A principle running through this chapter is that however much we have done, or however great our development in the knowledge of God, we are to increase more and more.
J.T.Jr. The Thummim is first here. It is a question of the *perfection* that God sees in Levi.
J.T. That would be in keeping with what we have remarked, that the things were already seen in him; here perfection was there.
A.N.W. I suppose the apostle Paul in writing epistles to the various companies would have a
{436}
distinctiveness of each company in his mind, and the exhortations have in view that what he approved should increase more and more.
J.T. That is very practical, and it should come home to us; however much faithfulness there may have been in service, or however much growth, there must be increase.
A.F.M. The word 'substance' is a good one. Of Levi it is said, "Bless, Jehovah, his substance". Levi, having spiritual substance and being blessed, would become more useful in the disposition of it.
J.T. "Bless, Jehovah, his substance, and let the work of his hands please thee". There was evidently need for improvement on that line. The work of our hands is to be pleasing to God. So that when you are getting on in the service of the Lord, you are thinking of pleasing Him -- not only of the success or results that may be attached to it, but pleasing the Lord in what you are doing. The evening is to be equal to the morning, as is indicated in the morning and evening lambs. The Lord was as vigorous in the evening as in the morning in His services, as the Gospels testify. And every service should yield not only something for God, but also something for the servant, so that he is sustained; he gets something out of everything; he is sustained in a sense in what he is doing by itself. The Lord said, "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his work", (@John 4:34).
J.E.H. We can say that it is the evening of Moses¬ life here; yet he is in great vigour. In the next chapter he *goes* up to the top of the mountain.
J.T. The history of Levi shows how substance is acquired. I believe that Aaron is the characteristic Levite -- a man who was not mentioned by name until he was very old -- about eighty-three -- but what
{437}
he was, was well known to God. He had had history with God, and in that way had substance. Priesthood is that feature of the Christian to which all else in him and his circumstances are to minister. The common person and the Levite (all referring to the same individual) minister to the priest.
A.N.W. If a man is serving pleasurably to God, does that not carry with it its own peculiar support?
J.T. It does, as was remarked. For example, you get a letter of enquiry from someone and find it difficult to answer; the suggestion arises that you should not be burdened with it. But you look into it and try to find out what is wanted and as depending on the Lord you will not fail to get it and, besides, get something for yourself in the toil. That is, I think, the idea. The servant gets food in his work, and thus he increases. The Lord's work is not unprofitable drudgery even to the worker. The general principle is that the servant increases as he goes; he does not lose ground by great toil.
J.T.Jr. "Thy Thummim and thy Urim are for thy godly one". What does that mean?
J.T. It is creditable to Levi that the Thummim is first here; it indicates that what corresponds with it had come out in him. I suppose the godly one would be in accord with what Peter said, "And we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God", (@John 6:69). Aaron was "the saint of Jehovah"; figuratively, he was Christ.
F.L. In Paul's addresses to the assemblies, would the Spirit of God indicate characteristics such as come out here in the twelve tribes?
J.T. The features we are dealing with are worked out in the epistles. The application is to the saints now; so that "Thy Thummim and thy Urim are for thy godly one" would bear on us. Romans leads to holiness; and in Ephesians the new man is created in truthful righteousness and holiness. The Thummim
{438}
and the Urim, of course, are in Christ as High Priest, but the saints are said to have the mind of Christ and hence correspond with them. Thus problems may be solved amongst us.
J.S. In line with what you were saying, that a servant increases as he goes along, would you view Moses as having thus reached a high spiritual plane here?
J.T. Exactly. At the end, he shone brightest. The book is "the words which Moses spoke" after the wilderness journey was over. It is his own work, as it were; his love for Israel and personality generally enter more into it than they do into his other books.
J.S. He was able to analyse what was wrought of God through the wilderness in each tribe.
J.T. Yes. Then he wrote the song of chapter 32 at the direction of God, to be laid up for Israel as a testimony amongst them. In all this we see what Moses was capable of at the end of his days. "His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated", (@Deuteronomy 34:7). In all the vicissitudes of the wilderness, the reception of divine communications, joys, sorrows, ministrations, and conflicts, he gained as he went, and lost nothing.
F.H.L. Would you say that about Stephen; he started by serving tables, but he ended as an asset to the testimony?
J.T. And Philip, too; they went on obtaining "for themselves a good degree, and much boldness in faith which is in Christ Jesus", (@1 Timothy 3:13).
A.P. Is not the adversary taken account of here in relation to that which is spiritual in verses 7 and 12? The two are somewhat different. In the end of verse 11 the prayer is that the enemy should be crushed; evidently by God Himself apart from the instrumentality of Levi; whereas, in connection with Judah, he was to be helped against his oppressors.
J.T. Yes; that is, Judah (pre-eminently in David)
{439}
is in the conflict, and the enemies of Levi are to be crushed. This would be illustrated in David's overthrow of the enemies of Israel and the release and enlargement of priestly service in his kingdom. Whilst you are in the conflict, God helps you against the oppressors; but as you serve God in the sanctuary, He takes account of our enemies and would set us entirely free.
W.B-w. Do you think Moses would have worn himself out if he had not taken Jethro's advice? (@Exodus 18).
J.T. There may have been something in Jethro's advice; but Moses, as a true Levite, would know what to do.
A.F.M. Would you say there is a link between "thy godly one" in verse 8 and "the beloved of Jehovah" in verse 12, as showing that the chapter is progressive?
J.T. "Thy godly one" answers to God in holiness; it would have to do with the sanctuary. Benjamin, "the beloved of Jehovah", is a very fine thought, alluding to the dwelling place, Jerusalem. Benjamin, as representing love and hence the condition for dwelling, rightly follows Levi.
A.P. He had a peculiar place in love. Does that correspond to John's place in @John 13?
J.T. Just so. Benjamin was looked on as a lovable personage in Genesis; he had no part in the attack on Joseph. As we were saying, it is a retrospective view here in the tribes -- what arose in their history. He is the beloved of the Lord. Judah refers to him in speaking to Joseph as the object of his father's love; thus the thought of dwelling comes out in him. God dwells with those whom He loves. He that dwells in love dwells in God and God in him; *dwelling between his shoulders* would mean that God dwells between Benjamin's shoulders; that is the idea, alluding to Jerusalem, but really to the strength
{440}
which love affords in His people providing dwelling conditions.
F.L. I was going to ask about the royal tribe. It was of Judah; but the royal city is of the tribe of Benjamin.
J.T. I think that brings out what we ought to see -- the working of love among the saints. Benjamin makes no complaint, as Jerusalem came practically into Judah's hands. It shows that Benjamin was affected by love and made full room for his royal brother. The King, Christ, came out of Judah. Normally the saints will make room for Christ; indeed, they will make room for true kingly qualities in whomsoever they may appear.
A.P. In the end of Ezekiel, Judah is on one side of the sanctuary and Benjamin on the other side.
T.A. A scripture of this kind must have been very sweet to the apostle Paul; he came from the tribe of Benjamin.
J.T. How readily he would give way to others if necessary, if love and wisdom required it! I think the tribute here is to Benjamin; from his earliest days he was the object of love. If God dwells in Benjamin through Judah, Benjamin is content because he has a dwelling place with God; that is enough. If the dwelling comes to him through another greater than himself, it is God nevertheless who dwells.
C.A.M. Benjamin puts himself out of sight and others come into prominence; it goes with this thought of love in dwelling.
J.T. That is what I thought; that we might get help on these blessings, for they imply that if I am seemingly at any disadvantage, so long as God gets His way through it, well and good, I shall not lose. God *is* getting His way, for, after all, He is dwelling between the shoulders of Benjamin. Although the temple was built by David and Solomon, it was in
{441}
Benjamin's territory. God would never lose sight of that.
F.L. When the test of division among the tribes came, after Solomon's death, Benjamin remained with Judah.
J.E.H. Would Mephibosheth fit in here? He was a Benjamite. He said, "Let him even take all, since my lord the king is come again in peace to his own house", (@2 Samuel 19:30).
J.T. See how beautifully he spoke about David. As long as the king comes back, let Ziba take all. In him Benjamin owned the worth of David. It was David who said, "Until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob", (@Psalm 132:5); but spiritually the dwelling would be between the shoulders of Benjamin.
C.A.M. There is something in a brother effacing himself that has more of an edifying effect, possibly, than anything else; such as the case of John the Baptist, a man who was content to disappear to make way for Christ.
J.T. That is how we get the good of these meetings, as we see in these touches that what is of God comes to you; even if it comes through another, it is still of God, and you are getting the benefit of it.
A.F.M. Do you think these suggestions are illustrated in Peter and John in the early Acts? Peter is in the forefront and John in the background.
J.T. You mean that John is second to Peter and hardly ever says anything; but he is getting the good of what is coming out, and sharing in it all. Love is content, as God's work goes on. Judah has an advantage as to Jerusalem; but in the next book he is giving up to Simeon, making room for Simeon in his territory; so there is equality continually, and God is glorified as love makes room for this.
F.L. In what sense is it said in the Psalms, "There is little Benjamin, their ruler", (@Psalm 68:27)?
{442}
J.T. It is a diminutive thought. Benjamin was generally small. Numerically, and especially after the dreadful reduction of the tribe in the time of the Judges; but this Psalm speaks of him as "their ruler", which would imply that, although small, he had acquired moral power, which involves a spiritual principle. It had expression in Paul, who was a true Benjamite in this sense. Small in his own eyes, less than the least of all the saints, yet he exercised, under the Lord, more moral authority than anyone. The book of Judges and the history of Saul bring out the sorrowful side of Benjamin, but he was not lost sight of; in the Psalm referred to he is still a tribe and a ruler.
C.A.M. What impresses one is that these tribes could not do without each other.
J.T. That is what comes out in the history of Benjamin; he was nearly wiped out, but his brethren began to think of him with affection and saved him.
J.E.N. Like the weak brother for whom Christ died.
J.T. Well, after you get the *dwelling*, the next thing is the *wealth* of the position, so that much is made of Joseph. "Blessed of Jehovah be his land, by the precious things of the heavens, by the dew, and by the deep that lieth beneath, and by the precious fruits of the sun, and by the precious things put forth by the months, and by the best things of the ancient mountains, and by the precious things of the everlasting hills, and by the precious things of the earth and the fulness thereof. And let the good will of him that dwelt in the bush come upon the head of Joseph, upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren". I think we are on Ephesian ground now, but as
{443}
always, the links go backward. In the one "that was separated from his brethren", we are directed back to Genesis.
W.F.K. Is he a type of Christ here?
J.T. Yes; but it is more Christ worked out in the saints. After God finds His dwelling-place, then you have the richness of the place.
W.F.K. There is more said of Joseph than of any of the others.
J.T. Because there is more of Christ worked out in him. Our mind is directed to Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians, which bring out the spiritual wealth of the Christian position. That is what we may see in Joseph. The wealth and sources of the wealth here are unlimited. In "the precious things of the heavens, by the dew, and by the deep that lieth beneath", you are reminded of the height and depth. In verses 14 and 15 you are directed backward "the ancient mountains, and by the precious things of the everlasting hills". The sources of wealth are immense; they are universal, including heaven and earth.
C.A.M. This seems to have a great connection with our spiritual emotions. I was thinking of the expression "him that was separated from his brethren"; these great things are not attained without deep spiritual emotions.
J.T. "But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth?" (@Ephesians 4:9) That touches the heart -- "into the lower parts of the earth". Love led Jesus down there.
F.L. I was thinking of these three epistles which are so rich. They emphasise greatly the sacrificial love of Christ, and bring love into exercise.
J.T. The ancient mountains would refer to the outstanding strength and stability of divine purposes and promises. All are now yea and amen in Christ, and so link on with the everlasting hills, the latter
{444}
stretching into eternity. Transcending thoughts lie in these connections and they should ravish our hearts. You get mountains in Genesis; they run right through Scripture; each represents some great principle, and all contribute to the spiritual wealth of the saints.
The high mountains were topped by the flood; hence they all came up out of death. Take Ararat, for instance; what thoughts are there! The ark rested there. What history is connected with Ararat!
A.F.M. This vast wealth you have spoken of, in verses 13 - 16, seems to connect with God's good will, which was to come "upon the head of Joseph, upon the top of the head of him that was separated from (a Nazarite) his brethren". So that Christ, while rejected by His brethren, was thus entirely separated to God.
J.T. We are directed backward in all these references, as well as forward; that is, to the *roots* of things.
C.A.M. So that the ancient history of the people of God impresses you as a very wonderful thing.
J.T. Especially the history of mountains. Genesis opens up much in connection with mountains, and so does Matthew.
W.B-w. Moriah was one of the mountains where Isaac was offered up.
J.T. "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (@Genesis 22:14), is a principle laid down in Genesis. I suppose such ancient things are what the Lord in @Matthew 13:52, speaks of as "things new *and old*". Then the "everlasting hills" would be the hills of Matthew, of which there are seven, bringing out the great principles that enter into the assembly and are everlasting; all contributing to the wealth of the saints. Then you have the one great mountain called the "holy mountain" by the apostle Peter. He spoke
{445}
by the Spirit of "being with him on the holy mountain", (@2 Peter 1:18). I suppose that is in effect one of the everlasting hills.
W.B-w. The "ancient mountains" go back to the past; the "everlasting hills" go on to the future.
J.T. That is right; all contributing to the wealth of the saints.
A.P.T. I notice the word 'precious' occurs frequently in this portion. Do you think it answers to the high level of Ephesian ground, to the great things of God?
J.T. "Precious" is one of Peter's choice adjectives. He was near to Jesus, and knew the intrinsic excellence of Jesus and His things.
A.F.M. That is why he speaks of the mountain as "holy".
J.T. That is what it was to him when writing about it, not what it was to him when he went to sleep on it! I suppose the way he speaks of it in his epistle shows that it is by the Spirit we understand things. The word 'precious' here appears five times in verses 13 - 16. It is a remarkable recurrence of the thought in relation to the wealth of the saints. It calls attention to the idea of treasuries which David specified in his building.
J.E.H. What is the meaning of the middle part of verse 16, "And let the good will of him that dwelt in the bush come upon the head of Joseph"?
J.T. It is to again bring forward past events; and was of great moment -- "the *good will* of him that dwelt in the bush". Good will attaching to anything carries its own relative meaning. "The good will of him that dwelt in the bush", is God coming down into such lowly circumstances; Moses knew Him in that way.
J.S. You feel that Moses would now understand what all this was, for God appeared to him in the burning bush.
{446}
J.T. The suggestion is that if you bless the saints or wish the saints well, you are not simply thinking of God as He is abstractly represented in Scripture, but as you know Him. This is the God that Moses knew. The impression he received at the bush governed his whole life and service.
T.A. I suppose when he stood on the mount of transfiguration, he had all this accumulative knowledge.
J.T. He had; and carried forward the wealth of the ancient mountains into the results of the everlasting hills!
J.S. Was it not figurative of Israel's being oppressed in Egypt; the bush was burning and yet not consumed?
J.T. Yes. God burns up all that is contrary to Him in His people, but in His good will He will see that nothing of Himself or of His work in them is lost; all that will be preserved. This also marked His discipline of Israel in the wilderness.
W.G.T. Is this to bring out the anointing -- what comes upon the head?
J.T. It would be involved in it, and recognises Joseph's distinguishment and dignity.
A.N.W. Is that emphasised by the next statement, "Upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren"?
J.T. Quite so; the top of the head emphasises what is meant. It is definitely on him. His person sustains it, too. Compare the reference to the Lord's head in @John 20.
A.P. Joseph, although separated from his brethren, was the means of bringing them together again. He is distinguished as carrying the idea of the twelve through.
J.T. Quite; as Christ *was* separated from His brethren, but this chapter regards Him as among them. Then his sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, I
{447}
suppose, would allude to the saints *in* Christ in the two tribes, and there were thousands and myriads of them. It would be the fulness of the redeemed in blessing and those who are blessed in Christ.
H.S.D. What is the idea of pushing the peoples unto the ends of the earth by Joseph?
J.T. That would be, I suppose, a feature of Christ in His millennial power; the saints will be used to execute this in the millennium.
C.A.M. What you said about these two tribes would help us to see that the thing is enlarging, and becoming very glorious.
J.T. Yes, the number -- the myriads of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh allude to the position in which we are in Christ.
C.A.M. So the men may be few at the beginning, but the thing enlarges immensely at the end.
J.T. Quite, and then that will be used in the future. The saints will be used in conflict -- "His majesty is as the firstling of his ox; and his horns are as the horns of a buffalo. With them shall he push the peoples together to the ends of the earth".
J.S. We have reached the full height of the position spiritually in the blessing here.
J.T. I think in Zebulun and Issachar we are branching off to another line of things -"Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and thou, Issachar, in thy tents! They shall invite the peoples to the mountain; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness; for they will suck the abundance of the seas and the hidden treasures of the sand". The allusion is to their position at the sea side: "They will suck the abundance of the seas" would be evangelisation. Gad would be the government of the assembly.
{448}
"Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad! As a lion doth he dwell, and teareth the arm, even the top of the head. And he provided the first part for himself; for there was reserved the portion of the lawgiver; and he came with the heads of the people; the justice of Jehovah and his judgments hath he executed with Israel". I think this alludes to the government of the house of God.
T.H. He received instructions from God and they were carried out in the assembly.
J.T. Yes; in the care meeting, doing justice. God does not spare the enemy. It says, "And teareth the arm, even the top of the head". The head refers to the wisdom the enemy had, the arm to his power to act; God deals with both the arm and the head.
J.S. This is more Corinthian territory.
J.T. I thought that. It is very important if you get the saints together through evangelisation, to have rule and government.
A.P.T. Paul speaks of his authority, the authority vested in him as an apostle. "The lawgiver" here corresponds.
J.T. "He provided the first part for himself; for there was reserved the portion of the lawgiver" which means, he values law; he does not despise it. Of course, the allusion may be to Moses¬ grave, but that is not the point for us. The lawgiver is important in the territory of Gad. For us, 1 and 2 Corinthians correspond.
T.A. "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers", (@Acts 2:42).
J.T. That is right -- "the teaching of the apostles" -- implying authority.
A.P.T. It says in the @Psalm 105:22, "And teach his
{449}
elders wisdom". As a rule, you feel that elders know everything; that they have not necessarily to be taught, and we must be open to any light presented to us by them; for things open out as we are subject to the Lord.
G.G. If we are in the good of the wealth of Joseph here, we can invite others to the mountain.
J.T. Quite so. I think Ephesians is the platform of evangelisation. You do not have evangelists mentioned among the gifts in Corinth, which is significant, but they are found in Ephesians, as if with Joseph conditions, so to speak, prevailing, you have something to invite people to. After Zebulun's and Issachar's services, who invite people to the mountain and bring in fresh material, there must be a coming under rule; that is what Gad is here.
F.H.L. That seems to be dependent on dwelling as a lion.
J.T. Which is said of Gad. You cannot touch him with impunity. He stands for the rights of God in government. He will not give way. He turneth not aside for any.
W.G.T. Dan is a young lion.
J.T. That is another thing. He leaps from Bashan. That is a brother who can get out of a position in a spiritual way.
J.S. Would you bring the care meeting in under Gad?
J.T. I would. Then Dan is a question of spiritual power. A man in a false position can get out of it. Bashan is not his territory. His place is in the land. It shows that it is another view of Daniel In @Genesis 49:16, it says, "Dan will judge his people as another of the tribes of Israel".
J.T. Naphtali fits in here in right order -- "Naphtali satisfied with favour, and full of the blessing of Jehovah, possess thou the west and the south".
{450}
They are there ready to possess the west and south, like a person who is spiritual; you can entrust him with things; you can enlarge him.
W.G.T. He is satisfied with it; he is not grumbling.
J.T. That is the kind of brother to entrust with things. A satisfied man can be trusted; a dissatisfied man is apt to satisfy himself at the expense of others.
A.F.M. The blessing of Asher is a fine winding up to the way Moses blessed the tribes.
J.T. "Asher shall be blessed with sons; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil". It seems to fit in to the end that there should be *sons*. "Let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil". There is not much said of him as to himself, but he shall be blessed with sons, and that is a fine suggestion. God's thought is *sons*. We have to look at it in a broad sense; it is increase of what is delightful to God, and in which the saints share. You can understand how his name -- Asher -- fits in well at the end. "Happy art thou, Israel!" The chapter indicates that all is in spiritual order, each tribe fitting in with others, according to whatever his history would furnish.
A.P. Do the last four verses apply generally as apart from any tribe particularly?
J.T. Yes, verse 28 shows what was in mind, and expresses God's thoughts of Israel in relation to these lovely features.
{451}
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (9)
@Joshua 4: 1 - 11; 7:13 - 16; 18:1 - 10
J.T. The first feature to be touched upon is that of the two and one-half tribes who obtained their inheritance on the wilderness side of the Jordan, as coming in first. What is to be noted is that they are subject to Joshua. Although their territory is separated by the Jordan from that of the other tribes, yet for the moment they qualify as fit for the land; so that there is no discrepancy in the twelve stones; all the tribes are there. Whilst we may fall short in our appreciation of God's thought for us, yet He does not fall short; His mind is the same for all the tribes. They are represented in Gilgal. They went over -- 40,000 of them. They served well in the conquest of Canaan, but as returning to their own territory they lost ground; they reared up a "great" altar, which, while not intended as rebellious, indicated a low and confused state of mind; besides, after a long experience of the promised land, they are content with the wilderness side of the Jordan.
They represent people who do well while they are in the assembly under the influence of the Lord, but on returning to their own settings (that is, where their hearts are -- in their families and businesses) they immediately lose ground; so that they built an altar which was pretentious and was to be a witness to their claim to the land; but an altar in the land is a poor substitute for *themselves* being in the land.
A.P. Apart from the failure of the two and one-half tribes on their side, do you look at the territory on the east side as part of the inheritance?
J.T. Well, it is not Canaan. It is, however, divine territory but given by *Moses*; it is in a certain sense Romans and Corinthians, but it is not Ephesians. It
{452}
is short of the full provision of love for us. Those content with it, have a lower estimate of what is suitable for us than God has.
A.N.W. What is to be learned from the fact that half of the tribe of Manasseh goes over?
J.T. I think it proves love according to God in the ones that *went over*. If I leave my natural setting to get into the divine thought for me, I am overcoming the claims of nature; so that part of the tribe was on a higher level; the divine thought governed them more than the natural.
A.F.M. What you said about the epistles to the Romans and Corinthians is helpful. We need those epistles, which suggest our responsibility in the plains of Moab, all the time we are here; but the sad condition of the two and one-half tribes was they had no intention of going on to the land. They settled down short of it.
J.T. It is divine territory, but short of what the great love of God would do for us later on. Why should not I have the best? Why not let God choose for me? He knows what is best. In the division of the tribes, the ones that settled the other side of Jordan would represent Christians who, while valuing what is of God, *prefer* natural things.
A.P. Are not the dangers of the eastern side of Jordan recognised by God Himself when He gave that side an equal number of cities of refuge as those in Canaan?
J.T. Quite so; there is a balance in that; God comes down to where we are even if we remain on lower ground than the heavenly; only in such a case we certainly need the cities of refuge more than those in Canaan, because the man-slayer is more likely to be there.
W.G.T. Moses was displeased with the request of the two and one-half tribes. It was like the action of the twelve spies.
{453}
J.T. They *determined* that they would do it. They said, "we will not inherit with them on yonder side the Jordan". There is no use in urging people, when they are determined not to go any further than a certain point; we must not reject them, however, but make the most of them.
W.B-w. Barzillai the Gileadite had marks about him that were good; he was loyal to David, but he did not go over Jordan.
J.T. Quite so; many, like his posterity, lose their priestly status, and have had to wait "till there stood up a priest with Urim and with Thummim", (@Ezra 2:63), to get their position. Showing how sure the government of God is.
J.S. Does it show that family and business relations may be maintained on natural lines, instead of on spiritual lines?
J.T. Yes, family life and cattle and all that are right, but they are not to be our living associations; we are to live in Canaan.
W.B-w. Barzillai would represent a man of wealth.
J.T. Yes, he could maintain David at Mahanaim, but could not have part with him at Jerusalem; whereas the true blessings of the believer are all *there*. God has "blessed us with every spiritual blessing *in the heavenlies* in Christ", (@Ephesians 1:3). The point is *where* the blessings are. The book of Joshua has this in view. In chapter 4 twelve men carry over twelve stones out of the bed of Jordan to Gilgal; so that, whatever our inclination or decision may be as to the present time, the mind of God is unaltered. The twelve tribes are in His mind, and they have a place in the land.
A.F.M. The tribes of Reuben and Gad were represented in the taking up of a stone from the midst of Jordan, as confirming God's mind further.
{454}
J.S. The territory is divinely given. How would you hold it?
J.T. We are on Ephesian ground now. In @Deuteronomy 33 the tribes are viewed in relation to what came out in the wilderness; here they are the same people, but their origin is *death*. That makes a great difference with us; not only the work of God dating back to our conversion, but that we are *identified with Christ in death* -- and that is the beginning of our history. The stones were taken out of Jordan while the ark was there. Ephesians contemplates our being dead in trespasses and sins, and out of that state we are quickened together with Christ. Our history begins there.
W.G.T. Is that why it says there were twelve stones taken out of Jordan and that twelve were put back?
J.T. Yes, they were put back by *Joshua*; it was his own doing; but the twelve stones taken out were taken out by twelve men, representing all the saints, and carried over, which was a burden, and set up in Gilgal; so that the book of Joshua would begin with death, and show our quickening out of it; @Deuteronomy 33 synchronises, in that every item of the work of God in us from the date of our conversion enters into that.
J.S. The work of God in us is carried over so that the identity is maintained.
J.T. Quite so; as in heaven we all have come out of death with Christ. Canaan is not heaven literally, but the entering into our privileges in the assembly at the present time.
A.F.M. In @Colossians 2:12 it says, "buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead". That would be parallel with Joshua, but not going as far as Ephesians.
{455}
J.T. Quite, you would need the being "quickened together with him", (@Colossians 2:13).
A.N.W. As to Romans and Corinthians, if the full effect of the teaching of these epistles was there, would not Ephesians follow? I mean, is not the germ of Ephesians in both of them? The one body in Christ, for instance, in @Romans 12 would lead one to look for Ephesians.
J.T. Yes. "One body in Christ" gives you status. I think we want to pay more attention to coming up actually out of death, for these stones do not come out of the wilderness. The assembly comes out of death. It synchronises with Eve as brought to Adam -- life out of death; she had no history.
C.A.M. It gives one a very much greater appreciation of the meaning of the death of Christ to see that we come out of that death.
J.T. That is your beginning. Notice that it was when all the people passed over; they are already on heavenly ground before these stones are taken over, and then we should see that the people themselves are over before the ark. In this sense the saints are seen as the object of the death of Christ. The antitype is the death and resurrection of Christ, and our quickening with Him.
T.A. The ark remained in the midst of Jordan until all the people passed over. I thought @John 20 would correspond with that.
J.T. It does, only that the ark is not seen in Gilgal. It does not appear until Jericho; that is to say, what is prominent here is the resurrection of the saints; it is the saints that are in view. The ark is there, of course, but it is holding the ground in the bed of Jordan. It says, "When all the people had completely gone over, that the ark of Jehovah went over, and the priests, in the presence of the people". It is the saints getting a view of Christ holding back the power of death until they get over.
{456}
Jordan goes back. It is Christ holding back the forces of death until we get over.
J.S. Would the appreciation in our souls of the power of Christ as overthrowing death enable us to pass over?
J.T. Just so. The saints are first over before the stones are taken up; that is, they are now a heavenly people whose origin is His death, and the stones are to represent that.
J.S. There is a new beginning in the stones.
J.T. That is where you start; the stones did not come out of the wilderness.
W.B-w. Is Christ holding back that power during the whole dispensation?
J.T. Yes; it is for *faith*. We know by testimony that death is abolished; yet it is still in power outwardly. Death still exists, as @Hebrews 2:14 says, "that through death he might annul him who *has* the might of death, that is, the devil". Satan *has* the might of death, but for faith it and he are annulled. The point here is the position we are in as out of death.
C.A.M. Does it not give meaning to those two words in Colossians, "with Christ"?
J.T. It touches your heart, that you are *with Him*; but think of the power that was there in the ark, in the bed of Jordan! The mind has to become accustomed to that.
W.B-w. The point is to see that the ark in Jordan applies not only to Christ on the cross, but to His holding back the power of death, until the assembly is complete.
J.T. Quite. It is a question of faith; by faith we take resurrection ground and the Spirit sustains us there.
A.N.W. In the last verse of the previous chapter it says, "until all the nation had completely gone over the Jordan", (chapter 3:17). Is that not worth noting?
J.T. It is; and then: "And it came to pass when
{457}
the whole nation had completely gone over the Jordan, that Jehovah spoke to Joshua, saying ... Take up hence out of the midst of the Jordan, *from the place where the priests¬ feet stood firm*, twelve stones". They are already over; then the stones are taken up and placed in Gilgal. The stones being taken from the place where the priests¬ feet who bore the ark stood firm, shows the complete identification with Christ in death.
J.S. Are the saints over Jordan as the subjects of the work of God?
J.T. It is what preceded, and gives you moral power to take that new position.
J.E.H. Say a word about the two thousand cubits -- the distance that had to be maintained between the people and the ark, before they got to the Jordan.
J.T. It is important as impressing you with the greatness of the Person typified in the ark. The distance stated affords a clear view of Christ as the only One who could annul death and him who has the power of it. The water would have disappeared by the time they got to Jordan!
W.B-w. The two and one-half tribes go over in a representative way.
J.T. They were there to maintain the full thought of God. All the tribes were there. The mind of God is unaltered in that the death of Christ has secured a place for all the saints, and is an important thing to apprehend. All the saints go over, but all the time they are going over, the ark is holding back the power of Jordan. The gain for us at the present time is that we might be in the assembly, and so beyond death. But in taking this ground we use the Spirit. The power that wrought in Christ in taking Him out of death works in us.
J.S. Every tribe would see where the ark stood.
J.T.Jr. What would you say about those people,
{458}
none of whom came into Canaan except Joshua and Caleb?
J.T. It emphasises the fact that it is a new generation; that idea comes out in Romans, although we do not get "risen with Christ" in that epistle, but we have the children of God. "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God", (@Romans 8:16). Jordan is the end of the life of responsibility. As in Canaan, we have come out of death with Christ. The idea of the new generation comes out in the wilderness, but going into Canaan is more than that. It is the end in death of the life in the flesh. This life is by *faith* of the Son of God; it is not over Jordan, but faith lays hold of Canaan, and it may indeed be enjoyed now in the power of the Spirit. We should note that where the feet of the priests who bore the ark stood, there are twelve stones, "and they are there to this day", meaning that there is a testimony there that we *have been* in death.
C.A.M. What we enjoy after the Lord's supper is a condition of things which really has no past history attaching to it.
J.T. That is right, but the breaking of bread answers to the covenant. It is the death of Christ, but the death of Christ seen at the foot of Horeb when the blood was in basins. It was there in volume that the love of God, in type, was told out; and then when Moses went up the mount later and came back, his face shone with the reflection of the glory. The Supper is a memorial of Christ and the other great feature is the covenant; but then after the Lord's supper there is, according to the power we may have unitedly, ability to take up heavenly ground. We are to follow the ark at a certain distance; that is, until death is reached and known to be overthrown. The people were in the land before it. In this respect the point in the ark is *power*. What you get at Gilgal
{459}
is not the ark, but the *old corn of the land*, meaning Christ as *indigenous to Canaan* -- not having been in the wilderness at all. The "old corn" is Christ in heaven; it represents Him as *there* characteristically.
A.P. They prepared victuals before going over the Jordan, but they got a new food on the other side.
J.T. Yes; here it is a heavenly thing; the old corn is of the land; it is not manna, which is Christ as food for the wilderness; the old corn is indigenous to heaven, as already said.
W.B-w. It is a new thought advanced that we do not follow the ark of the covenant through. That is to say, Christ opens the door for us to go through first.
J.T. That is right; the ark was made in the wilderness; that is the setting of it. The old corn was never in the wilderness; it is Christ in heaven; the ark is out of view in @Joshua 5 to make room for the other type, i.e., the old corn of the land.
A.F.M. That would be the reason, evidently, why the ark is so little brought before us in the book of Joshua after it goes round Jericho.
C.A.M. Would that account for the apostle's saying, "But if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer", (@2 Corinthians 5:16).
J.T. That is right; we know Him as He now is, not as a Man on earth, but the heavenly Man; the old corn would mean that He belongs in that sense to Canaan.
W.G.T. In chapter 3, the people go after the ark as far as Jordan and then they go past it.
J.T. That is the point; the power of God holding back the power of death until all go over. Of course we are quickened *with* Him -- we come out of death with Him; but the type here calls attention to the
{460}
personal distinction and power of Christ as abolishing death.
W.G.T. Would chapter 3 represent the energy that is required today to follow the Lord in this regard?
J.T. Exactly; you follow the ark at a reverential distance, but then you go past it; that is, you recognise, as seen in this type, that death would overwhelm you if it were not for Christ in power holding it back. All this has to be apprehended spiritually.
C.A.M. In connection with the gospel of John, we sometimes speak of chapter 19 as the ark of the covenant going into death. Do you think we should say the ark, in that gospel, is lost sight of?
J.T. When Christ comes into the midst of His own, it is more the old corn. The disciples looked into the sepulchre, but He was not there. Well then, that means that death is abolished. When He came into the company, it was as the One that *ascends*. "I ascend to my Father and your Father", (@John 20:17). *It was that heavenly One that came in among the disciples*.
A.N.W. What you say confirms that the land is not heaven literally.
J.T. It is the ascending or heavenly Man that comes into the assembly.
A.F.M. What is the New Testament antitype of the old corn of the land?
J.T. In a general way, it is @John 20, that is, Christ in His own sphere. Although here on earth in testimony, He was the Son of Man in heaven; (@John 3:13).
H.S.D. Would the *risen One* be emphasised in Colossians?
J.T. Colossians does not go beyond that for us, but in Ephesians we are raised up together and are made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ. In Colossians our hope is laid up in the heavens, Christ being there; but we are not there -- as risen
{461}
with Christ, we are to set our minds on things above.
R.W.S. Speaking of the twelve stones, Joshua says to Israel that when their children should ask what these stones mean, they should give an accurate answer. Has that a bearing today?
J.T. Indeed, you can hardly give an accurate answer now unless the children see that you are a heavenly man; that you have come up out of death. @Ephesians 2 includes the work of God in its entirety. All that is contrary to it is left behind in death, and it is in quickening I begin; but as once dead.
A.R. The death of Christ, in one aspect of it, clears me as guilty; but it also brings me forth in His life, with no past history of shame attaching to me.
R.D.G. Why did they not take any memorial out of the Red Sea?
J.T. There were no stones set up in the Red Sea or taken out of it. The Red Sea does not set forth the end of our responsible history; it is continued in the wilderness. The Red Sea and Jordan come together in Colossians. When you are over Jordan, there is complete adjustment for the heavenly position in circumcision and the passover; and the old corn comes into mind; that is, Christ in heaven in the history given, and it is a new thing altogether.
J.M. Do I understand that the serpent lifted up in the wilderness means that man after the flesh is gone?
J.T. The brazen serpent is judicial; it is the condemnation of sin in the flesh; it answers to Romans, not Colossians. Jordan is the end of our condition of flesh and blood altogether; so that henceforth know we no man after the flesh. We clothe each other with the risen, heavenly condition. The Lord would teach us what all this means, that "such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", (@1 Corinthians 15:48). As this is definitely reached the believer's whole outlook is changed. Our being brought to it
{462}
literally and finally is only a matter of time. In the power of the Spirit it is realised in the assembly. Paul says, "I know such a man, whether in the body or out of the body I know not", (@2 Corinthians 12:3). It is an immense thing to take heavenly ground in association with Christ in the assembly.
T.H. "Wherein there is not ... bondman, freeman, but Christ is everything and in all", (@Colossians 3:11).
J.T. Quite; "there is no male and female". @Galatians 3:28 shows you what the thing is; but in 1 Corinthians the sisters are recognised in the assembly, for in that epistle we are viewed as on the wilderness side of the Jordan.
J.T.Jr. Is Canaan the sphere of eternal life?
J.T. Well, eternal life enters into it, for it begins at Gilgal. Another thing comes in here, that is, a lodging place.
J.S. What is involved in that?
J.T. Well, these chapters do not give you the final thought. In principle, we have to wait for David and Solomon. If we could delete a few hundred years and bring them in here, we would have the full thought; but we can do that *spiritually*. In David we come under Christ typically as *head*.
R.D.G. There is no song when they come up out of Jordan. Does it suggest the idea of 'Yet deeper if a calmer joy?' (`178:6)
J.T. You have to wait for David to get the singing. That is what I was remarking as to spiritual ability, so that time does not affect us at all. The types fit as spiritually apprehended. Joshua even does not present headship; David does; in him we have typically the service of the assembly Godward. You get very little about the service of God in this book. The great thing is to apprehend the new position and the power by which it is secured, i.e., the ark in the midst of the Jordan. Then room is made later for David and Solomon as types of Christ.
{463}
F.N. In @Colossians 3:1 it says, "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ, seek the things which are above". What are the things referred to there?
J.T. The "things above" allude to the great system of things connected with Christ in heaven. Our minds are to be on these, not on the things on the earth. We are not viewed in heaven in Colossians, and yet not in the wilderness exactly. The earth is not our place; we are over Jordan, but in a lodging-place, to which Colossians corresponds.
{464}
THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL (10)
@Joshua 7:13 - 18; 25,26, 18:1 - 10
J.T. In view of the brethren having an outline of what is before us, it may be remarked that specific reference is made to the two and one-half tribes in the earlier chapters; they are included in the twelve, as come up out of Jordan; then the twelve stones are set up in the bed of the Jordan, representing that the tribes *had been there*. Here in chapter 7, the tribes are referred to to show that all are involved as sin occurs and discipline is carried out; the tribes also appear in chapter 18 in relation to the division of the land. Later their love is tested in affording cities for the Levites; in this all the tribes are seen making provision for the Lord's servants, the Levites. Another thing to be noted in this book, which may help us in our reading, is the three encampments -- at Gilgal, Shiloh, and Shechem. The final allusion to the tribes is in the last chapter when Joshua summons them to Shechem and delivers his final charge before he dies; so that the subject in hand runs right through the book.
J.S. Referring to the sin of Achan, what would be the significance of it for us today, as coming in here?
J.T. I suppose it is to teach us how to maintain government against sin arising, for the position in Canaan is not heaven literally. Popular hymns and the like assume that heaven is represented literally by the land of Canaan, but it is rather the position of the saints as still outwardly in this world, but brought into the light of God's purpose for them; having the Holy Spirit and taking up divine territory in faith, but with the possibility of sin working amongst them, so that this chapter shows how it is met.
{465}
F.L. That is according to Colossians and Ephesians.
J.T. Yes; contemplating our place in the land, and also the working of sin in us.
A.F.M. Is there significance in the words of Jehovah to Joshua: "*Israel* hath sinned?" Although one man had sinned, all the tribes were involved.
J.T. It is to maintain the universal responsibility. The whole assembly is involved in any action of this kind. It has to be dealt with locally, according to the New Testament, not in independency, but as recognising the whole; wisdom leaves it with those who should know about it. This, however, supposes a priestly state in them. Decisions must be by the priests, as seen in @Leviticus 14 and @Deuteronomy 21. The general thought as to discipline is in @Matthew 18:17, "tell it to the assembly".
W.G.T. Joshua lacked discernment, did he not?
J.T. Quite; but there seemed to be a state in the whole of Israel that God had to deal with because of the assumption that they could take Ai so easily. It showed that they were self-confident and not depending on God. In chapter 8, after the deep discipline of chapter 7, the ark is seen between Gerizim and Ebal, and all Israel with their elders and their officers and judges are on this side of it and on that. The ark is fully recognized -- the only power for us here. No doubt the discipline led to this, although what is seen at the end of chapter 8 had been specifically commanded.
C.B. God cannot go on with us unless we judge sin.
J.T. Quite. Each meeting has to recognise this, what affects one affects all, so that *all* Israel stoned Achan with stones.
F.L. Do you think the tribe of Judah being selected by the enemy for his attack, was because it was the royal tribe? Christ is called, "the lion which is of the tribe of Juda", (@Revelation 5:5). If that
{466}
tribe was overthrown the purpose of God would be interfered with.
J.T. It brings out the boldness of the enemy's tactics. He does not work from behind here as he did in the Amalekites¬ attack, but acts with great boldness in a frontal attack, so that the whole position of Israel should be affected. As in the case of Ananias and Sapphira, if the enemy had succeeded, the whole testimony in the assembly would have been discredited.
A.N.W. What does the stoning action as coming before the burning signify?
J.T. It is to bring in the principle that *everyone* in the assembly has to do with the matter, for everyone can cast a stone.
J.S. Each one would have to judge himself, and then take part in the carrying out of the judgment.
J.T. When the adulterous woman was brought before the Lord, He said, "Let him that is without sin among you first cast the stone at her", (@John 8:7). I cannot cast a stone unless I judge the evil myself. This principle gives everyone in a gathering an opportunity to deal with any sin occurring in it.
J.S. The Lord brought the treachery of Judas home to each of the twelve: "One of you shall deliver me up", (@Matthew 26:21).
J.T. So that they searched themselves, "being exceedingly grieved".
T.H. Those who have to do with discipline, as in a care-meeting, would gather all the information possible and present the result to the assembly.
J.T. Yes; administration belongs to the assembly. This principle of stoning is set out in the wilderness (@Numbers 15). It is a standing principle enabling each in a meeting to have part in the judgment of any sin arising. The severity of the judgment here -- stoning *and* burning -- is God's way of showing how He looks at sin occurring in the assembly. Burning is very
{467}
drastic. There is nothing left of the evil, it is dealt with, root and branch.
A.F.M. In this case Achan and his family bore the judgment, but in our case the Lord has borne it. The fire here would be in contrast to the lamb roast with fire; (@Exodus 12).
J.T. The Lord bore the judgment of God as it never had been borne by anyone. He bore it as apprehending fully what it meant. But the valley of Achor is to become a door of hope for Israel, (@Hosea 2), therefore the death of Christ as meeting the curse enters into this chapter.
C.A.M. This sin had to do with the Babylonish system. What would you say as to it?
J.T. The Babylonish system is *sustained* by the gold and silver. It is really Babylon in the midst of the people of God. Babylon maintained in its external adornment is fully seen in Revelation.
C.A.M. Would this sin come in in connection with the religious appearances in the world?
J.T. Yes; the garment represents what marks the system -- whatever it may be. You can understand how Achan would soon appear in this garment as having means in the gold and silver to sustain it. Babylon is a system of pride and show with plenty of means to sustain it. What Rome has in the way of display is most striking.
C.B. But underneath all this is lust.
J.T. Quite; everything that is wicked is underneath. It is the great intent of the devil to disguise every possible evil by this external religious show.
A.B.P. Would it be similar to "I am rich, and am grown rich, and have need of nothing", (@Revelation 3:17)?
J.T. Quite so; but the garment here goes further, it is distinctively Babylonish. Thyatira develops into Babylon.
A.N.W. What about this man's confession? Does it in any way change the situation?
{468}
J.T. Well; it might change it *now*; this would be a matter of priestly discernment today. The sin of Achan happened under law; under grace, of course, the assembly has the prerogative of forgiving as she has of retaining sins, so that today it would be question as to whether, if confessed, it could or could not be remitted.
J.E.H. I was wondering whether, "And ye shall be brought near in the morning", would support that thought. The exposure of his guilt was not made immediately. Achan had an opportunity of coming out and making a confession of his sin.
J.T. Quite. The allusion to the morning is suggestive; it is time given to weigh things over. In meeting Korah's rebellion, Moses says, "To-morrow will Jehovah make known". The staves of the tribes were laid up overnight, and "on the morrow" Aaron's staff had brought forth almonds; (@Numbers 17). God gives time for desired results.
W.G.T. This sin brought dishonour on the testimony.
J.T. It brought about the defeat of Israel's armies; not only was Achan involved, but there must have been a general state in Israel that needed to be discerned and judged.
R.W.S. Sapphira was guilty with Ananias in the first sin relating to the assembly, but Peter discerned it. Why were the sons and daughters of Achan burned, did they share in their father's guilt?
J.T. We have to so regard it. God saw the necessity for it. The stolen things were hidden in the tent and the family must have been aware of this. On the other hand, in the serious case of Korah, his sons were saved. God takes opportunity to show that He exercises mercy, but He did not here; nor was there any mercy for Ananias and Sapphira. Sapphira had three hours, in which to repent, after
{469}
her husband's death, even though she did not know what had happened to him. The point is as to whether I am spiritually sensitive enough to know how terrible the thing is that has happened. I should be sensitive about it; she was not. It is spiritual density when I do not feel things. Even Joshua did not know or feel that such wickedness as Achan's existed in the camp. He fell upon his face, but the Lord says, "Rise up ... Israel hath sinned". Why did he not know? His sensibilities could not then have been keen.
A.P-f. Is there not a difference between voluntary confession and confession brought about by God bringing the sin to light?
J.T. It is for us to discern whether it is the work of God or mere natural remorse like that which marked Judas. There is no moral value in that or in the tears of Esau; whereas David's contrition was real.
A.N.W. God would justify Himself in judging Achan's family and sparing Korah's.
G.McP. John says "There is a sin to death", and "there is a sin not unto death", (@1 John 5:16,17).
J.T. Exactly; we have to discern these cases.
W.B-w. Every case of sin has to be examined and dealt with separately. Each case is different. Pharaoh sinned several times and repented, nominally, but never repented in his heart; but when David confessed his sin there was a reality to it and it brought forgiveness.
J.T. On the other hand, the Lord says, that forgiveness is to be "until seventy times seven" (@Matthew 18:22); it is to be unlimited in extent from the side of one sinned against. But, of course, this does not set aside the necessity for genuineness in repentance; otherwise a forgiven one would not forgive another as the Lord's parable which follows shows.
{470}
W.B-w. In David's case, why did not the child live? David confessed his sin, but there was the penalty nevertheless; the child died.
J.T. It was the working out of the *government* of God. David's child was not the only one that died in relation to David's guilt, for Urijah had died. Absalom slew his brother and paid the penalty, for he died. On that same line the female speaker in the @Song of Songs 1:5 says, "I am black, but comely". Why was she black? Because the *sun* had looked on her. The government of God is one thing, and the knowledge of forgiveness through repentance towards God another. The government of God as to a sin may go on to the end of our journey.
T.H. When the child died David arose and anointed himself; why was that?
J.T. It was the end of an exercise. He arose from the earth, washed and anointed himself; changed his clothing, and went into the house of God and worshipped. That is important. The sword, however, never departed from his house, but David himself was set free before God. With Achan the judgment of God was *final*. Thus we learn that each case of discipline has its own characteristics.
J.S. Do we see the wisdom of the ways of God in allowing the breakdown of Israel with a view to their being thoroughly self-judged before taking possession of the land?
J.T. Exactly. They should have gone to Gerizim and Ebal as soon as they entered the land and asserted the curses and the blessings -- the land was to be held on the ground of obedience, which this action of Achan violated most inexcusably. In the next chapter they go to these mountains and do as Moses had commanded.
J.S. Is it in order that Christ might have His rightful place?
J.T. Yes; He did not have His rightful place
{471}
with Achan and his family, but in chapter 8, "All Israel, and their elders, and their officers and judges, stood on this side and on that side of the ark" (verse 33).
A.P.T. "A little leaven leavens the whole lump", (@1 Corinthians 5:6); the evil permeated the whole assembly, and had thus to be judged.
W.B-w. Unless conditions of evil in the assembly are dealt with, do they not gain ground?
J.T. That has to be learned; we may carry on our meetings, but God will not be with us until sin amongst us is dealt with.
W.G.T. A sin like this means the examination of everyone? The whole family in this case had to come forward.
J.T. That is what we see in the verses read, "Hallow yourselves for to-morrow", that gives *time*, "Rise up, hallow the people, and say, Hallow yourselves for to-morrow; for thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, Israel". The night preceding the morrow is a particular point here. It is a time of weighing things over, "Even in the nights my reins instruct me" (@Psalm 16:7); which means the inner workings of the soul as knowing God. "Man's spirit is the lamp of Jehovah, searching all the inner parts of the belly", (@Proverbs 20:27). That is what goes on with the spiritual in the night season.
W.G.T. We arrive at God's mind by the process of elimination?
J.T. @Romans 7 teaches us to examine ourselves inwardly, so as to reach deliverance.
W.B-w. Was the accursed thing in the heart of Achan, or in the gold, silver, and the garment he took?
J.T. It was his state; he coveted what was Babylonish. The history of modern Babylon explains all this, and has to be understood by us. How drastically God deals with it here in Achan! It is beyond man's power or the assembly's power to deal
{472}
with Babylon *now*. We read, "in one hour thy judgment is come", (@Revelation 18:10). Such will be the swift judgment of God; although He will use instrumentalities on earth, such as the beast and the ten kings, to accomplish this.
F.L. Babylon is the greatest system of evil and it runs through from Genesis to Revelation.
J.T. It runs through Scripture, and we can understand, looking back to this event, what God had in His mind. He sees the end from the beginning and deals with the roots. But generally this is an outstanding testimony to the people of God that He will not be with them save as they judge evil arising in their midst.
C.A.M. Weakness in a locality might be traced to one man among the people of God seeking a place in the world of appearances. That would be something like Achan coveting the Babylonish garment; but deliverance comes by the locating of it, and dealing with it even though the process is a very painful one.
J.T. The exercise must be gone through. David had not come to the end of it until the child died, then he arose and anointed himself and went into the house of God.
F.H.L. There is great encouragement when a company recognises its weakness and has power to deal with the cause of it.
J.T. Hallowing is important here; the saints have to see that this matter involves the holiness of God. What is in view is how are we able to deal with this "accursed thing"? God gives us the whole night to prepare, so that the thing is dealt with according to Himself.
J.S. God is helping Israel here.
J.T. Quite so. He is telling them what to do and they carry out the order He gives, and the end is reached.
A.P.T. The disciples were ignorant of what was in
{473}
Judas's heart. The scriptures indicate that they did not know he was going to betray the Lord. They thought the Lord was giving him directions as to the poor. They did not discern that he was the traitor.
J.T. The Lord had indicated earlier that something seriously wrong existed among the disciples: "Have not I chosen you the twelve? and of you one is a devil", (@John 6:70). One of the twelve a devil? If Peter discerned that Christ was "the holy one of God", then it was for him to see who the devil was as one of them. It was not a question of a demon but that Judas himself was a devil. Evidently Peter and the others went on, without discerning Judas as a devil, yet as such he was there.
W.G.T. Judas was a likeable man, for the Lord spoke of him as "mine own familiar friend, in whom I confided", (@Psalm 41:9).
J.T. Quite; if one were in need, he would help him no doubt, for he carried the bag. I suppose he had ability to hide his real self.
H.E. Would you say that the process of elimination was experienced when they said, "Is it I?"
J.T. That is the point; thus you discern if there is anything of the devil in your heart. The Lord intended that the eleven should get help through the wicked state of Judas, why then did they not discern him? The Lord might have told them that Judas was a devil, but it was for them to find out. He showed plainly that the evil was there, but left it for them to locate it, which became a test to them.
J.S. The Lord told John, according to John's gospel.
J.T. He did as enquiry was made. It was just as Judas was about to leave them. But why was enquiry not made earlier?
A.B.P. The Lord in speaking to the seven assemblies in Revelation said, "I know". Would that be to assure us that He knows what is going on?
{474}
J.T. Quite so; and He tells them what is wrong in each case. It was for each of them to find out what He meant and judge the evil.
T.H. He says in @Revelation 18:20, "Rejoice over her, heaven, and ye saints and apostles and prophets".
J.T. We are in remnant times today; the ability to deal with the public body has gone beyond our reach. God alone can deal with it; but He looks for us to be with Him in it. He has His judgment as to it, but He executes wrath on it according to the judgment of the saints. "God has judged your judgment upon her", (@Revelation 18:20).
J.T.Jr. The evil here is hidden in the earth in the tent. We get the thought of what is hidden very often in a good connection, but here it is in a bad sense, the hiding of something that permeated the whole assembly to bring about the destruction of it.
J.T. Quite; it was *well* hidden. This shows how Babylonish principles took root in the church. Achan said of the things he had taken, "they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent".
N.F.P. Paul writes to the Corinthians about the sin in their midst.
J.T. Yes, and upbraids them that they were not humbled because of it; instead of this they were puffed up.
H.S.D. That the garment was hidden in the tent shows that the domestic circle is contemplated.
J.T. Quite. Idolatry is in view. Rachel hid the teraphim in her tent. How secretive such people are!
Ques. What had you in mind in connection with "as they were eating", (@Matthew 26:26)?
J.T. Well, the Lord gives opportunity to judge oneself. There is more likelihood of our doing so when eating, in a spiritual sense, than when we are hungry. The eating of food gives leverage in the soul.
F.L. Silver and gold in themselves, viewed
{475}
according to type, were good things, suggesting redemption and righteousness. So that what we are confronted with often takes on the appearance of what is good.
J.T. Quite so. Babylon has things that are good in themselves but are in relation to an evil system. Here the metals are connected with the Babylonish garment.
A.F.M. Would you help us as to the evil coming to light? It speaks of a tribe being taken, and families, and then a family. How would that bear on discernment, or the discovering of evil today?
J.T. I suppose it is suggestive of the help we get from God now in locating sin. If we feel that there are things that are not right they will not long be hidden if we are with God. The next thing is to investigate, and the Lord helps us. Righteous discipline will result.
W.B-w. The valley of Achor becomes a door of hope. Would that refer to Christ?
J.T. Hosea takes it up. Hosea has a great way of bringing in victory where defeat was. Where Israel were called "not my people", they shall be called "Sons of the living God". Where there was curse and defeat as in the valley of Achor, there is victory, it becomes a door of hope; (@Hosea 2:15).
A.P.T. Verse 16 would indicate that the assembly, typically, is now beginning to function, and later, moral weight is seen in Joshua speaking to Achan, urging him to glorify Jehovah in making confession.
J.T. It says, "And Joshua rose early in the morning", that is a good example: you wish to have your senses clear in dealing with such a solemn matter, and you have the whole day before you. Then Joshua "caused Israel to come forward by their *tribes*" -- the thing is done in an orderly, careful way. There is moral power with Joshua in what he is doing. It says, "the tribe of Judah was taken.
{476}
And he caused the families of Judah to come forward ... and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken". They are not left with any doubt as to who it is. In Joshua's word, "Come forward", there is moral power.
A.R.S. What is the significance of the tribes thus brought forward? God could have brought the sin to light without their having to go through all this searching.
J.T. It is to bring everyone into it. As the tribes are coming forward everyone is concerned, and so the needful process of self-judgment goes on.
W.G.T. Judgment belongs to the assembly. Is that a point to be stressed?
J.T. Quite; so that *all* Israel stoned him with stones. In a moral sense they could not stone him unless they had judged themselves. Everyone that threw a stone had judged the thing.
G.McP. Is it the same idea in @Revelation 2 and 3? The Lord speaks to the angel of the assembly, and then to those that have ears to hear.
J.T. Quite. The assembly is addressed in each case, and every one in it is responsible for what may be wrong.
A.N.W. Say a word as to what the tribe of Judah being "taken" would mean for us today as indicated in this chapter.
J.T. I think it is the putting of any matter into the hands of the Lord. "The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole decision is of Jehovah", (@Proverbs 16:33). He gives guidance, and never fails us. In @Matthew 18:19,20, it is, "if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens. For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". The latter thought is in chapter 8
{477}
of Joshua -- the ark is in the midst of them. We recognise the antitype of the ark knowing *He never fails us*. "Ye and my spirit being gathered together, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ", the apostle says; (@1 Corinthians 5:4)?
J.S. What would the heap of stones set forth?
J.T. I suppose it is an *abiding* testimony commonly seen in the Old Testament. In the last chapter of this book you have one stone set up as a witness. With us things are held in our minds by the Spirit as witness of what God does amongst us; you may find yourself referring back to occurrences where God signally helped, and find comfort and assurance. A memorial like this would recall special help from God against, and overcoming, some great effort of Satan.
A.F.M. "And they raised over him a *great* heap of stones, which is there to this day". It would be conspicuous and would remain.
J.T. A testimony is thus carried forward that sin must be judged amongst the people of God.
F.L. The heap of stones would show the action of the assembly; whereas a monument would more recall the act of an individual. God would value the stones as representing those who had judged themselves and acted together for Him.
J.T. This was an assembly action. Each one could say, 'I had part in it!'
W.G.T. God would value every one of the stones.
J.T. Quite. As you look back to a crisis of twenty years ago you may wholesomely inquire, 'What was my part in it?'
A.B.P. There is a tendency in local difficulties for sides to be taken, showing that the principle involved is not discerned.
J.T. That was the situation at Corinth, but all were brought to judge the evil here.
F.H.L. Why is the silver brought in here?
J.T. The gold and silver would denote means of
{478}
supporting the false principle. The garment is the false principle. We must support a principle if we adopt it. Very often the support is by natural ability. Many who turn aside say, 'Look how we are being blessed!' and yet the false step or principle has never been judged.
W.B-w. It is called "a beautiful mantle of Shinar". It would be very attractive.
J.T. This Babylonish feature goes right through from Genesis to Revelation. Babel began at Shinar. The coveted garment represents this, and the gold and silver is to support it. In verse 1 of the next chapter there is an encouraging word, "Fear not, neither be dismayed". In this respect there is an incentive to deal with evil, for we thus come to realise the power of God: "Fear not, neither be dismayed. Take with thee all the people of war, and arise, go up to Ai".
W.F.K. Does Joshua typify Christ as Mediator here?
J.T. In this instance he is more the responsible one among us. God says to him, "Arise, go up to Ai". When he is acting for God he represents Christ.
A.F.M. Will you make a few general remarks about chapter 18?
J.T. The inheritance is a great subject in this book. It is Eleazar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes here, who allotted the inheritance to Israel; (chapter 14). The two and one-half tribes are noted first as receiving their inheritance on the east side of the Jordan. They failed to value the full divine thought. God would say to us, 'I have something much better for you', but we are content to take low ground. Moses accedes to their wish; they represent one side of this subject; that is, the inheritance that the Lord, as it were, is forced to give us. He has something much better for us than we are satisfied with, but He
{479}
accedes to our wish. These two and one-half tribes have full status in the land nevertheless. When the Lord comes for us He will not leave one believer behind.
The next thing is the tribes that have distinguished themselves, spiritually. You will notice that so far we are at Gilgal, not yet at Shiloh, which is a question of individual distinction. We may see in any movement of God that He brings forward certain men and they acquire distinction by their spiritual power and prowess. That is exemplified in Judah and Joseph. No doubt the half tribe of Manasseh was rewarded in that they pulled away from the other half of the tribe, and so did violence to natural feelings. They preferred to be with their brethren on the higher ground of Canaan that God gives us. That is how the matter stands up to chapters 15, 16 and 17; that is to say, you have great leading tribes brought forward, as representing those who are distinguished spiritually among the people of God. God honours such and gives them their inheritance before Shiloh, or the house of God, comes into view.
But there are still seven tribes to be considered. Why did they not get their inheritance? It is because of lack of spiritual energy, so that more than half the people had no inheritance. Judah *wanted* the inheritance -- Caleb, representing that tribe, claims it. Then the daughters of Zelophehad, representing Joseph, claim their inheritance. God values those who come forward and say, 'I want the very best'. He honours that desire and gives it to you openly without any appeal to the saints. Then in chapter 18 we may get our inheritance in relation to the tent of meeting at Shiloh. The judgment of the saints enters into this. There are a lot of brethren that have no personal distinction. Why is this? It is because of a lack of energy. Opportunity for spiritual wealth and distinction are there, then why am I so slow in
{480}
embracing it? Why should my tribe be one of seven out of the twelve tribes that have no inheritance? That is how matters stood according to chapter 18.
W.G.T. Judah and Joseph would be in fixed positions, one northerly and the other on the south.
J.T. Quite. There are a lot of saints among us that have no personal distinction or spiritual initiative, and so their inheritances are given to them through the brethren. Three men for each tribe divided the remaining territory, and wrote the divisions made in a book. This would mean that these territories were not held in the minds of the saints; but Caleb had held his in mind for forty years!
A.N.W. Are you challenging us individually or locally?
J.T. Well, generally. Why has my inheritance to be written down? There were many famous people in Israel; both men and women who distinguished themselves. Others got their positions apart from any energy in themselves to lay hold of it. So today with regard to a brother, I might go to the brethren in his locality and ask whether he is moving spiritually, whereas, with others I can see they are going forward in spiritual energy. God has a place in the assembly for each one according to His counsel, why then should we not have that place?
G.McP. Would 2 Corinthians be helpful as showing that we are to be an epistle of Christ known and read of all men?
J.T. Just so; the writing corresponds with our setting in the assembly.
H.S.D. David's mighty men distinguished themselves.
J.T. Gilgal is a place of distinguishment spiritually, for two tribes, Judah and Joseph, got their inheritance while encamped there. Gilgal is not a question primarily of God indicating His mind
{481}
through the assembly, but how I judge myself and see myself in those stones; a type of my being risen with Christ and having a heavenly portion. When I come to Shiloh there is another set of circumstances -- the tabernacle is in view, and more than half the people are seen as having proved themselves slack in taking their inheritance; and now the determination of the lot of each is through the saints, that is, three of a tribe making a survey and writing all in a book -- God indicating His mind in this way.
W.B-w. Chapter 18 means that God has a portion for everyone.
J.T. Yes, and He is displeased that they are letting it lapse.
A.N.W. There is quite enough for each one, and he is to shine according to his own distinction as under God.
F.L. As to natural ambition, "whosoever will be great among you, shall be your servant", (@Matthew 20:26). That is not contemplated here, but is to be condemned.
J.T. Quite so. What is in mind is that we are to know and value what God has given each of us according to the counsel of His love.
Ques. Would you say a word about Shechem; chapter 24?
J.T. It is another position, God moving on according to the exigencies of the testimony. He has not yet come to Jerusalem but He will do so. Chapter 24 contemplates the death of Joshua, and Israel is put under obligation to serve Jehovah when their great leader is no longer with them. This corresponds with our position in relation to the Lord's supper. Another thing entering into chapter 18 is that when my allotment is given I may have to share it with another brother. The question then arises, can I get on with that brother? That is a testing position. We see hero that Simeon fits in with Judah.
J.E.H. If we are heavenly minded we will not
{482}
have any difficulty in fitting in with a brother, will we?
J.T. Quite. Simeon fitted in with Judah, who is a Gilgal man. Then, in this chapter we find Benjamin fitted in between Judah and Ephraim. Benjamin was a "little one" like Paul. He was one that would take a lower place as between those two brothers.
T.H. Paul was heavenly minded.
J.T. He was "less than the least of all saints", (@Ephesians 3:8). How well he got on with them! He did not clash. "Little Benjamin" became "their ruler", according to @Psalm 68. It is worth while to be little.
A.B.P. Do not the saints help you to be small? We have often heard that Paul was let down "by the disciples" in a basket. (@Acts 9:25)
J.T. Quite so.
A.P. Sometimes there is a dangerous element in a meeting, like that of the mother of James and John, who wanted them to be in a position greater than that of others.
J.T. It is dangerous indeed; it caused a cleavage among the disciples. The Lord met it by challenging them as to His death and by what He was as ministering to need in this world.
