{1}
THE ABUNDANCE OF THE SEAS (1)
@Mark 1:1 - 20; @Mark 2:18 - 28
J.T. I hope the Lord will give something a little outside of what most of us understand in this gospel. Certain features have occurred to one. First there is the abruptness with which the writer introduces his subject, which reminds us of secret history with God. We have public history; but persons being introduced abruptly without any previous history being given would suggest the perfect knowledge God has of those He takes up for service, they take it up as having had educative relations with Himself. The introduction of John the Baptist here is in line with this, as also that of the Lord Himself, "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God". The same thing appears in certain characters of the Old Testament. Aaron and Elijah particularly are introduced in the service without their previous history being given; the first being typical of all Levites, because he is formally called "the Levite"; besides, in speaking of him to Moses God intimates His acquaintance with him, both as to his *speaking ability* and his *heart*. Elijah comes in with *authority*. If one has authority in service there can be no question of one's previous relations with God. Then there is certain teaching in relation to the *sea* this gospel in which the Lord may help us later.
F.H.E. Why is the Lord introduced as "Son of God" rather than as Son of Abraham and Son of David as in Matthew?
J.T. I think it is in regard to the dignity and finality of the service; that personality necessarily marks those who are serving; not only that there is history with God,
{2}
but personality through family relationship. This applies to the Lord Himself, although in Person of course He is unique; but the personality involved in family relationship underlies all service, as seen in the Levites, who were all firstborn ones. This family dignity is owned and confirmed by God as the result of a secret history pleasing to Him. Thus here the voice from heaven to Christ is, "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight".
Eu.R. Have you any thought why it begins, "Beginning of the glad tidings"?
J.T. The idea is that the vessel is, *fully* in the thing.
I am speaking now of ourselves, but this is seen in the Lord, who is our example in everything. Paul's ministry did not begin properly until @Acts 13 although he had served before. This gospel treats specially of Levitical principles, not the Levitical principles that are the subject: in the book of Joshua, but as in Numbers. We have to take account of the Levites from the standpoint of Numbers, and also from the standpoint of Joshua. In the latter they are seen as typically heavenly, exerting heavenly influence. In Numbers the Levite entered into service at the age of twenty-five, but thirty was the age at which he began his service properly.
M.W.B. Would you contrast the line of service in Mark with that in John? I was wondering whether you had in mind the more formal kind of service as in Mark.
J.T. Exactly.. John treats of the Lord's service as proceeding from Himself without any regard to the principles that should govern the Levite. That is, He does not wait for John to be cast into prison, but proceeds of himself. In the others he waits for this occurrence.
M.W.B. Yes; you referred to @Acts 13 in regard to tile apostle, but he had preached before that; there is a contrast.
J.T. Yes; his proper beginning was as sent out by
{3}
the Holy Spirit. That is, there might be a good deal of previous work, and very good work too, but the beginning of a man's service is when God formally recognizes him as called into service. That is what is in mind here: "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God". Therefore the Spirit goes back to the prophet, not resting only on the Person of the Son of God as in John; He is observing the Levitical principles. So that He goes on immediately to cite the prophet in regard to John the Baptist.
Eu.R. So in transferring this to ourselves after the link with the brethren and the assembly. Is that what you had in mind?
J.T. Yes. One has often thought of the dual transaction of @Acts 13 the transaction with the *Lord* directly, and then the transaction with the *brethren*, which Saul had. These two things go together in regard of the way for the Levitical position; at Antioch they lay their hands on him as the Holy Spirit recognized him. Ananias represented the brethren at Damascus.
J.J. Does that verse shew that Paul had a good deal of influence in the writing of this gospel?
J.T. Mark is the writer undoubtedly, and you can understand how the Holy Spirit would use him as conversant with Paul's gospel, that is, the gospel of the Son of God.
J.J. Yes; I thought of the fine word at the end of 2 Timothy about Mark: "He is serviceable to me for ministry",(@2 Timothy 4:11).
J.T. No one could be more serviceable than the writer of this gospel, and the apostle must have had great concern, about the continuance of the ministry. Mark would greatly help to promote it. That the apostle could thus speak of Mark, as he was about to pass out of the service himself bears, I believe, on this gospel.
{4}
F.H.B. I thought the verse (@Hebrews 12:23) you called attention to would shew that all levitical service should be carried out in the light of sonship.
P.L. So the Levites are the firstborn. Would that link up with the "Son of God"?
J.T. Yes; each one was a firstborn, and what I think we may see in that connection is that it would imply the influence of heaven in our service; not merely that we have a personality, but our *position* is heaven. As the seventy return and record their great success in the service, the Lord says, "Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens", (@Luke 10:20). That takes one out of the undue influence of success in the service; the servant retires into the greatness of his heavenly position, and that is really the great safeguard for us in successful service.
H.D'A.C. Why does Paul say, "He is serviceable to *me* for ministry"? Why not to the saints or the brethren?
J.T. I suppose he was profitable to him personally, and that is why he wanted him to be with him. The apostle's ministry in Rome would be largely in writing "The parchments" would indicate this, and Mark would serve in this connection.
Eu.R. Was the Lord Himself the pattern of that retirement when service was apparently unsuccessful, when He said, "I thank thee, O Father"?
J.T. It is just at that point He says that. It is in Matthew you get that feature, where His rejection is very evident. He retires into the sense of what He was with His Father who had "hid these things from the wise and prudent". But in Luke what occasions the praise is that their names are *written in heaven*; and then He speaks to the Father as to this, that He had revealed "these things" to the babes, and hidden them from the wise and prudent, and then He goes on to speak to His Father about Himself, that "no one knows who the Son is but the Father,
{5}
and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son is pleased to reveal him", @Luke 10:22. Then *He turns to the disciples*, as much as to say, all this is to influence you so that they should not be unduly occupied with their success. We should, of course, thank God for the success, but the retirement into the thought of what one is in heaven, is deliverance, and maintains the balance.
Ques. Do you regard Mark's gospel as indicating Christ serving here as a model?
J.T. Yes; as the "Son of God".
Eu.R. Is it your thought that the Son of God here is based more on Luke's gospel: "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God"?
J.T. It is "shall be *called*" personality acquired. The title is after certain history; of course the Person was there, but came out in Him as man is in view.
Eu.R. And then, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" and then His baptism is based on that.
J.T. Quite; the Father's voice speaks of what He *found* in Him.
H.E.S. Are both thoughts of dignity given in @Exodus 4, where God says, "Israel is my son, my firstborn ... . Let my son go, that he may serve me"?
J.T. Yes; all that came out in Christ.
Ques. Does the character of the service in Mark involve that a vessel shall be given over to it *entirely*?
J.T. Yes; *addicted* to it.
Rem. We may take up service in an incidental sort of way, such as preaching the gospel on the Lord's day, and forget the levitical side during the other days of the week.
Ques. Would you say what was in your mind in referring to the Levites in Numbers and in Joshua? What is the distinction?
{6}
J.T. Numbers, in general, gives the *toilsome* side, we "labour and suffer reproach". The word used in @Numbers 4, for the Levite calling involves strenuous work (Compare @2 Timothy 1:8,2:3); whereas Joshua generally treats of the Levites as priests, and that they have no inheritance here on earth. The book emphasises their heavenly position and privileges, particularly that besides the sacrifices of the Lord they had forty eight cities in Israel, meaning that they would not be heavenly only, but persons in cities, apprehending the idea of a city. The idea of a city is accentuated in the forty-eight that their influence should flow out universally city wise. It implies, therefore, an understanding of the thought of God in a city; that was to be seen in the Levites in the way of influence. Their commonwealth was in heaven; and so the great thing from that point of view would be heavenly influence, but citywise, not simply the idea of heaven, but the idea of a city; for that is the way heaven takes form finally in its relation with the earth. That is, it comes out concretely in an intelligent, understandable way; because a city is a known idea, and God graciously comes into our range in known ideas. Heaven, as a place is hardly known to men.
Ques. Would "forty eight" imply administration universally?
J.T. It is administration in an influential way. The heavenly city is light and rule, but rule of a most benign kind.
E.J.McB. And is your idea that it comes out now as it will do by and by?
J.T. Yes. You lay hold of the idea of a city, and it works out in your influence. It takes a person out of his individuality and sets him in relation to the city; particularly the cities of refuge, because those belonged to the levites; that there should be the continuance of grace; this was to be maintained amongst *them*.
H.D'A.C. Those forming the heavenly city have
{7}
learned to exert city influence here before they come out in it.
J.T. And one can see that the standpoint of Joshua is most important, but perhaps not much observed by us in our service. It takes us out of ruts and parties into a very high altitude where we are the distributors of grace in an ordered way, as in a city; so that it is distributed with intelligence. If our influence is only based on gift, we miss the teaching of Joshua.
Eu.R. Are you suggesting that our relations in our localities should take character from these cities, and that it is of great importance for a Levite to have a sense of being part of that heavenly administration?
J.T. Yes. The 'suburbs' might at any time be examined as a *test*. Comparatively the suburbs were small, but they were large enough as a test as to what influence really there was. So, if I go to a locality and I am with God, I discern what kind of influence there is *there* whether it is heavenly; if so, it should be extended.
Eu.R. What does the suburb suggest to us?
J.T. The *immediate* vicinity; sufficient to prove whether you have influence with God, We can test ourselves in that way.
Ques. Were they not the same measurement as the ark was in front of the children of Israel as they crossed the Jordan, two thousand cubits?
J.T. Yes. The distance, therefore, was not great; but it was enough to test just what influence was being exercised in any of those forty-eight cities, whether anything good was being done. So you can test the influence of the saints by the immediate vicinity.
J.J. How do you account for this gospel beginning with the wilderness in contrast to what you said?
J.T. That is a very important thing too, because the wilderness does not minister to the flesh. When the angel told Philip to go down to the road from Jerusalem
{8}
to Gaza, he told him it was a *desert* Philip would soon find this out, but he is specially told of it. That is to say, the servant has to make up his mind to that. It was said of John the baptist, in his private history, that he dwelt "in the deserts", not only in the desert, but in the deserts, shewing he had a *variety* of desert experience.
Eu.R. Then that has a place with us as to committing ourselves to the position. It says of Zion, "All my springs are in thee", (@Psalm 87:7); as accepting the position of service we are not to expect anything but wilderness conditions. If devoted to the service of the Lord, our springs are elsewhere.
J.T. That is the idea. In kindness to you the Lord would convey that it is not an easy path; He said to one who followed Him, "The foxes have holes and the birds of the heaven roosting places, but the Son of man has not where he may lay his head", (@Luke 9:58). It is kindness because young people setting out in the Lord's service are sure to be disappointed unless they understand what is involved and know where to turn for support and provision.
J.J. Do you think the desert experience of Philip was the balance to the success he had in Samaria?
J.T. Yes. And it is in that way he is honoured progressively. First, as he accepts the direction of the angel and goes into the desert, the *Spirit* speaks to him. That is progressive honour. It is greater thing for the Holy Spirit to speak to him than an angel; and then he joins himself to the chariot, and conducts himself in such a manner that the Holy Spirit lays bald of him entirely, and catches him away. That would impress upon us that it is a question of how we conduct ourselves in the service.
Eu.R. So in regard of the Lord Jesus here, the Spirit comes upon Him early in this chapter, and then drives Him into the wilderness.
J.T. Quite. That is another thing in Mark that
{9}
the Lord recoiled from having to do with Satan. He is *driven* by the Spirit here. The true levite does not seek out contact with the devil, but he does not refuse it if he has to face it. Then another thing here is that the word from heaven is to *Himself*, which is important; that you are made conscious that you are pleasing to God.
M.W.B. Do you associate that with the idea of personality?
J.T. Of course His divinity underlies all, but it is acquired personality here; as also in Luke: He "shall be called Son of God". It is His personal excellence in private life, and so God is now acquainting Him from heaven with His delight in Him, which is very precious. We should not mar that with any self-occupation in service, any dwelling on our ability or success.
P.L. "Mine elect in whom my soul delighteth!" (@Isaiah 42: 1).
H.D'A.C. The temptation, bringing out His perfection as Man, greatly aroused Satan.
H.H. We should appreciate the wilderness setting as that, which does not minister to the flesh, and so helps to establish us on the line of what it is to be for God here.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that a servant has a dual experience -- experience with God and wilderness experience?
J.T. Quite; John "was in the deserts, until the day of his shewing to Israel", (@Luke 1: 80). The world is definitely given up, and you do not minister to the flesh; you deny the flesh; otherwise you will not accept the service in all its glory. This, no doubt, explains Mark's breakdown. As accepting the wilderness we find what God can be to us in our service.
Ques. Is that what you meant by secret history with God?
J.T. Exactly.
P.L. John is in the deserts before he is baptising in the wilderness.
{10}
J.T. Quite; and we see what moral power there was in his baptism. He would convey to you something of the idea of the crossing of the Red Sea, which introduces into the wilderness.
Ques. Would John's clothing shew the idea of wilderness history before he attempts his public service?
J.T. Yes. Camel's hair; camels stand the wilderness well. Then his food was "locusts and wild honey", so the wilderness was not new to him as he commenced to serve. It is well to *train* oneself to self denial. Paul says, "I buffet my body, and lead it captive", (@1 Corinthians 9:27).
R.B. All this is in keeping with the Lord coming from Nazareth of Galilee. I am thinking of the secret place He had with God as accepting reproach.
J.T. It is very touching to think of the Son of God, the Creator of the universe, being in such obscurity and reproach all those years. It was "a town called Nazareth" a place of no reputation. Thus He was called a Nazaraean, answering to the testimony of the prophets as to His reproach, (@Matthew 2:23).
Now the next thing is the character of the Lord's first gospel address, as it were. He waited for John to be delivered up and then "came into Galilee preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom of God, and saying. The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God has drawn nigh; repent and believe in the glad tidings". That is very short, and it is His first recorded address. It contains The substance of what He preached in Galilee.
E.J.McB. It is far reaching. Do you think the emphasis lies on the repentance as making the position possible for the glad tidings?
J.T. Exactly. We are speaking from the standpoint of the preacher or servant, and he should know that the glad tidings will not be effective without repentance in those who hear.
E.J.McB. Do you not think that is the value of the wilderness experience?
{11}
J.T. Yes. John the baptist knew what the flesh was; he had proved it "in the deserts", and so preached "the baptism of repentance". The Lord continues that note, calling on people to repent. Then, notice it is not simply believe the glad tidings but believe *in* them. No believer can take it *all* in at once; but you have such a sense of the magnificence of the gospel as hearing it, that it is a question of the believer believing in the thing; that there is such a thing as the gospel, and that it has to be gone into, and explored, so to speak, in all its wonders. That is, the idea of preaching is to convey a right thought at the start; that you do not minimize the gospel; you do not bring it down to a verse of scripture; but you convey to the hearers that a wonderful thing has come in, how God has come out in Christ for their deliverance and blessing. The Lord in Mark almost personifies the gospel.
E.J.McB. So you want people really to believe in the *thing*.
J.T. And then to look into it and see what is in it. The epistle to the Romans opens up the gospel, but I believe in *it* to begin with.
M.W.B. Believing is like an open door that leads you into an immense storehouse.
J.T. That is what I thought.
M.W.B. One feels what vast resources there are.
J.T. Do you present it that way?
M.W.B. I should like to.
J.T. One only raises the question because it is important that you should convey to the hearer that there is such a thing as that. The Lord's first address is that of course He would say other things, but that conveys the great thought, that there is such a wonderful thing come in, and that is "glad tidings", and one is to believe in them.
R.B. Then do you mean that the power of the preacher lies largely in his believing in the glad tidings?
{12}
J.T. The gospel must be effective in him if it is to be so in his hearers. If I am a son in conscious dignity, I am more than a forgiven person. I enjoy forgiveness, but I am more than that. I have come into the light and good of Paul's gospel. As the apostle says. God "was pleased to reveal his Son in me". (@Galatians 1:16).
H.D'A.C. It is a vast world of light into which he has come and in which he lives.
W.R.P. Would believing in the gospel suppose one's affections have been won to it?
J.T. Yes; so that the preacher is enlarged inwardly. What I mean is this, Paul says that God had revealed His Son him, not to him, meaning there was room there; it is the idea of a vessel; there is such room within that God can operate in you and through you. The Son revealed in him, the believer is in the very centre of the vast system of blessing, which the gospel presents.
F.S.M. Was not the apostle Paul conveying the idea when he said, "For I am not ashamed of the glad tidings; for it is God's power to salvation, to every one that believes"? (@Romans 1:16).
J.T. That is good. Do you present the gospel in this way?
F.S.M. One would like to give the impression every time that it is vast and wonderful to one's own soul.
J.T. That is the thing. In Romans the apostle begins, "Separated to God's glad tidings … concerning his Son". The Son of God is the centre, and theme of what is presented. Romans opens it up, but Ephesians completes it.
A.S.L. And Romans speaks of His being the Son of David; this involves the kingdom. It says here that "the kingdom of God has drawn nigh".
J.T. That is another thing; although God is referred to as King, it has Christ as Man in view, and David represented this. Hence Christ is said to have "come of David's seed according to flesh".
{13}
A.S.L. I was thinking too of the close of the Acts where Paul "remained two whole years in his own hired lodging, and received all who came to him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ", (@Acts 28:30,31). I should like to hear a little on that.
J.T. The idea of the kingdom of God brings in the One who can administer it, and that necessitates the seed of David. God had come in in Christ for man's deliverance and blessing. The kingdom of God was there in the most tangible and practical way. The transfiguration in Mark is "the kingdom of God *come in power*".
A.S.L. So "Remember Jesus Christ raised from among the dead, of the seed of David, according to my glad tidings", (@2 Timothy 2:8).
J.T. The gospel of Matthew enlarges on that side. Christ is the "root of David", which would be John's gospel; and the "offspring of David", which would be Matthew's gospel; but even in treating of Him as the offspring of David His Person is always guarded. The introduction of David in 1 Samuel is as of Jesse, following Ruth. If I go backward through Jesse I must get to the root, but the forward movement is towards the offspring. So I am perfectly balanced as to the Person, even viewing Him as the offspring of David, as the One who administers the kingdom. The "child ... born" is the "Mighty God", who governs "upon the throne of David", (@Isaiah 9).
A.S.L. So he emphasizes the resurrection at the outset of Romans, and then again in Timothy, the sure mercies of David are in the risen Son of David.
J.T. That is it. He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", (@Romans 1:4), but He is officially "our Lord"; this implies the kingdom.
A.S.L. I wanted some more help; you have been challenging some of us. If Paul preached the kingdom
{14}
of God, how would you sum up his preaching? You have the verse here, a remarkably simple gospel address. He says, "The time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God has drawn nigh; repent and believe in the glad tidings". Is not the gospel that the kingdom of God has drawn nigh? That must be blessed glad tidings for men.
J.T. Quite. "The time is fulfilled"; that is the first thing, you understand the time. And then, "the kingdom of God has drawn nigh". It was there Christ. It is the kingdom *of God*; God was active in grace, active practically in the ministry of Christ. That is how I understand it.
E.J.McB. Would "the time is fulfilled" indicate that the time of the flesh was over, and that thus wilderness conditions had begun; and that in the kingdom of God drawn nigh there is an entirely new vista opened up, and then the outcome is you enter into the vast blessedness that is consequent on the testimony of all this?
J.T. Quite; the servant thus understands the time, in which he is serving and the light that governs it. The kingdom is God active in grace.
H.D'A.C. Really there in Christ's Person.
J.T. That is what I was trying to make clear, His ministry is the thing. Ministry is representative of God in some sense, or it is not anything. It is representative too of the time and the overtures of God to men; so that the Lord told the seventy to say to the cities visited, "The kingdom of God is come nigh to you", (@Luke 10:9). It was operative in them. This involves the kind of person who is ministering.
E.J.McB. Is that why they were to take no resources, indicating that their resources were in what had drawn nigh?
J.T. Exactly; all was furnished in the kingdom God.
J.J. Would it be illustrated in @1 Kings 17? The widow thoroughly believed in Elijah at the end.
{15}
J.T. Exactly. Elijah had asserted the rights of God as operative in himself: "There shall not be dew these years, except by my word", (@1 Kings 17:1). That was a very remarkable thing to say, and it is what the widow of Zarephath came to; she came to an apprehension of it in her own house. All were proving the effects of the drought, but she was proving support in it. Besides, her son was restored to life. How real the power of God was in the prophet!
Eu.R. Is your suggestion that if we are to be able to present the kingdom we need the Lord in His official character as Son of David, and that He puts the impression of Himself on our spirits as the Son of the Father's love? Much has to take place with us in the way of liberation before we can give souls the touch, and impress them with the substance of what is available.
J.T. Quite.
A.S.L. The kingdom of God was brought here and set forth in the Person and works of Christ; and those who through grace left everything and followed Him came into it and exercised the power of it; their preaching affected others similarly.
J.T. Quite; that is what came out in @Acts 11. Through the preaching of those who were scattered they that believed were "added to the Lord", and they were to "abide with the Lord". All that proves they were really in the kingdom and that precedes our being brought into the church.
The next thing in our chapter is the Lord "walking by the sea of Galilee", verse 16. The Servant is walking and walking in a certain relation. It introduces the subject of the sea in this gospel, which perhaps may be opened up to us. I only refer to it here because of the Lord's walking by it, as if His service is to be in relation to it.
Ques. Does the sea refer to the gentiles?
J.T. I think we shall see in Mark that the bearing of
{16}
the sea is universal. There are other meanings to it, but there is a remarkable outlook world wide. There is the suggestion of territory beyond.
H.E. S. Is your thought that this glorious service is to be universal?
J.T. Yes. He walks by the sea, and that would tend to preclude at once undue, nationalism. That is the bearing of the sea. Here He is walking by it, a most interesting thing. Then, "He saw Simon, and Andrew, Simon's brother, casting out a net in the sea, for they were fishers. And Jesus said to them. Come after me, and I will make you become fishers of men", verses 16,17. I only thought we might notice the result of this walking, the attractiveness of the Lord as before them, having in mind that He would make them fishers of men. That is, the service is towards *men*.
P.L. Would the position in the end of Mark be in accordance with this walking by the sea?
J.T. Quite. "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation", (@Mark 16:15). Going into the world implies that I go into a *hostile* scene, but I have the *creation*, in view in Mark.
Eu.R. Is it your thought that the attractiveness of the Lord was great enough to supersede the trawl nets and their fish?
J.T. Exactly, and I think the force of that comes in when the next two are called, that is, when you get the father and the servants.
Eu.R. How?
J.T. Because the great pull is seen when there is anything to be left of a social status in this world. It says of Simon and Andrew that they left their trawl nets, but to leave one's business is not quite the same thing as leaving your father and the servants. Many leave the trawl nets, but asset leave the father and the servants. I mean, they never give up what social status attaches to them, and that always is fly in the ointment.
{17}
Ques. Was that not true in Mark's own case when he sailed away to Cyprus?
J.T. Quite; the natural drew him. The business is easily given up by many of us, but when the father and the servants have to be left, that is the real test, and that is what you get in James and John. There is complete deliverance in the divine call, not only from the things of business but from the influence of family connections and all that goes with these.
R.B. So it says, "They went *away* after him".
J.T. That is good, meaning that the distance was definite.
Eu.R. I was thinking this cuts two ways. There might be incentive on the part of those who consider themselves in some lower status becoming equal to those above them.
J.T. That is important, because the Lord's service sometimes makes 'gentlemen' of us, but it was never intended to do that.
Eu.R. It brings us into a new thing, which is greater than all social distinction.
J.T. The idea was, they were not to give up their calling, they were to be fishers still, but simply to change the kind of fish they were looking for; they were to be "fishers of *men*".
Eu.R. This would make us simple as to the sphere in which God has set us in His governmental ordering.
J.T. The thing is to see the greatness of the levitical idea governing the believer in his service. He is greater than the distinctions that men pride themselves in, and that is what the Lord would impress on us in Luke, saying, "your names are written in heaven".
H.D'A.C. What is the difference between forsaking the father and the hired servants?
J.T. "Leaving their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants"; it is one idea. The father is left with the servants. It looks as if Zebedee had some little
{18}
distinction, having 'hired servants'. That John was known to the high priest would indicate this. The father is left with the servants; that is the position. You may enlarge this in modem times to any extent; the more the hired servants the greater the dignity. Can I leave *that*? Many have left the nets, but retain the social dignity.
Ques. Do you think the trawl nets would suggest the implements of business, the ability to do things?
J.T. Yes; especially as it says they were using them; they were actually engaged in their calling.
Eu.R. Is there importance in the fact that each of these men is called with a brother?
J.T. It is important to notice that. The family link is there, and one point would be that although there, it is to be superseded by the new order of things or merged in it. The next verse shews they have now entered into a new order of things. It says, not simply that He went, but "*they* go into Capernaum". That is, I belong to this new companionship and everything must be subservient to it.
Eu.R. So Capernaum is spoken of as being uniquely responsible because this wonderful service was carried on there.
J.T. They went into Capernaum five persons brought together under those extraordinary circumstances. Capernaum had now something that no other city ever had, that is, an order of things set up by the Lord Jesus, having as yet only four followers, but to be enlarged, so as to fill the universe. The *greatest* testimony was there.
J.O.S. Would the fact that the Lord saw them imply a secret history as you said?
J.T. No doubt He had watched, over them. There is nothing in connection with all our histories, back to our forefathers, that He has not taken notice of in calling us; He knows it all. Then it goes on, "And straightway on the sabbath be entered into the synagogue and taught. And they
{19}
were astonished at his doctrine". That is the position here; He was not only preaching but *teaching*. The evangelist certainly should be able to teach, and there should be something distinctive about it; it should not be merely theoretic. Then there is the power over evil, and then the healing of Peter's wife's mother; that is to say, the household of one of the servants is attended to, because that is very often a difficulty with us, that our households are deranged and the service is to that extent hindered and marred. But the Lord puts that right and she serves *them*. Then in chapter 2 it says, "He entered again into Capernaum"; 'again' meaning there is another phase of the testimony to be brought into Capernaum; so it is not now a question of overcoming the devil, but of what went on in the house. "He entered again into Capernaum after several days, and it was reported that he was at the house".
Ques. Why is it *He* here?
J.T. In the first visit they entered into Capernaum, and I think we have the idea that God has introduced a great system of things marked by teaching with power. But, after all, the Lord is the doer of what is done, and every true Levite recognizes that. Then "after several days" that has to be noted "it was reported that he was at the house". That is to say, there is no idea of advertising His coming. He is in the house and the report goes out. He is therefore not advertising before hand. What is done is as by Himself the disciples are not mentioned.
E.J.McB. J.N.D. gives a footnote indicating that He was 'at home'.
J.T. That would shew there was some convenient house there, and He was free in it. The fact that the roof was broken through without any murmurings would shew He had secured a footing there.
Rem. The Lord was living in the city at that time, (@Matthew 4:13).
{20}
Eu.R. Would you suggest that is what we should have in our local conditions, room for the Lord to move in that way?
J.T. I should think so. "In the house" implies advantageous conditions, and so the friends of this impotent man had liberty to open the roof and let him down before the Lord. The point was to get him down there, and then we have the often noted transparency marking the whole operation, which is a very important thing in dealing with people in the house. All the circumstances are exposed nothing is hidden, because the bed on which he lay comes down.
Eu.R. So in gospel labours we should not be content merely to take the gospel to souls, but to get them into those conditions where they can get their impotency healed.
J.T. That is right, here it is not the gospel carried to the man, but the man carried to Christ.
E.J.McB. The thing seems to have been done by *four*, who would correspond with the four the Lord had already secured.
J.T. Quite. The testimony was thus in Capernaum in a new way house wise; there is freedom and the service is correspondingly effective. They "glorified God, saying. We never saw it thus", chapter 2:12.
{21}
THE ABUNDANCE OF THE SEAS (2)
@Mark 3:7 - 18; @Mark 4:1,2,35 - 41
J.T. We see from these passages the bearing of the *sea* in this gospel. In the previous chapter it says, "And he went out again by the sea, and all the crowd came to him, and he taught them", verse 13. Then in chapter 3, "And Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea", verse 7, and chapter 4 begins, "And again he began to teach by the sea. And a great crowd was gathered together to him, so that going on board ship he sat in the sea"; and then in the end of the chapter He crosses the sea "to the other side". Many thoughts enter into the sea as Scripture presents it, but this gospel stresses it as regards evangelical or levitical service. We have in the types a reference to those who "had knowledge of the sea" in Solomon's time, great wealth accruing from maritime expeditions. The sea suggests countries farther off and tends to remove insularity. Christians are not to be insular; island conditions tend to make us insular; whereas the sea suggests *other* lands and their wealth, so that maritime nations in the history of the world always had an advantage. I thought that that advantage should appear in a spiritual sense, for there are great varieties of wealth brought from overseas; Solomon understood that.
Eu.R. "Go into all the world", chapter 16:15; does that suggest the sea?
J.T. Quite. You get in the end of chapter 4 that the disciples were to go to the other side, whatever that may have been.
P.L. And would Simon being in the tanner's house "by the sea" connect with it, leading to the sheet let down from heaven?
J.T. That is really the link with the work among the gentiles in the Acts, so it was a question there of the word from heaven. What the angel said to Cornelius was
{22}
to send to one Simon, who was surnamed Peter, who was in the house of one by the sea. Peter is where the teaching of this gospel would put him to the test as to; whether he is to be governed by his natural links, as suggested in *Simon*, or whether he is to be governed by; his 'surname' at this juncture. It was a critical time, but the sequel shewed that the spiritual side connected with *Peter* predominated. Had he leaned toward the other, the Simon side, he would have allowed his natural feelings and prejudices and missed the import of the outlook he had in the house by the sea; but he went up to the housetop to pray; that was his salvation, so to speak; he was in the divine current for the moment. There is always a divine current, and it is a question of whether we are in it or not; a question of our state of soul, because there is always the mixed condition as indicated in 'Simon' and 'Peter'. So it is a question of our state of soul in crises, whether we are to be governed by the spiritual feature in us, or by the natural. Peter went up to the housetop to pray, and there he becomes in an ecstasy, shewing that the spiritual feature gained the day, and heaven greeted him, as it were. He said that the sheet "came even to me". On the housetop in prayer he was completely adjusted and brought into accord with God, with the universal testimony to the gentiles.
H.E.S. The Lord partook of the produce of the sea for food; is the thought that He would not only get His food from Israel but from what is universal?
J.T. I suppose so. The loaves and fishes combine the products of land and sea.
F.S.M. It is said in (@2 Chronicles 8) that Huram's servants had knowledge of the sea and they brought four hundred and fifty talents of gold to king Solomon.
J.T. His was a maritime country and so had an advantage, and Solomon gained by it. The record of the queen of Sheba following immediately shews what is in
{23}
view. "She came from the ends of the earth", the Lord says.
P.L. And Solomon referred to the virtuous woman as being "like the merchants¬ ships: she bringeth her food from afar", (@Proverbs 31:14).
J.T. That is good; and so the psalmist said, "Yonder is the great and wide sea: therein are moving things innumerable, living creatures small and great" that is potential wealth "There go the ships", (@Psalm 104:25). The ships are the means of communication, and those who have the knowledge of the sea manage them, hence the rich results.
H.H. I suppose Paul in that sense had travelled the sea a good deal; he spoke of where he had gone preaching the kingdom of God. That is the idea morally.
J.T. Exactly. The tendency to insularity and nationalism is very great with us, and it militates against the dispensation. It has thus to be discerned and judged, so that we may be with God. It is not in keeping with the present time. God will eventually revert to the national thought. The wise men from the east respected this side of things. They inquired for Him who was born "King of the *Jews*"; that was right. They saw His star in the east, indicating what will obtain when the favoured nation of God will be respected by other nations; but evangelical principles break down insularity; the sea shore makes for universality; not only is the need of distant nations considered, but also the wealth that is available in them.
M.W.B. Would you say a word as to the blending of the universal thought you are pressing now with submission to the governmental ordering of God? I was thinking of @Acts 16, the education of the apostle, forbidden in one place and suffered not in another.
J.T. That is another and important consideration. God establishes the universal principle in the sheet let down from heaven knit at the four comers, but then
{24}
another thing is, He knows where the wealth is. Solomon's ships undoubtedly were guided by the knowledge of where the gold was. All the governmental dealings of God with the race have had in view the present rime, that is, the universal testimony that He intended to render; so that the next thing is, *where* is the needed wealth? God knows, so that the Spirit of Jesus suffered not Paul and his fellow workers to go into Bithynia. The man from Macedonia was calling them; that was the guide. Evidently the wealth that God had in mind for this dispensation lay in the west, not in the east. I suppose the magi indicate that in the future the wealth will lie in the east, the west will have had its day.
M.W.B. I was wondering whether we should not have to bear both thoughts in mind in our own movements and prayers, the one not to be in any way lost sight of, yet the other to have a governing element in it.
J.T. We must have the thought of the dispensation clearly in our minds, that it is universal, and has all men in view. Then you recognize that God has a perfect knowledge of where the wealth is, and that He would have it now, as Solomon did. God knew that in His governmental dealings the west would afford a better field for the church than the east; that conditions in the east did not afford the same material for the gospel, having the church in view. But the "everlasting gospel" will undoubtedly reach out towards them.
Eu.R. So Peter in preaching says, "But in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him". (@Acts 10:35); that is what was coming into view. And he says of the Lord there, "He *is* Lord of all things", (@Acts 10:36).
J.T. Cornelius clearly indicates the part of the race that God had in view for the gospel in this dispensation, that is, the race of Japheth It was undoubtedly that part of the race He had mainly in view for the gospel, and to take the church out of it. Of course the work began
{25}
with the Jews, but it did not continue with them, (@Acts 28:28).
J.J. Would Issachar and Zebulun come into the thought in Mark in connection with the sea? "For they will suck the abundance of the seas, and the hidden treasures of the sand", (@Deuteronomy 33:19).
J.T. They represent what we are speaking of. Jonah went in the wrong direction; he was premature. God had sent him to the east and he failed in it, but he went afterwards.
Ques. Could you illustrate insularity of outlook for us today?
J.T. Well, Australia, is a very good example.
Ques. In what way?
J.T. It is so far away and isolated. Distance from other saints greatly tends to insularity, and has to be watched. I have noticed it also on the Pacific coast of America. The saints there are so far away that they tend to lose sight of what God is doing generally. I do not mean to be personal, but to bring out what would apply to any position separated by great distance from the generality of the saints. I am sure you must feel that out there.
Rem. I thought perhaps you were thinking of servants of God who do not take account of the greatness of the field.
J.T. That is also true; and the tendency in this country would be centralization or metropolitanism, the feeling that things go out from a position; whereas the sea in these scriptures would habituate the mind to the thought that there are *other* parts, and those other parts afford spiritual wealth also.
Eu.R. This tendency to be insular may apply to saints in any locality. We all need to have our hearts exercised as to the universal movements of the Lord.
J.T. Yes; to "go over to the other side". That is the
{26}
idea, because there is something perhaps which we never thought of on the other side.
P.L. You get this principle of isolation exposing to danger in relation to the people who were dwelling at Laish, @Judges 18. They were "dwelling securely, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; and no one was in the land who possessed authority, that might put them to shame in anything; and they were far from the Zidonians, and had nothing to do with any man", verse 7.
J.T. Exactly; and therefore they were exposed and were overcome. That is very suggestive, because there is strength in the universal position.
E.J.McB. Does the Lord here withdraw from where His rights as the Lord of the sabbath had been refused?
J.T. Quite. You see the opposition had arisen, and that leads us back to the end of chapter 2, and we see what accrued from this service by the sea. It says, "And he went out again by the sea, and all the crowd came to him, and he taught them. And passing by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax-office, and says to him. Follow me". And Levi followed Him, and He sat in his house.
M.W.B. You mentioned this morning something about teaching; would you say a little as to the idea of teaching in connection with the preaching.
J.T. Teaching is a prominent feature in Mark. It is in all the gospels, but particularly here; it is an enforcement of things by power. People hear things in the preaching, but what do they mean? what is the moral force of them? You see it in a most striking manner at Ephesus, where the apostle separated the disciples from the synagogue into the school of one Tyrannus, leading up to the church. It is a *course*, and it is not optional. The name of the man who owned the school would indicate there was to be government and obligation to it; that is to say, the teaching is imperative. We *must* be
{27}
taught, not only listen to things, but have things forced into the mind. It is said that the apostle *reasoned* with them over a period of time in that school; the truth would be forced into minds on account of its moral value.
G.W.W. Do you mean that if a preacher of the gospel states facts and presses them, he should be prepared to shew his hearers their moral force?
J.T. Yes. The apostle in the epistle that sets out the gospel stresses the idea of teaching: "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed", (@Romans 6:17). I believe there is great want of teaching, that is to say, the forcing of the truth into the minds of believers, shewing the moral value of it. That is particularly needed.
H.D'A.C. They continued in the teaching of the apostles. @Acts 2:42.
J.T. There it is exactly.
J.J. Do you connect the sea with the epistle to the Romans?
J.T. Well, yes. The apostle had never been to Rome; it was overseas for him; but he knew they had obeyed from the heart the form of teaching delivered to them, not only obeyed the gospel, but *the form of teaching*.
Now, Levi seems to yield more than any of the disciples so far. When believers begin to yield the desired fruit the idea of the bridegroom fits in. The Lord alludes to the bridechamber and the bridegroom indicating that he was already obtaining something corresponding with these from His sowing. That is the thing to be looked for. He does not yet speak of the bride, but there was something that accrued to the Lord, which led Him to speak of the bridegroom. It says of Levi that the Lord "lay at table in his house"; and "many tax-gatherers and they were many, and they followed him". There was much for Him there.
R.B. Is the point you are making that Levi was to be
{28}
called from taxing the wealth of the nation to go in for gathering the wealth of the sea?
J.T. Pretty much, and that there was already a yield for Christ in him, and in connection with him. The many *following* Him was the evidence of a work of God.
P.L. Does that connect with @Romans 7? "Married to another ... that we should bring forth fruit unto God". Is that the crop coming up, something for the Bridegroom?
J.T. Quite. As soon as you begin to feel a little joy in your work as you see some fruit, think what must it be to Christ! Repentance in a man's soul that is something to Him. When a man is so delivered by the gospel that he leaves his money and desk and opens up his house to Christ, and brings in the tax-gatherers and sinners and sets them down there, the Lord's heart is touched. If you go about the world and see the little gatherings, you understand what wealth there is in them, but what must it be to Christ when He sees the affections of the saints drawn out to Him and to one another! That is the idea really of the church. It is not named, but the idea of the bridegroom already comes out and the joy He had, and so He refers to Himself in this way.
M.W.B. Should that feeling move us in our levitical service, the feeling of what there can be gathered for Christ's joy?
J.T. Yes. I think that is really how you get at, the church, in seeing what it is to Christ.
H.D'A.C. Did Levi get a great impression as to teaching, and did it not come out in his gospel in the way he speaks of Christ and His teaching?
J.T. I am sure he did. The persons he invited to his house implied disregard for Jewish prejudices, and this marks his (Matthew's) gospel.
Jos.S. I thought there were two lines of teaching, one in relation to God's attitude toward men, and the other in relation to His thoughts for the saints.
{29}
J.T. Well, I am sure that is right.
Jos.S. You said this morning that the evangelist should teach. I can understand teaching in connection with God's attitude toward men, but you would hardly open up God's thoughts in regard of the church so much in the gospel preaching, would you?
J.T. No; but I think you lead on to it; You see in the way that Saul was converted how the work is to be done. You do a bit. The Lord did a bit Himself (of course He does everything). He converted him, but then He says, "Rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do", (@Acts 9:6). What the Lord did was to prepare the subject for Ananias¬ work; that is, you pass the convert on to the next stage, so to speak, and there is a suited worker. In what you preach you convey the thought in the teaching, and the convert will feel the need of this and accept it as available.
J.O.S. The Lord taught the disciples (@Mark 8:31) that He must be rejected and suffer many thing would that be the evangelist's work?
J.T. Teaching those things is remarkable. I should not like to divide very much, but only suggest the general thought of teaching. The Lord taught them here by the sea, and then Levi comes in, as was pointed out. What a teacher he became, how thoroughly adjusting his gospel is for any who are holding to national religion and the like!
D.L.H. Is there not always the thought of the mystery of the gospel? I mean, attached to the preaching of the gospel, there is the mystery in view in the background.
J.T. It is formally introduced at the end of Romans.
H.P.W. Is your thought that you would like to leave a man with the impression that there is a lot beyond what you have told him?
J.T. That is the thing; and that there are others capable of leading him on. You may not be able to lead him very far, but the Lord has provided for it. So you
{30}
get in Colossians, which is on the up line, "Teaching ... to ... present every man perfect in Christ".
Ques. Then, when the Lord said to Saul, "Why persecutest thou me?" do you think there was something beyond, in the words that he would take to heart in relation to the church?
J.T. Quite; that would be opened up to him later. He found it in Ananias. The Lord made a point that the first Christian Saul would meet should rightly represent Him. In view of young people coming on amongst us, who have heard the gospel and believed and confessed the Lord, there is a great shortage, of the Ananias spirit. The next thing needed is the person who can rightly lay his hands on that young man or young woman who is seeking the way. Ananias went and laid his hands upon Saul. The Lord had been to him before that, so they were the hands of one who represented the Lord. He says, "The Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou earnest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight", (@Acts 9:17). That was the thing, and he says, "Saul, brother". That is, the laying of the hands on a convert would indicate that you are linking him on with what is there. It is an immense thing to convey to a person just converted that he is coming into something that is already victorious; that has been and will be victorious; that he is not coming into anything that will be a disadvantage to him, but that will be immensely advantageous to him. Those hands that are laid on him ought to convey something of all this.
E.J.McB. We want to know like Ananias what the Lord's thoughts in regard of that case were.
J.T. Quite. The Lord is very particular as to the first hand that is laid upon the convert, because that hand will impress him. "Why persecutest thou me?" Saul had had to do with such hands as that; they had not resisted him; he dragged them out of houses and before the tribunals, but they were not resisting hands, they
{31}
were subject, accepting the sufferings like their Master. "He doth not resist you", it says. That is the kind of thing Saul had met with in the saints when he persecuted them, and now he is meeting the same thing in Ananias, and that is what the Lord would convey to him, that he is coming into that. It is the 'me' the Lord spoke of to Saul.
H.D'A.C. That is, the hand of the preacher and also the hand of a disciple.
Eu.R. In all his work the servant stands in relation to the joy of the Bridegroom.
J.T. That is the idea. Every bit of fruit for Christ from your ministry is to add to the joy of the Bridegroom; it is a very fine thought not yet the bride. John heard the voice of the Bridegroom, but here the Lord speaks about Himself in that way, and that it was not a time for fasting. He would impress us with the idea of the joy that is in the results of the service.
F.S.M. Do you think that kind of consolidating work that Ananias did would be very largely personal work and might be done, and often is done, by spiritual sisters?
J.T. Exactly; so that the young believer should be impressed with the spirit of the church. There is mothering and this reflects "Jerusalem above", (@Galatians 4:26).
Eu.R. So Matthew records that it was for "joy of it" (the 'treasure') that the Lord sold all that He had and bought the field.
J.T. You will observe there that the Lord spoke the parables outside; but the three closing similes of the kingdom, referring to the church, are not *called* parables because they are all *inside* the house; it is an important thing that as soon as one is really converted to God he belongs inside and you want to bring, him inside. It is no longer parabolic ministry, but direct ministry, and the first thing is the joy the treasure occasioned. The New Translation omits 'again' in the second set of similes (@Matthew 13:44); they are not a continuation of the four
{32}
spoken outside. They are said to those inside, and it is a question of the Lord opening up what the treasure and the pearl are to Him.
Eu.R. So if persons are rightly converted and really acknowledge the redemptive rights of the Lord individually, they should be prepared immediately for the thoughts of the assembly.
J.T. Quite. As has just been remarked, the idea of the assembly is conveyed in the gospel, and the first hand that touches the convert afterwards should convey the spirit of the assembly.
Rem. That would be according to what the apostle Paul had in mind when he spoke of the "glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God".
H.E.S. Is it your thought that if the Lord gets a place in my house and circumstances, I am to be brought into the light of the joy it is to Him?
J.T. That is the point. You get here the idea of the bridechamber and the bridegroom coming in, and that leads on to the new cloth and the new bottles.
J.C.S. Would you say that the joy in any service is not what is ministered to you, but what it is to Christ?
J.T. Exactly; and I think we also should look for joy. Of course levitical work is heavy work; but it is not drudgery. You come into the joy of the thing, as working finder, the Lord.
P.L. So there are *singing* levites as well as carrying ones, the same persons, of course.
J.T. Exactly. There were four thousand of them in David's time.
P.L. Philippians would develop that: "Rejoice in the Lord always: again I will say. Rejoice", chapter 4:4.
D.L.H. What about "Then shall they fast in those days"?
J.T. The Lord there is emphasising the change when the Bridegroom is taken away. That would be a dispensational touch.
{33}
D.L.H. But does not that apply to the moment in which we are, in a certain sense?
J.T. I think here it alludes to the Jewish position; the disciples would be left there as He was taken. But christianity (in which we are) is another thing, and could not fit in there -- into a system of legal, requirements. Hence what follows as to new cloth and new bottles. We come into the joy of the Bridegroom now. Fasting is, of course, right now, but the Lord treats of it here in the setting in which it came up. It was a question of what the disciples of John and those of the Pharisees were doing.
Eu.R. What did you mean when you said that a young convert should be impressed with the fact that he is coming into what is victorious?
J.T. That is what the church is in principle. "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith", (@1 John 5:4). That is what he is coming into.
Eu.R. Externally it does not look quite like that.
J.T. Well, that may be, but it is really so. There is nothing else victorious in the whole world, however little it may be. There is nothing lost, that is the principle. Of course, the individual acquires the victory through believing that "Jesus is the Son of God".
Ques. Would you mind enlarging a little on the thought of laying on the hands as with Ananias?
J.T. Well it is committal, a link formed with the believer. The saints commit themselves to him, but in the way of help, because Saul was to get help. His eyes were to be opened, and he was to get the Holy Spirit. It was an immense thing, and he was greeted accordingly: "Saul, brother".
J.C.S. Would you say that what he found in Damascus corresponded with the light that shone out of heaven?
J.T. It corresponded with what he met in Christ, that is the idea. .
{34}
J.J. Is not the calling of the twelve in Mark especially in relation to what is victorious? (chapter 3).
J.T. Yes, following the teaching in the end of chapter 2 you see how the disciples came into a state of *liberty* It laid hold of them in the Lord's action in going through the cornfields. It says, "And it came to pass that he went on the sabbath through the cornfields; and his disciples began to walk on, plucking the ears". That is, they did more than He did. It is an indication to us how He leads in the way of liberty, how you acquire the spirit of nothing what He does. It is the liberty where with He sets free.
Eu.R. What do the first two verses of chapter 4 suggest, sitting by the sea and teaching, and then the crowd close to the sea?
J.T. Now you see He is definitely moving out, "And again he began to teach by the sea", but before that you have the appointment of the twelve. You will observe He separated the disciples in chapter 3:7, "Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea". That is consequent upon the murderous attitude of the religious leaders; very much like Paul separating the disciples at Ephesus, but here instead of separating to the school of Tyrannus, He separates them to the sea, as if He would not find the wealth among the Jews but would go further afield, among the gentiles. And, therefore. He appoints the twelve. "And he goes up into the mountain, and calls whom he himself would, and they went to him. And he appointed twelve that they might be with him, and that he might send them to preach, and to have power to heal diseases, and to cast out demons", chapter 3: 13 - 15. Now the position is clearly defined. The murderous attitude of the Jewish leaders led Him to withdraw with His disciples. The position is very clear, but then the power is not diminished. He still goes on casting out demons and so forth, and then, "He goes up into the mountain, and calls whom he himself would".
{35}
He is now by the sea, the source of wealth, and He would appoint those whom He would use in the work in the wide area in view.
H.E.S. Is He like David as rejected selecting the mighty men of his kingdom? The Lord is making provision here for the moment of His absence.
J.T. Exactly; and that they should be representatives too, thus they should be *with Him* on the mount.
M.W.B. There are three spheres spoken of: the house, the synagogue, and the sea. Would you say a word as to the difference?
J.T. The house suggests the family principle. It has a great place in the gospels, more especially in Matthew than in Mark but it has a place here. It is where the Lord is free; it is in the house He explains things; and in chapter 2 He heals the paralytic in the house. I think the house suggests these congenial spheres that we hope to find in our service; because Mark contemplates sympathy springing up as we go on in our service; an environment characterized by this, which is a great thing.
P.L. So Paul takes courage when he sees the brethren at Appii Forum.
J.T. Quite. Then the synagogue represents the current recognized religion, but dominated by evil. That is another thing that is very sorrowful. Then the sea, is to give you room; it is the wideness of the field, the great possibilities there are for fruit, for results from the service of the gospel.
Eu.R. There is necessity for the withdrawal on our part, owing to the tendency to narrow up our affections.
J.T. That is what you see. The Lord withdrew with His disciples, but He was not narrowed. The tendency is to become narrow, to accept the smallness, and our testimony loses power and really ceases to be anything for God. But we should never lose sight of the dispensation in principle, and that is what is taught
{36}
here: "Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea", and then the power is still apparent even in greater measure, so that the demons, falling down before Him, acknowledge Him to be the Son of God. But He would not take any testimony from them; the testimony must be from accredited witnesses, from persons who are with Him, which is very touching. "He ... calls whom he himself would ... that they might be with him, and that he might send them to preach, and to have power to heal diseases, and to cast out demons", verses 13 - 15.
J.H.B. After the sea He goes up into the mountain; what would that represent?
J.T. I think it is moral elevation. We have the mountain idea much more in Matthew than here. In Matthew there are six mountains seven really, but six on which the Lord definitely operates, which may be likened to that which is round about Jerusalem; but in Mark it is the moral elevation that should mark the ministry. You do not get that ministry from the schools, you get it on the principle of moral elevation; for there could be no companionship with Christ save as in elevation from this world.
H.E.S. Is your thought that the Lord does not receive witness from accredited religion because there was the unclean spirit connected with it, but He receives witness from His own accredited witnesses?
J.T. That is right. The whole hierarchical system is set aside; it is not on that principle. He does not accept witness from such; this chapter shews us the principle on which He witnesses, that is, through persons that are morally elevated: "He ... calls whom he himself would". It is His sovereign choice, and they are with Him, and He names every one of them; it is one by one; the conjunction separates them here in every case. It is not by 'twos', as in Matthew.
H.E.S. So following on the thought of the sea, the Lord is sovereign both with regard to persons and places.
{37}
Question, Is the moral thought seen in the fact that the word 'apostles' is omitted here?
J.T. That is more in Luke, presenting the idea of authority. Here it is a question of the moral power the disciples have; they are qualified as indicated in this chapter. You are called out, separated, withdrawn to the sea from a state of things which although religious is murderous.
J.J. With regard to the names, why does He surname the three? They were the three always with Him.
J.T. It helps us as to selection, that the Lord always reserves the right to have some one or two or three; special ones; it is His privilege. David had his first three, hone of the others attained to them, and these are the first three in the Lord's selection. These represent the best of what He had, and you find them with Him on all special occasions. That is His own sovereign right and we must not quarrel with it. But there is *something* in those three men that gives them superiority over the others; of this we may be sure, for with the Lord there is a moral basis for everything.
J.C. It is in the interests of the saints to accept His selection and not to dispute it.
J.T. Yes. Paul said, "That by me the preaching might be fully known", (@2 Timothy 4:17); the Lord would not have it otherwise. I am sure many of the saints said there were people who could preach better than Paul, but the Lord would have the preaching *known* through him: "That by me the preaching might be fully known".
H.E.S. Is that why in every case Peter is mentioned first?
J.T. That is the reason. In Matthew it is formally stated that he is first: "first, Simon, who was called Peter", chapter 10:2.
J.C.S. Would you say that results always justified the Lord's selection?
J.T. Exactly. You see how Peter shone in the
{38}
Acts. And when God began to move towards the gentiles he was moving too, as we have seen.
Ques. Why did the Lord appoint a Judas?
J.T. That is another matter. It brings out what the Old Testament really ended up with. Even the, ministry of Christ ended up with a broken state of things, "the eleven". It is to shew that man in the *most favourable* circumstances broke down. It awaited Christianity and the coming of the Spirit for the perfect state of things; you never could have it before that.
Eu.R. After the Lord made this proposal, "Let us go over to the other side", it says, "They take him with them, as he was, in the ship". What are we to learn from that?
J.T. That shews they were content with Him *as He was*. Many of those abroad today are not content with the Christ of the gospels. He is too small a Man for them, and they try to add to Him in one way or another; but the humble believer accepts Him as He is. It is the humble Christ as He is; and accepting Him as He is means we are as He is; "As he is, so are we in this world".
Eu.R. It was a very beautiful answer to His choosing them that they might be with Him.
Ques. Have you in mind that the teaching by the sea prepares the way to go to sea?
J.T. Yes. At the beginning of the chapter it says, "And again he began to teach by the sea", shewing that He is going back to the idea; He had not completed it. He is finishing the thing. "And a great crowd was gathered together to him, so that going on board ship he sat in the sea, and all the crowd were close to the sea on the land". Now He is in the sea. If I am to have knowledge of the sea, I have to know Him *in* the sea.
Rem. It is progressive in that way; the next step is He *walks* on it, chapter 6:48.
J.T. Quite; so the knowledge of the sea must be acquired from Christ. I suppose in the types the first
{39}
great knowledge of the sea is the crossing of the Red Sea; they went right through. No people ever had such an experience of the sea as they did. The ark was not there yet, but the bottom of the sea was seen, and the wall of water on either side. They could see the character of the thing as they went through it, and we may say Christ went through that here.
Ques. Would the knowledge of the Lord in the sea take the place of the trawl-nets? It was remarked this morning that they left the trawl-nets.
J.T. You see here how He acted in the sea. Later He directs them where to cast the net, shewing that He knew where the fish were. Here it is not that, it is the Lord in the sea and teaching there, and then, as has been remarked, to see Him walking on it. That is how we get the knowledge of the sea.
R.B. Would you say a word as to what the ship stands for? You have spoken of the sea, and the house, and the synagogue, what does the ship stand for?
J.T. It is the means of using the sea. In Mark it is the means of getting the gain of it.
H.D'A.C. "They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters, these see the works of Jehovah, and his wonders in the deep", (@Psalm 107:23,24), not those who live by the sea-side merely. They have a much larger idea.
J.T. That is good. That is, you can go because the ships go; there is a *means* of going.
Ques. Would it convey the idea of spiritual commerce, in that way? You spoke of it this morning. It says "that a little ship should wait upon him"; what had you in mind in regard to that? Is it not the first reference to the ship, and does it suggest something coming into view by way of spiritual commerce?
J.T. It is that we may use the sea. The ship continues the idea here of reaching the wealth that is beyond; that is the idea.
{40}
Remark, I had in mind your quotation, "There go the ships".
J.T. Exactly. Who that lives within these shores does not know that the wealth of this country is largely built up by the use of ships? It is the means by which it acquired power and wealth in the world. And so, spiritually, ships are the means of acquiring wealth. So you get a little ship waiting upon Him, and then in chapter 4, "Going on board ship", that is a larger idea. Then in the end of that chapter it says, "Let us go over to the other side: and having sent away the crowd, they take him with them, as he was, in the ship". They are doing it. I take it now they are acquiring knowledge of the sea, because *they take Him* in it. That would shew they assumed to be able to navigate they had precious cargo surely!
R.B. Then would the ship suggest opportunities may have had for going down to the sea?
J.T. That is the idea. "There go the ships", it says in the psalm. Well, it is a good thing to get on board.
J.J. The verse you quote out of @Psalm 104 immediately goes on to say, "There that leviathan, which thou hast formed to play therein". I suppose in crossing the sea here, the leviathan was playing and seeking to swamp this ship.
J.T. But there are other things there beside him, "moving things innumerable, living creatures small and great". That is it, the wealth that is there its innumerable character. The Lord knows where they are, He alone knows the paths of the sea. That is a remarkable thing; He knows the paths of it.
P.L. "The way of a ship in the midst of the sea", (@Proverbs 30:19).
Eu.R. Would these fishers of men suggest those who can operate in the sea and secure material for the assembly?
{41}
J.T. Quite. They are learning now in that they take Him in the ship, that is, they had precious cargo, as remarked; there is that idea to be continued.
W.C. What bearing would Jonah's education have in relation to what is before us? He was a preacher.
J.T. That opens up a wide subject; shewing what the wealth of the sea is, the moving things innumerable; what God has there, and how at His bidding they are. He prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. I believe in that you have indicated the right of way God has in at His bidding to do His will. Therefore, if Jonah were not carrying out the will of God in going to Tarshish, when he gets into the fish's belly every movement that fish made was under, divine command. There was a living creature entirely under the divine will, and that be a never to be forgotten lesson for Jonah. The fish was doing His will, "and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land". What a wonderful process went on in Jonah's soul in that fish, and what a composition he made there! How God came into his soul!
R.G.H. How do you regard the "other little ships" that went with the Lord?
J.T. It is to be noted they are "*with* Him"; they are not operating in competition.
R.G.H. What is the practical bearing of that today?
J.T. A fleet of ships is a great thing; Solomon had a fleet; the other ships here suggest that idea.
F.H.B. It does not say that the storm came down on any of those ships.
J.T. It says, "And there comes a violent gust of wind, and the waves beat into the ship", as if the enemy was directly against Christ.
M.W.B. The first movements of life in @Genesis 1 are connected with the sea; the "swarms of living souls" implying immense wealth, and an allusion to an area of later sovereign movements of God.
{42}
J.T. That is very interesting indeed, and sheds light on what we are speaking about.
F.I. Going back to what you said with regard to the insular position, this fleet of ships would be valuable not only to take exports but to bring imports.
J.T. That would maintain balance!
E.J.McB. Would Jonah's fish carry an element of instruction for him in view of his mission to the gentile city, that God had His reserves in the sea?
J.T. Nineveh really is the same idea from the standpoint of what we are speaking of; and so every movement of that fish spelt the will of God, which Jonah had been disregarding. He might expect that in Nineveh, and that is exactly what he found when he went there; they put sackcloth not only on themselves but on their beasts. It is the same idea that the living creatures, whether on the land or in the sea, are to do the will of God. The Ninevites had the idea; no doubt Jonah conveyed to them the impression of where he had been. There were living creatures in the sea, but also on the land, and the last word in Jonah is 'cattle'. It agrees with what is in mind in this gospel.
J.J. In @Matthew 17 there was one fish, but it was useful to the Lord as containing the needed money.
M.W.B. With regard to the universal thought you are pressing and the avoidance of insularity, would there be any connection between the levites in Joshua and the forty-eight cities in that connection?
J.T. Yes; the influence of the levites was intended to be universal. I suppose the numeral would denote that, twelve times four. It is the administration of that benign or heavenly influence universally.
H.E.S. Would not the service of the Son of God produce the will of God universally?
J.T. That is what is in view in this gospel, the creation. It is a very striking thing. "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation",
{43}
shewing that the whole creation is to be secured for God.
Eu.R. What are we to learn from the expression, "The wind and the sea obey him"?
J.T. That is another thing. In these pursuits we cannot hope to escape the power of Satan; so whilst on the one hand the sea indicates what is beyond in the way of wealth, it also denotes an element that Satan can act upon. Leviathan is there. God in the book of Job and the Psalms calls attention to him. The sea is an element on which Satan can act. It is not simply here that "the wind was contrary", as in Matthew, but there was "a violent gust of wind". That is, it was a satanic action, a special attack against Christ. Hence the importance of having a knowledge of the sea to contend against all this.
Rem. The apostle at Athens is an example of one who had a knowledge of the sea -- the way in which he could use the word in such circumstances.
D.L.H. The apostle says, "Unless these abide in the ship ye cannot be saved", (@Acts 27:31); if all were to be preserved those who had a knowledge of the sea must keep in the ship.
J.T. That is the idea. They were the mariners and they had a knowledge of the sea. These are the ones we need, but in @Acts 27 they were not true mariners. They were not rightly concerned about the safety of their ship and the cargo.
D.L.H. I was wondering whether there was any spiritual application in view of the wrecked and ruined state of things in which the church is in these days?
J.T. What comes out in that passage is the position that Paul acquired on board the ship. The history of the church is in view. For the persons reaching land, all hinged on what Paul said; he had said, "Unless these abide in the *ship* ye cannot be saved". It meant they had to listen to Paul. The shipwreck took place because they
{44}
had failed to listen to him, but now Paul is getting a hearing and all the persons reached land.
Ques. Have we not known in the history of the testimony those who have left the ship under a pretext?
J.T. I am sure many have, and at what consequent loss too. The point is to listen to Paul; that is the word today. Lydia had her heart opened to listen to Paul.
A.M. "Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto him. What doest thou?" (@Ecclesiastes 8:4).
Eu.R. It was the word of the King here saying, "Silence; be mute".
J.T. I think it is more than the word of a king; it is the word of the creator. His glory shines in this incident.
J.J. And yet He is seen asleep -- beautiful sight!
J.T. Wonderful.
{45}
THE ABUNDANCE OF THE SEAS (3)
@Mark 5:21 - 43; @Mark 6:30 - 56
J.T. Up to yesterday afternoon we were dwelling on the Lord's service by the sea. It was observed that the Lord's service in this gospel is particularly set in relation to it; having the sea in the centre as affording an opportunity for the principle indicated in it to be emphasised; so that the end of chapter 4 shews that the disciples were already acquiring a knowledge of the sea. The references to the Old Testament helped us as to the use of ships so that the wealth of the seas should be acquired. The end of chapter 4 shews that the Lord having been taken by the disciples "as he was, in the ship" proved His superiority to the element of opposition that might be expected to arise; for whilst the sea denotes the area of the gospel, and the divine sowing, as in @chapter 4, it also suggests an area in which Satan has power.
F.H.B. Would it be well, for those not here yesterday, to say a word as to what the sea represents in this gospel?
J.T. What has come before us is that it primarily suggests the area whence divine wealth is to be drawn; so that the disciples are informed they are to be made *fishers of men*. That gives an indication at once of what the figure suggests.
F.H.B. What was universal in contrast to what might be insular -- the widest aspect of the service.
J.T. Quite. Now we see that the apostles are actually on the sea. The Lord began in chapter 4 by sitting in it, and as in the boat speaking the parable of the sower, this meaning that God would sow in that area, and that there would be the good ground. That is the principle of sovereign preparation; that God knows the ground. He knows the area, and prepares beforehand the good ground, so that there may be fruit. It brings in the sovereignty of God, and the perfect knowledge He has of the parts in which the gospel is to be proclaimed.
{46}
Eu.R. And the yield is encouraging in this gospel.
J.T. I think we shall see how the wealth of the seas, so to speak, is in view from @chapter 5 to the end of @chapter 7.
Eu.R. It is not a diminishing yield here, but thirty, sixty and a hundred.
J.T. That should stimulate us, that we may always hope for better results. It keeps us from discouragement. So we find in this first incident in @chapter 5 that the result though not large was very excellent in quality one person in the whole country. It is in regard of a man representing the power of Satan, not now operating on the sea, but actually in the man; shewing that the material with which God is ready to deal is the very worst, possible, as we might say. The most difficult case imaginable is this man, as if God would shew that He does not take the easiest way. He does not seek out the people that are comparatively immune from satanic power, because there are grades in this respect, but He begins to meet the enemy in his stronghold. As in the case of Saul of Tarsus, He takes the most difficult case to shew the possible effect of the power of the ministry, because that is the point in Mark. The official idea of apostleship is not so much in evidence as the moral power in the ministers. You do not need to emphasise the official side if the actual power is there. It is a question of what is done, and nobody can dispute it.
H.E. S. Is the central point in Mark that the kingdom of God has come with power?
J.T. That is how it is presented in chapter 9, as we shall see; that is "the kingdom of God come in power", and it is seen here in chapter 5 in the first great yield in Decapolis, that is, as passing over to the other side, which shews the idea of going overseas. The position is difficult, the soil is hard; it was a region of ten cities shewing the advantage that cities afford to Satan -- the influence of cities. We were speaking about the cities of
{47}
the Levites, they were over against Decapolis. The dries of the levites are necessary for God; but these cities, as the world's cities do, afford power to Satan. But the man is completely delivered and wished to be with the Lord. He is found "sitting, and clothed and in his right mind", and that is evidently the first great yield that we want -- the man representing the intelligence and power needed for the testimony.
J.C.S. Would you say the power demonstrated in dealing with this man shewed what the Lord could do with *any* case?
J.T. That is the idea. So, in the type, Moses is directed as Pharaoh goes out to the water to go and take his stand in front of him. That is, in the service we do not seek the weak subjects, because God would shew the superiority of His power to all that is of the devil: "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world", (@1 John 4:4). Moses stands in front of him; that is, you confront the whole power of the world in the testimony.
E.M. Would there be an illustration in the rod becoming a serpent and then being taken up by the hand of Moses, that satanic power would be dealt with?
J.T. Quite. It was *taken back*; the rod became a symbol of Moses¬ power; shewing how the instrument is wrested from the enemy to be used against him.
Eu.R. In the christian economy God's thought is to have the levitical cities now in the midst of man's cities.
J.T. That is where God is setting His testimony -- in the cities, according to Proverbs and the Acts.
Eu.R. So by the operation of the Lord each one needs to be withdrawn from whatever may have influenced him or her as in the life of that city, and come into this new thing, which God has used in testimony in that city.
J.T. Quite; the rod became a serpent on the ground and Moses fled from it. It was the power of Satan in man, but he takes it back by the tail, which indicates
{48}
what is meant. The idea of man is taken up, but man who had been under satanic power, now in God's hand for service. That is the idea of this gospel; it is the "kingdom of God come in power", so that the convert is in the Lord's hands. He can so trust him that He leaves him behind where there is no protection at all for him, not even other saints -- a man alone in that land of Satan's power. The Lord can trust him *there*, and that indicates what the yield means, what there is for God in those overseas operations.
H.E.S. And is the fact that the yield increases in Mark's gospel suggestive that the closing days will be the best?
J.T. At any rate, *in quality*. You would hope for that, and I am sure we should aim at quality whilst having quantity also in view. What you get in Solomon's overseas expeditions was what was for God, that is, *gold*. The volume of gold is what is emphasised (@1 Kings 9:28), and then the queen of Sheba symbolising the thing in persons, that she came herself in intelligence, knowing to what she was coming.
J.J. What was in your mind about Proverbs in mentioning that book?
J.T. Wisdom takes her stand in the chief places of concourse where people are. That is where the testimony is rendered.
Ques. Would sitting, clothed and sensible, shew the quality?
J.T. Yes; that is the kind of thing from the man's side. What you want in a man is just those three things, that he is sitting and clothed and in his right mind. That is the idea of the rod brought back and held in the hand, as the symbol of divine authority, but divine authority used in one who had been under the power of Satan.
Eu.R. So the apostle says to the saints at Corinth, "Such were some of you"; he reminds them whence they had come.
{49}
J.C.S. The power that dealt with the man, was the kind of power that is meeting the power of the enemy in the Lord's service here.
J.T. Do you not think he would need that as left alone in the territory where the Lord was refused? They ask the Lord to depart out of their coasts and He does, but He leaves the man there. What power would be needed in that man, to stand and tell what the Lord had done for him, to bear witness there!
Rem. So that God has secured a man for His service.
J.T. That is right, and he would tell what was done for him; he would be a witness in himself of what God had done for him.
Eu.R. The Lord had become attractive to him, and he would fain be with Him.
J.T. Quite; that kind of man the Lord can trust. If he were just simply delivered the Lord would no doubt have allowed him to accompany Him, but I think His leaving him in the country indicates the quality of the work there. Then you get another movement in verse 21, at which we began to read: "And Jesus having passed over in the ship again to the other side, a great crowd gathered to him; and he was by the sea". There you see what the Lord carried on; He is 'by the sea'; He has come to His own side, but He is still by the sea, and the remaining part of the chapter brings out quality, first in a woman and then in a girl. That is, it is the excellence of the quality in these three cases, shewing how the work of God takes in mankind in its varied relations a man, a woman and a girl, the latter called 'damsel' here by the Lord.
N.McC. What is the suggestion in that?
J.T. The idea is freshness of life, but here in Mark with the added thought of walking. She not only sat but she walked, because that is a feature of fresh young life.
J.C. S. Do you regard all this as indicating the Lord's ability to draw upon the wealth of the sea?
{50}
J.T. The passage begins with that, that He was by the sea, verse 21.
Ques. What is the suggestion in the twelve years, both in the woman and the child?
J.T. The three taken together refer to what goes on in one believer, namely, intelligence, then transparency, that is deliverance inwardly, as in @Romans 7 and then fewness of life. It is, I think, the believer according to Romans. What do you think?
F.S.M. I was wondering whether the three incidents together would not suggest the conditions for our service today; first deliverance, and then sitting at the feet of Jesus clothed and in the right mind, then being sent, then being transparent, and finally the simplicity that would mark the child in newness of life.
J.T. Yes; so that the twelve years in the case of the woman and the child would mean the effect of deliverance in the believer. The child's life corresponded with the time of the woman's trouble; it was year by year; so that the inward deliverance of @Romans 7,8 culminates in a normal spiritual state; The Lord begins to shew here that there were grades of quality in the service; that the servants were not all on the same level in His mind; there were three distinctive ones. He is already indicating quality in His servants, and He has in mind that there should be quality and spiritual refinement in the result of His work; and I think that is seen in the girl. She is the product, not of what was public as in the woman's case, but of private work. It is a private spiritual refinement culminating in fresh life, as implied in @Romans 8.
M.W.B. In that way there is a reflection of what the servant is in the work that he accomplishes.
J.T. Just so. You would be exercised as to adding a little touch to the saints. It is not always rough work. There is that certainly; dealing with the man was heavy work, casting out the demons; but then there is the
{51}
refining process, and that is also seen here. That is a very great test as to where one is, and what is the quality of one's ministry; it is what one would be exercised about as to the quality of the ministry, because whilst we have volume, thank God, we must never overlook that quality must enter into ministry, the refining of the saints. The Lord is aiming at the greatest possible product; but the church is to be the acme of divine workmanship and He is pleased to use us in that. So it is a question of one's ability for refining, that is, the increase in quality in the ministry. The heavenly city will be the fulness of the result of that work, the excess. The superlative degree is in Ephesians, and that points to the work of God in its completeness. The heavenly city really will display the supreme refining work of God, and that is what should affect us if the Lord is pleased to call us into His service; are we able to move on into a little bit of quality in ministry? It is not simply volume; quality is the thing to which the Lord would call attention.
Ques. Is it suggested in the thought of the twelve the power for service and the conditions that there might be quality?
J.T. We are speaking now rather about the three. The twelve represent the complete administrative system, to meet the whole position of evil here; but then you have three selected out of the twelve; reminding us that the Lord is already indicating quality. Why should He take those three? There must be something about them above the others. You find them specially selected, and then they are brought into this particular part of the work in the house, and you have this result, a girl brought up out of death, by the Lord, and walking. You would see there freshness, grace of movement and potential development of features of the church.
H.E.S. Do these three incidents shew the perfection of the service? Is it in principle deliverance from Satan, sin and death?
{52}
J.T. Well, there is all that; but I think you ought to add the thought of refinement, the newness of life that Romans contemplates. @Romans 8 contemplates something very fine leading on to Ephesians. Romans properly leads into Ephesians. That is, in a girl like this, fresh from the Lord's hands, brought back to life in this environment of the father and the mother and the three selected apostles, you have something that can be developed. She is only twelve years of age, and therefore there is in her that which can be developed.
F.S.M. Would it suggest in the Lord taking the girl by the hand at the age of twelve, that there is a moment in our soul history when the Lord would take us by the hand and awaken the instincts of service towards Him?
J.T. You have in a girl in those circumstances a subject, as you might say, for the development of spirituality. From the Lord's point of view, what will He not do with this case?
E.J.McB. Is your thought the possibility of walking in newness of life?
J.T. Yes, the possibilities that follow the full effect of the teaching in Romans.
J.C.S. Speaking again of refinement, would persons serving on that line have a kind of moral elegance in their service?
J.T. That is so. Then there must be something important in that you have the actual original words the Lord used, "Talitha koumi". The child hears those words from His own lips. They are interpreted for us; but you have the actual words the Lord used in this girl's ears. That is to say, she is a direct product of His own work; and it says she immediately arose and walked. "Damsel, I say to thee. Arise. And immediately the damsel arose and walked, for she was twelve years old". Now, whatever comes after must have this as a groundwork. That is to say, as I understand it, it is that which Romans produces and which Ephesians finishes.
{53}
Obviously a girl of twelve years is not finished; she does not present the full divine idea in a woman, for the divine idea really is the church. That is the great culminating thing on the feminine side; but here you have a *subject* for that work, from the standpoint of quality.
M.W.B. Do you connect that with the way Ananias put his hands on Saul? Would he have given him an impression of what was suited to the assembly in the way of refinement, of the quality of the thing?
J.T. That is a good suggestion, because the Lord had taken Ananias in hand to ensure that the touch should be, that which should represent Him.
R.B. Do you mean that if there is to be the securing of quality in the yield, you must have the quality first in the Levite?
J.T. Exactly; that is what I have been thinking as to the quality of the ministry that the Lord is giving. There is much of it; but it is quality that is needed so that there should be the development and the finish in the church. What do you say?
E.J.McB. I think that is very good.
J.T. How do you look at it in our ministry?
E.J.McB. One would long to see converts actually marked by a fresh character of life in this scene, with interests and affections moving into what is dear to Christ.
J.T. You see how little there is of that abroad in the nominal service of the Lord. There is no idea of quality, even although souls may be saved; there is no idea of the finished product, so to speak.
W.L. Would the Philippian epistle cover the range of those three you have brought before us, commencing with the rough work in the jailor, and Lydia going on to the finer touches we get in the epistle?
J.T. That is good. I have no doubt Lydia represents the quality of Philippi, because she is the woman "whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul". Paul spoke to the jailor of course; but she *attended*.
{54}
to the things spoken by him. Whatever he said she would attend to; Paul's ministry is the full thought of God in the church.
J.J. This all involves a moral process.
J.T. It does; Paul recognised afterwards that Lydia represented the quality of his work, for he went to her when he was released from the prison. "They came to Lydia", as if she was the special link there. The apostle could thank God for his "whole remembrance" of the Philippian saints, (@Philippians 1:3).
Ques. What place does food have in relation to what you have said? "He desired that something should be given her to eat".
J.T. That is another important thing that necessarily goes with refinement of character, the quality of the food. The Lord says, 'Something'; He does not specify it. "He desired that something should be given her to eat". It would be for the parents to provide the food for her, those who were responsible. It was not simply that there should be food in the house, but food that would suit such a one. What have you in mind?
Rem. I was wondering if "Damsel, I say to thee, Arise", would suggest a divine operation, and the food, the service of those who sympathetically stand by and see what the girl needs.
J.T. Exactly.
J.J. Does the last verse shew that Romans overlaps into Colossians?
J.T. I think Romans really merges into Ephesians; the end of Romans links on with Ephesians. Colossians, is a sort of detour necessary because of a certain danger at Colosse. The normal course is Romans into Ephesians; that is, the mystery is introduced at the end of Romans and that links with Ephesians.
F.H.B. When you speak of refinement, do you mean the development of the character of Christ in the
{55}
J.T. Just so. What is suggested here is the spiritual environment into which the girl is raised up. The Lord put out certain ones. "But he, having put them all out, takes with him the father of the child, and the mother, and those that were with him, and enters in where the child was lying". So that the environment was spiritual. It was the quality, the very best available the Lord Himself, and then those three, and then the father and the mother of the child, and the girl is raised up into that environment. So whilst it is a divine operation, it is a divine operation in *such* surroundings.
Ques. Would you classify these three incidents as dispossession, relief and formation?
J.T. That is right.
M.W.B. Is there progress in that way, subjugation in connection with the man in intelligence; and then transparency; and then what you said as to spiritual refinement? That is, the lack of transparency prevents the refinement.
J.T. Just so; and then the age of the child means that she is a subject for further development.
M.W.B. It is not maturity, but the immense possibilities.
G.W.W. Is your thought that giving something to eat indicates the work of the Spirit in connection with one established in Roman truth, but not yet ready to take up the position indicated in Ephesians?
J.T. Yes; giving something to eat would build up the constitution, as we say. In Saul's case it says he, "having received food, got strength", then he was with the disciples, and then he entered into the synagogue and preached that Jesus was the Son of God. All this required spiritual strength, which suitable food alone can impart.
G.W.W. Do you think it indicates the work of the Spirit?
J.T. I think so, and then what any one of us gives in the way of ministry.
{56}
P.S.M. Would you suggest giving something to eat would encourage us in our local meetings that there should be that kind of ministry, that would build up servants of quality and refinement?
J.T. So if you feel led in taking on service to younger people, you want to leave the subject for further development. You lead them on as the Lord help you; and the next ministry may lead them on further. That is, the ministry ought to be one whole, under the Lord, for "the *perfecting* of the saints". All the gifts are "for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ; until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", (@Ephesians 4:12,13). I am sure that is the line.
C.S.S. Would the fine quality of the curtains of the tabernacle indicate what you are saying?
J.T. That is good, because it is really the *fineness* that is in view. The further you go into the tabernacle the finer the quality in regard of the materials used. The curtains were of byssus, which would imply an excessively fine yarn. The nearer you get to God, the more essential is the refinement indicated in this material.
Rem. I suppose nothing would promote that like the study of Christ.
J.T. That is the idea, what Ephesians contemplates; "the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", that is, what shines out in Him as Man.
E.J.M. There were Peter, James and John; do you have administration, practical service and love reaching to the service of the Lord Jesus Himself?
J.T. Just so.
G.W.W. Would the paternal and maternal influence found in the assembly be indicated by the father and mother being brought into prominence?
{57}
J.T. I thought that.
Eu.R. In the next chapter we have the Lord feeding the multitude; have you that in mind at all?
J.T. There is much instruction in the next chapter. You have the calling out of the twelve; it is not the three now, but the twelve. "And he calls the twelve to him and he began to send them out". Chapter 5 suggests the wealth of the sea through the Lord's own ministry. Now the twelve are called, and he began to send them out. A long course of ministry is in view. The twelve anointed certain subjects of their work with oil, verse 13.
E.L.M. Would the period of time between naming the disciples in chapter 3:17 here answer to the probationary period of levitical service?
J.T. That is right; the Levite entered the service at twenty-five and became fully developed at thirty; this chapter is full levitical maturity the Lord can trust them with a commission and the result is, "They cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many infirm, and healed them". The anointing with oil is the spiritual dignity with which converts are invested.
J.J. Have you anything to say as to the lack of converts in localities in connection with all that has been before us? Ought not that to be a concern with us?
J.T. Well I am sure it ought to be taken to heart, but I think there is a good deal of 'hook -- and -- line' work going on now. I mean, we should not ignore what is being done. Time was when the 'net' work was more in evidence and you heard of a good many converts in a place; but I think there is more hook -- and -- line work going on now, individuals getting blessing here and there. Every day you hear of some one or two, and that is not to be ignored, but I am sure the Lord would stimulate us as to this, and I believe the Lord will use what is coming before us here to this end.
Ques. Do you think the hook-and-line work would tend more to quality?
{58}
J.T. It does. It is recognised by fishermen that die hook -- and -- line fish are the best.
H.D'A.C. In the previous chapter it was one soul in each case, the demoniac, the woman and the child.
J.T. Then the first works of the twelve justify the Lord in His selection of them. They anoint with oil, which is a very good sign; they would leave the result of their work in spiritual dignity, They are thinking not of themselves in it, but of God, because the Holy Spirit represents God.
R.B. Is that something additional to what you referred to as refinement?
J.T. I think the anointing with oil is dignity put upon them publicly. What did you think?
R.B. I thought anointing was public.
E.L.M. Was that not Paul's exercise at Ephesus? "Have ye received the Holy Spirit?" I wondered if that was the foundation for Ephesian truth, the saints set up in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. Quite, and then the work of God itself should be representative of Him. An anointed person is one dignified. We have three things about the believer; the anointing, the sealing, and the earnest of the Spirit in the heart. The anointing is what the believer is publicly for God.
W.R.P. Have you any thought why the anointing is in connection with the work of the disciples rather than with the Lord's own work?
J.T. It indicates how they entered into the spirit of the work, that they were not going by rule. As we sometimes say. Where is your scripture for this or that? It is right, of course, to have scripture for anything, but you enter into the spirit of the Lord's work, and I think this lesson begins in the end of chapter 2, where He walked through the cornfield. That was all He did; He did not pluck the ears of corn; they did, and He defended their action; as if He would say. You have been coming into
{59}
liberty by the example I have shewn you and you have got into the spirit of it. That is one great thing in Christianity, getting into the spirit of things, because the full effect of coming into this is to get to God Himself, for He is behind all. What is written is comparatively little, but the deeper you go, the nearer you get to God Himself. I believe the disciples got the spirit of the Lord's ministry in applying the oil.
W.R.P. I heartily go with that.
J.T. I think every one should be concerned as to the product of his ministry, that it should have refinement and dignity.
F.S. Why is it connected with the infirm?
J.T. They were consciously weak. "When I am weak, then I am powerful", (@2 Corinthians 12:10). It is the weak things God takes up and anoints, and although weak you are powerful.
W.C. Would the anointing with oil involve souls being brought into their intelligent place in the anointed vessel?
J.T. I am sure that is true.
H.D'A.C. When one hears of converts the question is, where is the oil? Can we perceive that the Spirit is there? It is very important; it should be evident that the Spirit is there.
T.K. In connection with the remark as to the spirit of the thing, would the qualification for that be faith working by love?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. You referred to the opening of @Proverbs 8. What application do you give to that today?
J.T. Wisdom's service is to be *where men are*.
Eu.R. In this anointing with oil it is not only that there is deliverance from demons, but the bringing in of some entirely new feature that would represent God.
J.T. That is the idea. God has taken up weak and
{60}
infirm persons and put His dignity upon them, because the anointing is dignity and power.
Eu.R. So it is to the Corinthians the apostle writes of the saints being established in Christ and anointed. Would it involve that we should have the sense locally of being established in Christ and anointed together for the representation of God.
J.T. I am sure that is right.
D.L.H. I should like to ask why the anointing with oil seems to be placed here as a means to an end? It does not say they healed them and anointed them with oil, but they anointed them with oil and healed them. The healing seems to follow the anointing with oil, very much as in the epistle of James. Why is that?
J.T. The idea is that healing is included in the results of the oil. It is the Spirit in that connection, the public aspect, where there was disease. Luke speaks about 'diseases' as well as sick people. All is superseded by the dignity and power involved in the possession of the Spirit.
D.L.H. Then would the healing be characterised by the Spirit's power?
J.T. That is what I thought. It goes with it; the anointing is the thing to take notice of specially.
J.J. Is not the woman with the issue of blood an illustration of that? She felt in her body that she was healed; it was power really by the Spirit, was it not?
J.T. @Romans 5 leads to @Romans 7,8. The anointing here is @Romans 8, only it is more public and I carries healing with it. There is really no healing spiritually without the Holy Spirit.
Eu.R. The apostles could call attention to the man in (@Acts 3:16): "By faith in his name, his name has made this man strong whom ye behold and know; and the faith which is by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all". Would that suggest it?
J.T. Just so.
{61}
Eu.R. It says in the next chapter, "Beholding the man who had been healed standing with them".
J.T. He "held Peter and John", shewing he had linked on with the public testimony. The anointing is implied in his case.
Eu.R. And although such a young convert there was dignity there.
J.C.S. Was the power there in the twelve to produce the quality?
J.T. That is the idea. The result of their testimony should correspond with them. I mean, you want to represent God in your service. I suppose the two pillars in the front of the temple indicated what God could produce by the testimony, and there were all the necessary things in the court of the temple to bring about correspondence with those pillars. Spiritually the means were there of bringing the man that approached into accord with those pillars, and that is the thought in public service. The servant represents God and what God would effect. The thing is therefore brought near to the person who is the subject of grace. You have the idea in yourself, not only in what you say, but in what you are. These men were anointed, and they anointed the subjects of their work infirmity marking all. How weak Saul was after the heavenly vision!
M.W.B. You were saying it should be an exercise on the part of the servant to be in his ministry and manner that which he wishes to be produced in those to whom he ministers.
J.T. That is all important.
J.H.T. Do you think the service of Tychicus at Colosse would be a vital link in the growth from Romans to Ephesians? Paul speaks of him as "the beloved brother and faithful minister". Would the former bring in the refinement there and the latter bring in food? I was thinking of what you said as to God sending the ministers and that they should represent Him. Paul
{62}
speaks of having sent Tychicus. He had that delegated authority, and he is marked by these features of refinement and bringing in food; and then the secret of his power would be in his being a "fellow -- bondman". Further, he says, "that he might know your state". I wondered if he would not be concerned about the growth from Romans to Ephesians; it also says, "that he might encourage your hearts", and then he that "with Onesimus ... they shall make known to you everything here". Is that suggestive?
J.T. Yes. It indicates plainly that Tychicus was representative of God in his ministry.
Eu.R. Would you make a few remarks on the rest of the chapter?
J.T. The passage read, (@Mark 6:30), records that the apostles were gathered together to Jesus. They have now got their official title; they are called 'apostles' I suppose to shew that they are qualified.
R.B. Is this what you have called getting their degrees?
J.T. Just so. There is the principle in Scripture of *naming* a thing when it is there. They had evidently qualified in their service, and so they are formally called apostles in verse 30; "The apostles are gathered together to Jesus". That is a good reference, "to Jesus" they go back after their successful service to *Jesus*. It is very touching and a beautiful example, with much besides. There is a certain calm mg result in going back to Jesus "gathered together to Jesus", it says. "They related to him all things, both what they had done and what they had taught". That was their part, and then He said to them, "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place and rest a little", and then it adds, "For those coming and those going were many, and they had not leisure even to eat. And they went away apart into a desert place by ship". There again the link is kept up with the sea, and then you have the feeding of the multitude, which brought
{63}
out that after all their successful service they were defective in ability to bring in the food.
Then "immediately he compelled his disciples to go on board ship, and to go on before to the other side to Bethsaida, while he sends the crowd away. And, having dismissed them, he departed into the mountain to pray". Now they are in a position where the wind is contrary. They are in a position selected for them by Him, and apparently they took the position somewhat reluctantly. "He compelled" them, shewing that at certain points the Lord has to use a firm hand, and He does. He compelled them to take up this position in the ship, but then He would bring out something that they perhaps had never thought of. He would bring out the principle of walking on the water, which was a new experience altogether for them. And the Lord "would have passed them by", which is a very searching matter, even at a time of success in service, as If He would remind us that after all He could get along without us. Not that He wishes to, Because He does not really pass them by, but He would remind them of that. "Seeing them labouring in rowing, for the wind was contrary to them, about the fourth watch of the night he comes to them walking on the sea, and would have passed them by". That is a thing to be noted.
Ques. Was that a test of their state?
J.T. No doubt it would have been a challenge to them, to see the Lord about to pass them by. Well, why should that be? We can never assume, therefore, that He can be brought to a standstill because of anything in us He can go on.
J.J. I suppose in one sense He had passed them by in taking up Paul.
J.T. Exactly; and in taking up the seventy according to Luke, He shewed He could get others, and many others. But it is only to call attention to the lesson to be learned. Then it says, "But they, seeing him walking
{64}
on the sea, thought that it was an apparition, and cried out. For all saw him and were troubled. And immediately he spoke with them, and says to them. Be of good courage: it is I, be not afraid. And he went up to them into the ship, and the wind fell". It was a very wonderful experience, I am sure, and the result was a great stimulation in them. Their real state is brought to light as indicating why He would have passed them by. It says, "They were exceedingly beyond measure astonished in themselves and wondered, for they understood not through the loaves: for their heart was hardened". That shews He was dealing with what was in their hearts, and that explains why He would have passed them by. And then it says, "Having passed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret and made the shore. And on their coming out of the ship, immediately recognising him, they ran through that whole country around, and began to carry about those that were ill on couches, where they heard that he was". There is great stimulation now in this acquired fresh knowledge of the Lord.
Eu.R. Is it like a crisis among the people of God, that if the gain is secured, it leads to a fresh impression of Himself?
J.T. One has often seen that. The result of a crisis is that there is an excess of light and stimulation, but it is humbling that it could come only in this way.
J.H.T. There may be much public activity, but the Lord looks at the state behind it.
J.T. That is very searching.
H.E.S. Does this testing bring out the characteristic feature in regard of the servant in Mark, that is, unbelief? Is that our weakness?
J.T. Quite. I hope we shall see something of the seriousness of that as it appears in the last chapters of this gospel.
{65}
THE ABUNDANCE OF THE SEAS (4)
@Mark 7:31 - 37; @Mark 9:1 - 13
J.T. We were dwelling on chapters 5 and 6 this morning as indicating the wealth accruing from ministry in relation to the sea. We left off at the Lord walking on the sea at the end of chapter 6. The Lord increases in the minds of the disciples as His ministry proceeds, so that the end of chapter 6 records that "On their coming out of the ship, immediately recognising him, they ran through that whole country around, and began to carry about those that were ill on couches, where they heard that he was. And wherever he entered into villages, or cities, or the country, they laid the sick in the marketplaces, and besought him that they might touch if it were only the hem of his garment; and as many as touched him were healed". We can thus see how the Lord increased in their minds, even His garments being recognised as emitting virtue. Chapter 7 brings out the opposition seen in the Pharisees and some of the scribes in Jerusalem. We are not yet in the area of condensed opposition, that comes in in the second section; but Jerusalem's influence is in evidence, and we have the question of ceremonialism.
Eu.R. Would the city of Jerusalem suggest organised opposition to the line that was coming in?
J.T. That is it exactly, and we have to face it. We shall see it in the second division of the book, but already it is stretching out its hand.
H.E.S. Do we learn from chapters 6 and 7 that the servant needs to be delivered from every natural and spiritual feature of the present scene?
J.T. Quite. Ceremonialism is a very potent weapon in holding people's minds. There has been a great effort put forth in this country during the past few years to enlarge on that side, as strengthening the accredited Establishment, appealing to the religious element in the
{66}
human mind. Observing the great success of superstitious ritualism in Rome, the Establishment is seeking to utilise it fully here.
Ques. What would the hem of the garment suggest?
J.T. It was power going out from the Lord in His immediate circumstances; the circumstances themselves emitting virtue, shewing the excess of power. Power is used ordinarily by the intelligence, the hands but when it is emitted from the garments, the thing itself is there in excess. It is all around, so to speak, so that as many as touched Him were healed.
H.E.S. Would it be right to say that in the gospel of Luke we have the excess of grace, and in this gospel we have the excess of power?
J.T. Exactly; power in the testimony is what Mark would emphasise.
J.J. I suppose what comes out in @Colossians 2 would correct ceremonialism. Would that go along with this?
J.T. It does. The Lord meets it by saying, "Well did Esaias prophesy concerning you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honour me with their lips, but their heart is far away from me. But in vain do they worship me, teaching as their teachings commandments of men". That is what has to be noticed now. "For, leaving the commandment of God, ye hold what is delivered by men to keep", He says, and then, "Having called again the crowd, he said to them. Hear me, all of you, and understand: There is nothing from outside a man entering into him, which can defile him; but the things, which go out from him, those it is which defile the man. If any one have ears to hear, let him hear. And when he went indoors from the crowd, his disciples asked him concerning the parable". The Lord would lay; it upon us a little to think of the crowd. The crowd is the general public, the general profession, who may turn an ear and pay attention. The Lord pays particular attention to them,
{67}
and He would suggest that to us. They deserve attention especially in view of this increase of ceremonialism. There may be an ear, it may be very little, but I believe it should be attended to, if there be any interest. In the prophet Amos we have the suggestion of a shepherd taking out of the mouth of the lion two legs or a piece of an ear. Whatever there be, it should be attended to. Then there is the private side, verse 17, which embraces ourselves; the *disciples* inquire inside.
H.H. Your thought is that ceremonialism would nullify power?
J.T. It would; the enemy has a great advantage in it in regard of the multitude. At Colosse it was creeping in amongst the saints, although marked by order. The Colossian assembly was not like that at Corinth; it was marked by order, and the apostle rejoices in the order, but they were exposed to philosophy and worldly ordinances. But here it is rather the crowd.
H.H. Would that bring in the gospel? In appealing to people generally you would move on gospel lines.
J.T. Exactly; whatever ear there is. It may not be much now; the ear of the public is becoming less and less attentive, but whatever there is, I am sure it should be ministered to. Then "when he went indoors" that is another thing. The Lord graciously helps us indoors to a right understanding of everything. Here it is really a question of the state of the heart of man; it is not what goes in, but what comes out of a man, what comes out of his heart. There are thirteen things mentioned by the Lord, not simply *in* the man's heart, but that *proceed* out of it.
H.H. Shewing that the heart is dreadfully defiled.
J.T. That is the idea, what man is at the core; and the things are not inactive. They "proceed out" of him. So that the woman's daughter next mentioned is to remind us of this evil; she was possessed with an unclean spirit. "Whose little daughter", it says, "had an unclean
{68}
spirit" a very sorrowful thing; a different state to that of Jairus daughter. And then there is the man who had an impediment in his speech. It says, "They bring to him a deaf man who could not speak right". I mention these things in the order in which they appear in chapter 7 in view of the emphasis laid on ceremonialism lately in this country, and the awful moral conditions that exist in the increasing looseness. We see the great expression of it in this little daughter with an unclean demon.
R.B. Why does the question of His not being hid come in connection with Tyre and Sidon? "He could not be hid".
J.T. I suppose it is in keeping with Mark; we do not need to advertise if the power is there. Not that we should hide ourselves away; the Lord did not do that. He was in the house, that is, in a place of sympathy, but "he could not be hid", need finds Him. "Having entered into a house he would not have any one know it, and he could not be hid", verse 24. It is to call attention to the power of the servant.
H.E.S. Do you think if the kingdom of God is come in power it will be manifest without any such thought as advertisement?
J.T. I am sure human methods in advertising would be condemned by the spirit of Mark; and *yet* the truth should be known. It will be known as there is power in the ministry.
J.C.S. Do you regard the little daughter as representative of what ceremonialism has brought forth? There is affinity between it and the unclean spirit.
J.T. Yes; and the evil condition of the heart of man, proceeding out from it, is covered, over with a cloak of ceremonialism. It was a dreadful state of things here, and the demon is operating in one who ought to have been protected. It shews there must have been great domestic derangement, for the little girl ought to have been protected. Evidently she was not, for the unclean
{69}
demon got in. The mother felt it, which was good, but apparently there had not been protection.
Eu.R. Along with these terrible things in the human heart, there is a natural religiousness that can go on with a formal condition of things.
J.T. Exactly.
Eu.R. We have to beware of the influence of what proceeds from Jerusalem, in that way.
J.T. Ritualism will just cover over the awful condition that is below, the vicious state of man's heart, and the consequent result m the unclean demon in a little girl -- one who ought to have been the object of the tenderest care and protection, indicating the sad state prevalent now throughout the christianised world.
Eu.R. Do we have to learn to judge these things at the root that are mentioned here one at a time?
J.T. Yes. No doubt they are mentioned in order here. This chapter should be specially noted in the light of the modem development in this country of superstitious ritualism. Rome has succeeded on this line everybody recognises it is a marvellous success in maintaining a system of religion, whilst covering over the awful conditions in man's heart. These things come out. Rome pretends to look after them with the confessional and all that, but there is no power to check them, they come out; they proceed out, the Lord says, and the effect is seen in that the family protection was not there. It is remarkable that it was in the neighbourhood of Tyre and Sidon; as if the Lord went there that this might come to light and that He might meet it; He met it in power, without seeing the girl at all. The demon went out of her; it was a question of His word.
E.M. Would ceremonialism be the enemy's counterpart to what we were having this morning, the thought of refinement and perfection of the work which is being carried on at the present moment?
J.T. I am sure human refinement is nowhere more
{70}
developed than in the ceremonial system. It appeals to the flesh; the flesh is developed in it. Agag is the flesh, but refined flesh. God ordered Saul to destroy the Amalekites, and he seemingly did; but he saved the king and the best of the sheep and the cattle. Agag represents the *best*. It says that he came gaily or delicately, he would put on the politeness of the flesh, and that is developed in the ceremonial system as nowhere else; it is very ensnaring and appealing. The fine arts are taxed to their limits in the cathedrals.
H.D'A.C. The sweet music dulls the senses.
P.L. Do you get all this in the word to all servants of the Lord in the last days in (@2 Timothy 3)? These various features of the natural heart are brought out to the full in the early verses of that chapter, "without natural affection", and so on, then the ceremonialism, "Having a form of piety but denying the power of it"; and then what is said in regard of the households in connection with the little girl, "Leading captive silly women, laden with sins, led by various lusts".
J.T. That is very true. It shews the awful conditions that exist underneath all this recent effort in this country. Rome has succeeded in it, and we, as seeking to serve, ought to take account of the enemy's effort. The Lord shews how to meet it. He would bring the woman down, for there was also pretension to national advantage. It says in this gospel that she "was a Greek, Syrophenician by race", to suggest that she would consider that as of importance, because next to the Jews the Greeks had a renown in the world. They are so regarded in Romans; they are put alongside the Jew, "Jew and Greek", shewing that as a nation they had distinction; so she is said here to have been a Greek, but she had to come down. Deliverance from this unclean system is in acknowledging our true state; and the Lord says to her, "Suffer the children to be first filled; for it is not right to take the children's bread and cast it to the dogs. But
{71}
she answered and says to him. Yea, Lord; for even the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs. And he said to her. Because of this word, go thy way, the demon is gone out of thy daughter". You see thus how to get at this state of things in service as depicted in this chapter, and how we may serve in it. It is by bringing in the light of what belongs to the children, and that no national distinction is of any value at all.
Eu.R. And by the admission that one is simply a dog, that is, with these unclean things in one's heart and mind, however refined. Is there import in the fact that this is in the borders of Tyre and Sidon, two seafaring places?
J.T. Exactly; commercialism fosters this sort of thing, affording the means for the gratification of the human heart.
J.J. It is well that we have (@Matthew 16) following chapter 15, where this same incident is brought out, because over against ceremonialism the Lord is building the assembly, what is solid and marked by spirituality.
H.H. And is it not serious, looking at it from a national point of view, that ceremonialism tends to produce this kind of thing? I mean, it forecasts serious things for the nation.
J.T. The prospect is dreadful yet @Amos 3 encourages us, that God does nothing save that He makes it known to His servants the prophets. The Lord would draw us into his confidence as to what is coming. In the meantime the shepherd takes out of the mouth of the lion two legs or a piece of an ear. That is the kind of service that is suitable, you rescue when you can.
W.L. Will not ceremonialism produce apostasy and the Antichrist?
J.T. I am sure that is true.
P.L. It is interesting to see at Tyre in (@Acts 21) the wives and the children kneeling down on the shore and praying. Has this service at Tyre been continued, and are there many houses now cleansed from all this?
{72}
J.T. That is good. It shews something had been learned. The wives and the children are in sympathy with the apostle.
Eu.R. This was a territory that yielded a good deal of material for the temple.
J.T. And the Lord is indicating here that He is going to draw upon it again, but on this line the national claim is disregarded.
J.J. Would you just say what relation this gospel has to the assembly, in contrast to Matthew?
J.T. As has been remarked, this is the, servants gospel, but it necessarily bears on the assembly. What we have said all through bears on the assembly, for the wealth of the seas embellishes the house of God. Thus you have stated the amount of gold brought in in Solomon's day and the other things for the embellishing of the house; so that this gospel would bear on the assembly in that way.
Eu.R. This woman would become a lover of the true David, and so would be material for the assembly.
R.B. Is it not encouraging that in spite of the awful state of things you have drawn attention to, the power was such that the demon was *gone* out; it is not *cast* out.
J.T. It is very remarkable. The Lord said to the woman, "Because of this word, go thy way, the demon is gone out of thy daughter". I suppose the position was made untenable by the power of Christ, and being at a distance would indicate the power of His word, how He can act at a distance.
H.E.S. In 1 Corinthians, in the light of all that the Jew and Greek were seeking, the apostle brings in Christ as God's wisdom and God's power.
P.L. Would the young girl now be like those half-opened lilies in the house of God, bursting forth into grace and life?
J.T. What follows would be the development of what
{73}
is seen in her. The demon is gone out: "And having gone away to her house she found the demon gone out, and her daughter lying on the bed". Then the next thing is, "And again having left the borders of Tyre and Sidon, he came to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. And they bring to him a deaf man who could not speak right". She is in a way continued in this next case, and this further operation is needed, but what comes out in this section is the Lord's profound feelings. We are coming now to something that should touch our hearts in service, that is, deep feelings so as to feel things as they are. It says, "Having taken him away from the crowd apart, he put his fingers to his ears; and having spit, he touched his tongue; and looking up to heaven he groaned, and says to him, Ephphatha, that is. Be opened". We have not only the Lord's power, that He can act at a distance, so that the demon has to go out without His even seeing the girl, but what the Lord feelings in all this; what the effects of sin were to Him. One would seek to enter into this a little in the Lord's service.
Eu.R. Do you mean because the man had his ear closed to God?
J.T. Quite. What an advantage it was to the enemy when Eve gave her ear to Satan, and Adam was brought into that! What widespread disaster resulted! The Lord goes back on all that. It is now a question of the whole race of man, and the power that Satan had over it. Think what it involved for Him if an ear is to be opened and if the mind of God is to be heard and enter into a man, so that he is able to speak right about God, and there is complete deliverance in intelligence. So you see the feelings of Christ here. He put His fingers mark, His fingers first to his ears, and then He spit and touched his tongue, and looking up to heaven He groaned. Consider what all these things mentioned meant in the Son of God, for I suppose the spitting means what He
{74}
was essentially as coming into all this, and how infinitely.
M.W.B. Do you think the Lord's feelings stand in direct contrast to the ceremonialism of the early part of the chapter?
J.T. I do.
M.W.B. It is just a reference to what is going on today; very perfunctory and formal service in contrast to these deep feelings.
J.T. Yes. Of course the Lord does certain things formally, but power is in everything that He does. We are not Quakers; we do not disregard certain things that may be called formal, but power should mark them; power is behind every movement here, the fingers, the looking up to heaven, the spitting, and the groaning -- the power of God is in everything.
F.H.B. The order too is remarkable. He touched his ears first before his tongue, as if the ears had to be set right first.
J.T. That would be the order in which man was lost to God.
H.H. There would be a very close relation between the Lord and the man in that way.
H.P.W. Is it not so in the presentation of the gospel, that the spirit in which it is presented, reflecting in some way the feelings of Christ, is as important and often more so than the actual words themselves?
J.T. It is. I am sure the Lord would impress us as *to feelings*. There are religious feelings and so on, but to have feelings like His is what should be desired.
H.P.W. His feelings would have an effect upon our spirits, and in that way affect the persons ministered to.
F.S.M. Would there be an intimate relation between the Lord's feelings and the Lord's touch? Is it not striking that the touch is emphasised? Is not the way we are able to touch souls dependent on the measure in
{75}
which our souls sigh and cry for all the abominations that are done?
J.T. I believe where you get the original words of Christ, the very words He used, what is in mind is to bring His own feelings to you. This gospel is somewhat distinguished in that way by the recording of words actually used by the Lord, such as "Talitha koumi" and this one, 'Ephphatha', and 'Abba'. We are let into His own feelings in what He said to the Father, Abba, Father.
W.C. Is the climax at the cross in the Hebrew being given in the forsaking? "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?"
J.T. It is. One would love to thus get near to the Lord, and I believe that is the suggestion in His very words being given. The very words are handed on, suppose, in all languages into which the Bible has been translated.
J.C.S. So we come close to Him and imbibe His feelings.
Ques. Can we have those feelings if we remain in Tyre and Sidon? Commercial feelings tend to harden.
J.T. That is so. He came back into Decapolis, a hard soil, but another person is delivered there.
H.E.S. In the statement, "He does all things well", is there emphasis not only on what the Lord did, but on the manner of His doing it?
J.T. That is the point; He did all things well. That is another expression peculiar to Mark.
J.J. Were not those feelings continued very much in Paul in his service, both in the gospel and in relation to the saints in a special way?
J.T. I am sure they were.
P.L. He was "painfully excited" at Athens. (@Acts 17:16).
Ques. Was God securing a public response to refinement in perfection here?
J.T. I think the result here is most important. "Immediately", it says, "his ears were opened, and
{76}
the band of his tongue was loosed and he spoke right". It is more than the previous man. The man out of whom the demons were cast was sitting, clothed and in his right mind, but here you have the power of hearing and speaking.
Eu.R. The man in (@Acts 3) began immediately to praise God. That would be speaking right.
J.T. Quite.
H.D'A.C. The Man who opened this man's ears was the greatest listener that had ever been on the earth. "Morning by morning" He listened to God and got His word; He was not deaf to God.
J.T. And the greatest speaker too. They "wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth", (@Luke 4:22).
E.J.M. Do you think those that brought him had some sense of the feelings of the Lord Jesus in regard to these conditions? It says that they brought him.
J.T. No doubt. And "they *beseech* him that he might lay his hand on him" they felt for the man. The Lord values this.
M.W.B. You referred just now to the Lord's action in spitting, implying what He was essentially. What had you in mind in that?
J.T. It refers to what He is essentially. Though He had come into those circumstances, it was Himself. I think. His deity is involved in it.
M.W.B. Implying incarnation.
J.T. Yes; coming into manhood He remains what He is ever "the Same".
M.W.B. There must be great importance in this, as so much detail is given with precision.
J.T. Yes; it is a marvellous grouping of actions by the Lord; and I am sure it is so comprehensive that His own essential personality is implied, that He entered into these circumstances. It is marvellously touching to my mind that He should put His fingers in the ears and
{77}
spit and touch the tongue, and then look up to heaven and groan. It is very wonderful the more one dwells upon it, and the more what entered into it is seen, in the One who was there.
J.J. Would it be illustrated in the feelings of the two prophets Elijah and Elisha with the two boys?
J.T. I think that is good. You mean the prophet Elijah stretched himself on the lad; that is to say, he identified himself with the state of the boy, in the house of the widow of Zarephath, and Elisha did the same thing in the house of the Shunammite. It is the Lord's complete identification with the person.
H.P.W. Would you say a word as to the looking up to heaven.
J.T. That is to bring out His dependence, which is most interesting. We have in this gospel two feedings of the multitude, as in Matthew. In the first, the Lord looks up to heaven, that is, He recognises heaven as a dependent Man here. In the second. He does not look up to heaven. In the first you have the order, fifties or hundreds in ranks; but in the second there is no specification for any such divisions, because it is a question of the power that is already there, that is, the Spirit You may minister the word by the Spirit to any number; but when He looks up, then the idea is the assembly as representative of heaven here, and you have specification as to numbers, that is, the fifties or hundreds, in this gospel. So I think looking up to heaven would mean an acknowledgment of heaven; the Lord's dependence on it when here, and the order corresponding with it.
J.O.S. In the first feeding it is said that the Lord blessed, but in the second feeding He gave thanks only. Is there any special reason for that?
J.T. In the second feeding the number seven refers to what is here. It is a divine Person here, and we must respect the Holy Spirit. It is a divine Person here, and I believe that is the import of the second feeding in
{78}
chapter 8. The first feeding refers to heaven; that is, administration from heaven in the twelve, and the consequent specification as to numbers. Blessing comes in there.
J.J. How does the blind man of Bethsaida, who sees men as trees walking, come in in chapter 8?
J.T. That is an additional thing. We are now nearing the climax in this course of instruction. We are nearing the mount of transfiguration; and before you get to it there must be the principle of seeing everything clearly; for we are going to see great personages on the mount, and our minds must be disabused of ordinary men of earth. So the second touch, I think, is Colossians. The Colossians were in danger of the influence of men; and this second touch is to disabuse the mind of men as such, and enable us to see all things clearly.
J.H.T. Is this on the line of the Son setting you free? Would the truth setting you free be Romans, and the Son setting you free be Colossians?
J.T. Just so, and I think that fits here. It says, "And he comes to Bethsaida; and they bring him a blind man, and beseech him that he might touch him. And taking hold of the hand of the blind man he led him forth out of the village, and having spit upon his eyes, he laid his hands upon him, and asked him if he beheld anything. And having looked up, he said, I behold men, for I see them, as trees, walking. Then he laid his hands again upon his eyes, and he saw distinctly, and was restored and saw all things clearly". I think that is the effect of the epistle to the Colossians, in the sense that it delivers you from man; you see everything in clear perspective.
Eu.R. And then the one loaf in the next chapter would suggest the *sufficiency* of Christ, would it?
J.T. Yes. They had one loaf. Chapter 9 confirms that: "Jesus alone with themselves"; that is all we need, and it corresponds with Colossians.
{79}
Eu.R. Clarity of vision would be evidenced in the recognition of that.
J.T. And hence the next thing is, "Who do men say that I am?"
E.M. Is not verse 14 the last allusion to the ship in this gospel, where the one loaf is mentioned? I wondered whether there was any significance in that whether their education was complete on that line, reaching now toward the mount?
J.T. I am sure that is what is indicated. The sea is mentioned later, but not in the sense in which we have been considering it. It is a question here of a clear apprehension of the Person of Christ.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that before we come to the mount of glory, a process of moral adjustment goes on with us?
J.T. Exactly; so that we may get an apprehension of the personality of Christ and then of personality generally in the divine realm.
Eu.R. On the one hand. God has come near to us in Jesus to open our ears and loose our tongues, and that would enable us to take account of Him as the Son of God.
J.T. Up to this point His Person is gradually coming into view. At the end of chapter 6 He is greatly enlarged in their minds; and in chapter 7 you have the spitting, the further thought of what He was essentially; and then in this chapter the one loaf, and then His question, "But ye, who do ye say that I am?"
E.M. What they discover on the mount was really true in principle in the one loaf -- who He was.
J.T. Quite; it was there all the time; but on the mount they saw "Jesus only with themselves". That is the position of christianity; you have the true idea of His Person and that Christ is sufficient; so the mount means that we have a clear perspective as to everything on earth. That is Colossians, that no man is obscuring
{80}
your vision, and perhaps if we were free to admit it, it is not so easy to get clear of the influence of man. How easily one gets an undue place among the saints, and a whole district is ruled by him. That is a thing that has to be guarded against. To see men as trees walking leads to being absorbed with some particular person; but when you see all things clearly, you are adjusted in regard to the whole position on earth. Now the next thing is, what do you think about Christ? He certainly has distinction. It is of the very greatest importance to acquire ability to take account of Him who He is.
Eu.R. Why is Peter's confession here simply, "Thou art the Christ"?
J.T. It is in keeping with the teaching of this gospel, not to shut out the full confession of Matthew. What you need here is the anointed Man, that is, a Man to whom God can commit Himself; "the Christ" One who accomplishes things for God.
M.W.B. With regard to what you were saying, do you think the adjustment of the epistle to the Colossians would prepare for the knowledge of the Son of God that is referred to in Ephesians?
J.T. I am sure of it; it prepares the way for the "fulness of the Christ". You can thus take account of His fulness, what has shone out, what was ever there. What He is essentially is there, and you find it throughout. There are indications of His Person all along from your first acquaintance with Christ. Now you come to the point of ascension and you are challenged as to what your conception of Christ is. It is not only what you think, but what you *say*. What are we saying about Him? We surely ought to speak about Him, and in doing so make plain who He is.
Ques. Did the writer of the epistle to the Hebrews get an impression of that? "Who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance".
J.T. Exactly. The world's history is full of so called
{81}
great men how much do *we* speak of the Lord Jesus, and of His personal distinction?
F.S.M. Would the epistle to the Colossians enable us to answer that question, "Who do ye say that I am?" "That *he* might have the first place in all things"?
J.T. Chapter 1 unfolds to us that the Father has delivered us from the authority of darkness and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His love; and then the Holy Spirit proceeds to tell us about His Person. How great and glorious He is as presented there!
F.S.M. If Peter had been instructed in the epistle to the Colossians he would never have said, "Let us make three tabernacles".
Ques. Do you think it would be possible for us to have an apprehension of Christ and not have the power of language to express it?
J.T. Peter had language enough. He says here to the Lord, "Thou art the Christ". If our ears, have been opened by His touch, and our tongues loosed by His touch, why should we not have language enough to speak about His Person? Of what value is language if in it we cannot extol the Person of Christ? But the point here is who I am saying He is. Every one of us should be saying something about His personal greatness.
H.D'A.C. And we ought to be able to say something about Him to Himself. When the Lord asks the question Peter does not answer to all the people, he says it to Jesus.
J.T. "Who do men say that I am?" People were speaking about Him, and none of them could say a right thing about Him. Peter's answer shews the disciples knew something of His Person, because there is nothing said here about a revelation from the Father. It is more what any one of them could say about Him, because His works shewed He was the Son of God.
{82}
A.M. The man in @John 9 says a good deal about him, and worshipped Him as the Son of God.
H.D'A.C. He does not say anything about this at the beginning of His ministry.
J.T. He gave them opportunity to know. The Lord's question was to bring out the apprehension they had acquired of Him.
Rem. It is a matter of spiritual intelligence.
J.T. Just so. The point is, am I observing who Christ is in my spiritual history and taking in the teaching?
N.McG. In doing that we should appreciate what the Father says about Him on the mount.
J.T. He made a selection according to the beginning of chapter 9 and took them up. "And after six days Jesus takes with him Peter and James and John, and takes them up on a high mountain by themselves apart. And he was transfigured before them: and his garments became shining, exceeding white as snow, such as fuller on earth could not whiten them". Now, how are they to behave up there? As Moses prepared Israel to enter the land in Deuteronomy, so the Lord here, before taking them up, gave them abundant training; Now they are tested by what comes before them on the mount, and they fail. They do not know how to behave themselves up there. So if I talk about going to heaven or even having part in the assembly, the question is whether I can fit in, whether I can take in the kind of manners and mode of procedure there. So what you get is, "He was transfigured before them ... . And there appeared to them Elias with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus". And note the appearing of Moses with Elias was to *them*. But they were not equal this scene; they talked about making *three* tabernacles. That will not do. It shews that they could not discern the greatness of Christ. No one could compare with Him at all. Peter had confessed the Lord's Person below, but was unable
{83}
to maintain this on the mount. All this is searching.
F.H.B. Clearly they had not yet come to see all things clearly.
J.T. They had had adjustment on earth, but they were not equal to the scene of glory on the holy mount. They did not understand; they failed in the test.
J.J. Would it be in Colossian language, "not holding the head"?
J.T. Quite. Not recognising the greatness of His Person.
P.H.W. Is there a good example of a young man who discerned things in 1 Samuel, where he said, "I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, who is skilled in playing, and he is a valiant man and a man of war, and skilled in speech, and of good presence, and Jehovah is with him", (@1 Samuel 16:18). He discerned it for himself.
J.T. That is it. He said, "I have *seen*".
Ques. Would the test come out in the Song of Songs? The bride reaches the point that He is the altogether lovely One.
J.T. Just so.
P.L. Would you attribute importance to the special word as to Mark in Colossians? "Concerning whom ye have received orders (if he come to you, receive him)". Would the Colossians be helped in regard to Paul's ministry to them as to the glory of the Person, by Mark's word, what he would compose as touching the King?
J.T. Mark's gospel will help them surely.
Eu.R. What is the great gain of this incident in regard to levitical service?
J.T. To get an idea of personality, because we want to see how things are in *God's* realm, to get an idea of personality up there. So that you see those two great persons coming out and speaking with Jesus; the Lord, as one might say, taking the place of listening to them. They are speaking with Him, shewing the mutual feeling that exists up there, but with all that you must never
{84}
forget in the scene of mutuality that He is supreme,, Abraham excelled in a similar scene. He could discern who the Lord was of the "three men"; he did not put the other two on the same level with the Lord, whereas Peter did here.
H.E.S. Is the thought in (@Numbers 3) on this line? "And the prince of princes of the Levites was Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest".
J.T. Just so.
J.C.S. It is very beautiful to see how Peter speaks in regard of this scene in his epistle. He changed his speaking then.
J.T. Yes; he speaks there of His majesty. I often question whether I have any idea of majesty. "Having been eye witnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom *I* have found my delight; and this voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain", (@2 Peter 1:17,18).
Eu.R. So the gain of such a scene as this is very great to those who would serve. The impression received there would affect us, especially in our service.
J.T. That is it. Peter makes no allusion to Moses and Elias when he speaks of the holy mount afterwards. The disciples were not to speak of it till He was risen. His resurrection and the coming of the Spirit were needed to make them equal to such majesty and glory.
Eu.R. They would speak better and serve more efficiently as having been on the mount with the Lord, but for this they needed the Holy Spirit.
{85}
THE ABUNDANCE OF THE SEAS (5)
@Mark 10:46 - 52; @Mark 11:1 - 11; @Mark 12:41 - 44
J.T. We observed yesterday that chapter 10 begins the second general division of the gospel. It is said of the Lord, "Rising up thence he comes into the coasts of Judaea, and the other side of the Jordan". Then later, verses 32 - 34, "And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was going on before them; and they were amazed, and were afraid as they followed. And taking the twelve again to him, he began to tell them what was going to happen to him: Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered up to the chief priests and to the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him up to the nations: and they shall mock him and shall scourge him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him; and after three days he shall rise again". These verses indicate what is now in view. The Lord had been labouring in relation to the sea, in connection with which there was no organised opposition, although there was opposition but now He is turning towards Jerusalem, and what we may see in our consideration of these remaining passages is the kind of material that comes to light in the blind man and the colt. We are now turned towards the recognised divine centre, but the facts developed shew that it was like "the hill of God" in the hands of the Philistine, in the enemy's hands, so that the Lord, in turning In that direction, asserts His rights. We are, therefore, in the presence of the full power of the enemy. That at the hill of God were outposts of the Philistines was a matter to be taken to heart; and the Lord, as facing all this, acquaints His disciples with what they might expect.
Eu.R. It is interesting that in invading Jerusalem the Spirit of God would draw attention to His coming first to the coasts of Judea and the other side of Jordan.
{86}
Would it involve that in overthrowing the Philistine element, holding things in bondage. God would open up universal blessing?
J.T. Exactly. He came in by way of Trans-Jordanian territory; He came in that way. That is what is meant, I think. He approached *that* way.
P.L. Are you connecting that with the experience of Israel? In regard of the Red Sea have we got more the expression "the way" and what lies in it; but in the crossing the Jordan with the ark the enemies are scattered. Is it the concentrated power against Christ here?
J.T. Yes. Jericho stands for that; so that you have the expression that he followed Jesus "in the way", meaning that he took that way. That is to be noted "the way". Approaching Judaea and Jerusalem on this line we are reminded of the power in which the land was taken. It was a question of the "Lord of all the earth" that is to say, the rights of God entered into the crossing of the Jordan and taking possession of the land. It was the "ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth", and those powers enter into chapter 10. The Lord approaches similarly, and He finds material at Jericho corresponding very much with Rahab. That is, the blind man Bartimaeus recognises the Son of David. It is not an ordinary person believing for salvation, but one who recognises in his faith the Lord's right to the inheritance. That is, you have material that will stand up against the opposition that now is evident, as with Rahab.
So the subjects dealt with in this chapter enter into this; the subject of marriage and divorce; and that of children; and the rich man whom the Lord is said to have loved all these enter into the position. The rights of God and His institutions are in view; and perhaps we shall be helped in taking up this section of the gospel if we take account of the testimony as involving all these things, but that in maintaining them we have to contend
{87}
with entrenched organised opposition. What belongs to the Lord by profession is in the enemy's hand. That is the position now. So, in turning our faces towards Jerusalem, as it were, the rights of the Lord come into view, and all has to be maintained in the presence of organised opposition. The hill of the Lord is in the enemy's hand.
Ques. Would the thought of Hebron help to illustrate it? "The name of Hebron before was Kirjath-Arba".
J.T. Well, it does; it had been held by a family of giants, (@Joshua 15: 13 - 15).
M.W.B. Do you mean that the situation becomes more defined both in the organised opposition and in the actual securing of the material?
J.T. Yes; Bartimaeus represents the material now. It is material of, as one might say, fighting ability, because he came into blessing against opposition. Difficulties were raised him and he overcame them whereas earlier, throughout the first section, there was a sympathetic atmosphere. In the cases mentioned the environment generally was sympathetic, so that the needy soul was helped to the Lord; but now there is opposition. Barriers are raised up, but he overcomes.
E.J.McB. Does he represent a case that is translated out of the authority of darkness into the kingdom of the Son of God's love?
J.T. Just so.
E.J.McB. So that he throws aside his garment.
H.E.S. Is the thought of Rahab that before there were material effects gained by God there was a great moral effect gained in her heart, and is that the character of the present moment?
J.T. Yes, it is power in the believer that overcomes the environment, because she was beset by deadly opposition to the people of God, but in her soul she had light as to what God did at the Red Sea, and what the people did to Sihon and Og. She had light as to the
{88}
power of God in the resurrection of Christ, and the power of the Spirit acting in the saints; and, alongside of that, a cumulative moral state, for she had the stalks of flax on the roof of the house; meaning that she was coming into unity out of the sink of corruption in which she had been, and she directed the spies to go another way. She had the principle in her soul of *another way*, not the ordinary way, and so she represents the kind of material that would stand up against the opposition, as she herself did. So the opposition here fits in with our present circumstances. The effect of our study of the first section should be to make us evangelical, but as the wealth is acquired, this opposition has to be met; because the wealth must be made to fit in with the rights of the Lord. He is the "Lord of all the earth", and His institutions must stand. Whatever was given from the very outset, every divine principle must stand; so that we hold to all these things in the presence of organised opposition to them.
E.M. Would it be an exercise to bring to pass that, which would be protective of what is so precious to Christ as the result of ministry?
J.T. Yes. So you are concerned now in moving on to Judaea and Jerusalem, as to whether the result of the ministry is able to take its place in conflict, for otherwise it will go under.
E.M. To be a "good soldier of Jesus Christ".
J.T. That is right, and to *take your share in suffering*.
Eu.R. It would be vain for me to hail Him as Son of David when others are refusing His rights, if I do not take my place in relation to those rights as an individual. I must not be occupied with what others are doing, but come under His authority, and I will find my place in relation to others on that line.
J.T. Quite. You stand by those rights and suffer if necessary. The blind man "saw immediately, and followed him in the way". "The way" is to be noted
{89}
here; it involves divine principles and their maintenance.
J.J. It is mentioned three times in the chapter.
Eu.R. Is it the thought that there were already others in the way? The disciples were wondering as they followed Jesus in the way, and so he would link on with them.
J.T. Yes, and then it says, "And as he went forth into the way, a person ran up to him, and kneeling to him asked him. Good Teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" verse 17. Well, he did not hold in the way, although he kneels down. In the Establishment there is plenty of that sort of thing, and profession to be in the way, but riches lead this man out of it again, so that he is a discredit to it.
F.H.B. The way here led definitely to the cross.
J.J. Would it be like Mark's own history in leaving Paul?
J.T. He comes in later on, as the young man who fled because of the intense persecution and left the linen cloth. Mark is more a failing Christian but this man does not denote a genuine disciple.
R.B. Do you think that Moses had any light as to this when he said, "Shew me thy way"?
J.T. He wished to see it.
H.H. Do you not think that all these points we are going over in regard to the gospel of Mark suggest that Mark himself came into a much fuller apprehension of them. He had got to write about the things, and is not the gospel running rather on that line as brought before us for our education?
J.T. I am sure that is so. Moses, as was said, desired to see God's way; he saw it as on the mount of transfiguration.
A.N. Was there correspondence in the way the blind man addresses the Lord, and in what is seen in Rahab?
J.T. She had light corresponding with this. It is quite clear that this man had been the subject of a divine
{90}
work. Otherwise he would never, being a blind man, have been able to address the Lord in this way. It says, "Having heard that it was Jesus the Nazaraean, he began to cry out and to say, O Son of David, Jesus, have mercy on me", and then again as they rebuked him, it says, "But he cried so much the more. Son of David, have mercy on me". That is, he is shewing what kind of material is in him; and he therefore stands for what is to be relied upon, in the way the Lord was taking.
H.E.S. Is there the thought in addressing the Lord as Son of David that he felt the power of the kingdom, and knew the seriousness of the position in which he was placed?
J.T. It rather gives that impression. Whatever intelligence he had himself, the position of the confession here has relation to the rights of Christ, which is a greater thing than his need. Not that one would say much as to what he really understood, but the title by which he addresses the Lord is in keeping with the position; and that testimony comes out here; there is the acknowledgment of the Lord as the Son of David, although outwardly He was known as Jesus the Nazaraean. That is what was told him by those passing by, but he called Him Son of David, which shews there was a work of God there, that he had light in his soul. Therefore, it is a testimony in this particular setting, to the rights of the Lord and what was due to Him in Jerusalem. He would stand by that; because the next character is the colt, and he *carries* the Lord. All this has to be taken account of. He carries the Lord into the city of the great king, and the Lord is acclaimed in this relation, as borne by him into the city.
M.W.B. Do you think there is an analogy to the way the word of the Lord is spoken of in connection with Ephesus? "Thus with might the word of the Lord increased and prevailed". (@Acts 19:20). It is the rights of the Lord in that respect.
{91}
J.T. Yes. That reminds one of what we have here very strikingly, because of the teaching that preceded it. The Holy Spirit first, in chapter 19, and then the teaching in the school of Tyrannus over a long period, and then the word of the Lord. It is not the word of God as in chapter 18, but the word of the Lord; His power to take up the inheritance.
M.W.B. I was wondering whether there is not a twofold usage of the title Lord in that regard? the general thought of the kingdom and then that almighty power that the word of the Lord has. Nothing can stand against it; His word is supreme.
J.T. That is an important distinction. The first is, in general, Romans, the second, Ephesians.
W.R.P. I have not got your thought with regard to the colt. Would you say a little more about it?
J.T. That is a very important item in the instruction. I think he is a continuation of Bartimaeus It is the idea that he is available: "The Lord has need of it". It is the creation really taken up in the colt, as you might say. No man had ever sat on him at any time, he had never been under man's training or yoke; so I think this section brings in the Lord's creational rights, as well as His royal rights.
W.R.P. Do you mean creation is made subservient to Him and His rights?
J.T. That is the idea. When crossing the Jordan it was the "ark ... of the Lord of all the earth", and this corresponds, so that His creational rights are in view in the colt. "The Lord has need of it". It was a colt; that is to say, when you drop down to the lower animals it is more the creation as such. Mark has that in view preaching the gospel "to all the creation"; and in this section creational rights are in view as well as His royal rights. They must and they will combine. Therefore, you see the intense opposition; because all these positions are in the hands of the enemy. You see how he has
{92}
invaded the marital institution and the family in chapter 10. These involve creational rights: "God made them male and female". The title Son of David implies His royal rights. These also are in view. We are now facing the combined opposition of Satan, because he has taken up all those things, he is entrenched in them.
Ques. Would the fact that this man is begging be out of keeping with the dignity of the "ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth"? He was sitting by the wayside. I wondered whether that would represent the moral work of God in his soul. He is near to the way, but out of keeping with the dignity of it.
J.T. I am sure that is right, and it marks many. But he is now coming into the kingdom, he will not be begging any more.
P.L. Was Timothy to be brought into the way? "Remember Jesus Christ raised from among the dead, of the seed of David, according to my glad tidings", (@2 Timothy 2:8). Would that connect with the Son of David here?
J.T. It is remarkable that is brought in there, doubtless he needed to be brought into it more fully. So that 2 Timothy necessarily has the rights of the Lord in view in a day of apostasy. "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", (@2 Timothy 2:19). It is a question of what is due to the Lord.
Eu.R. And would it be right to say for ourselves, that it is only as coming under the royal rights that we can fill out our place in creational rights?
J.T. Exactly. You feel the kingdom gives you liberty to revert back to the divine institutions and to hold them inviolate. That is an important part of the testimony, that the marital relation should be held as a divine institution, and that the family should be maintained accordingly.
Eu.R. So in Timothy you get those "forbidding to
{93}
marry, bidding to abstain from meats". All those things are safeguarded here.
J.T. Quite.
H.H. Do you not think the inheritance comprises creational rights and royal rights? The effort to keep Christ out would be a denial of both sides.
J.T. Exactly; so later on they discern He is the heir, and put Him to death, so that they should have the inheritance without any claim to it.
Eu.R. Is that all involved in the "Firstborn of all creation" in Colossians?
J.T. Yes.
H.H. Would not the conflict in the end of Ephesians have regard to the inheritance in the way you are looking at it, in the opposition to the testimony which has to be met?
J.T. Exactly; so that we are to stand: "Having accomplished all things, to stand" in the power of the Lord. It is a question of the Lord, as has been remarked as to (@Acts 19). It is the Lord, not so much the kingdom, either in that chapter or in Ephesians. It is rather the *military* position, the "captain of the Lord's host", the power that is in the Lord against "the universal lords of this darkness", so that we are to have on the whole armour of God.
W.C. Is that why courage comes in in Joshua? "Be ... of a good courage".
J.T. Yes.
W.R.P. You connect all this with the inheritance?
J.T. Quite, it is the Heir here. He is to put us into possession. It is to overthrow the hostile power; so when the disciples in Luke come to Him and say that the demons were subject to them through His name. He says, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven". That meant the power that He had to meet Satan; it is what is involved in the Lord in the sense in which we are speaking; the power He has to deal with the "universal
{94}
lords of this darkness", and so angelic power comes in here. The Lord can marshal all powers in heaven and on earth, as the Lord, in a military sense; and hence you find Michael acting against Satan, but all under the Lord.
Eu.R. And in 2 Timothy the apostle seeks to make all that power converge on Timothy: "For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power". Would that fit in?
J.T. Yes; and so every one naming the name of the Lord withdraws from iniquity. He has to contend with iniquity after he withdraws from it, but the Lord will support him in this.
A.N. Are the two chapters here set forth in principle in (@Revelation 4,5)? In chapter 4 you get the creational rights secured: "Thou art worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were and they have been created". Then in chapter 5 you get the Lord presented as the "Lion of the tribe of Judah". That is, there are His royal rights as well as His creational rights.
J.T. That is good; and then in (@Revelation 10) a "strong angel" comes down and places his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the earth and cries "with a loud voice as a lion roars". That is to convey the power there is under the hand of Christ; those mighty powers that are set in the creation itself are under His hand and will be used against the enemy. Satan may have something to do with the air, but it really belongs to the Lord, so the "living creatures" symbolise the divine power there is in creation, and which God has under His hand. John is forbidden to write what the thunders said, because it was not the time for it; but simply to indicate that the Lord has those powers under His hand, and will use them yet; what is available to *us* is the Spirit of God.
H.D'A.C. Why does He allude to angels in the word
{95}
connected with Nathanael? "Henceforth ye shall see the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man", (@John 1:51). Why do angels come in there?
J.T. Does it not allude to (@Genesis 28)? In that chapter the angels begin at the bottom of the ladder, meaning that they were perfectly conversant with Jacob. They had been attending to their ministry there. "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" (@Hebrews 1:14). They were conversant with Jacob, and the thought is they carried up to heaven the latest information, so to speak. Not that God does not know everything; but to indicate to us the first hand knowledge there is.
H.D'A.C. So they begin at that moment.
J.T. It is not simply on the ladder as in Genesis, but on *Christ*. The angels of God were ascending and descending on Him, meaning that they were recognising the Person here, and that they begin from that time 'henceforth'.
H.D'A.C. And did the saints recognise from that moment who was there?
J.T. It was there. I have no doubt the bearing of it is millennial, because @John 2 opens with the millennium, "the third day"; but still there is the fact.
H.D'A.C. They were under His hand then at any rate.
J.T. And they were recognising His Person. He was "seen of angels"; they were ascending and descending on Him.
Eu.R. And so at the end of this gospel He is sitting at the right hand of God; and Peter says, "Who is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him", (@1 Peter 3:22), would that fit in?
J.T. Yes. So He comes "with the angels of his power, inflaming fire taking vengeance on those who
{96}
know not God, and those who do not obey the glad tidings of our Lord Jesus Christ", (@2 Thessalonians 1:8). That is future.
H.E.S. Is your thought that unless we recognise and submit to His rights we are not suited material?
J.T. Yes. You recognise them. What is so beautiful about Bartimaeus is that he emphasised the rights of the Person. He called for mercy, but he does not say, "Jesus the Nazaraean", but addresses Him as the Son of David. And then the colt taken up from the standpoint of creation, is the continuation of Bartimaeus. He is carrying the Lord into His royal city. Creation, as it were, like the living creatures in Revelation, is in sympathy, brought into accord with Him, and usable.
H.D'A.C. What are the living creatures? Are they simply symbolic?
J.T. I think so. There are four of them, symbols of the creation in its universality, and it is all secured through redemption.
Ques. Would you say a further word as to the organised opposition?
J.T. That is what we are in the presence of here. The Lord is acclaimed and carried into the city by the colt, and He looks around. "He entered into Jerusalem and into the temple; and having looked round on all things, the hour being already late, he went out to Bethany with the twelve". Then He goes back the next morning and curses the fig tree, there being no fruit on it. This is creational action. God can curse. "Cursed be the ground on thy account" was said to Adam. God has a right to do it. Judaism was fruitless, and He cursed it on creational grounds. He has a right to do that. Then He goes into the temple and He intimates His right there. The temple belonged to God. His Person shines out. He could go in and look round in the temple, and then curse the fig tree, and then go back again and clear out of the temple all that was contrary. He walks
{97}
about in it; there is majesty there; but it is God in His house; and He answers questions in it.
Ques. Had you in view the chief priests and scribes in speaking of organised opposition?
J.T. Yes. We are approaching all that here; but before we come to it fully, we have these wonderful things, indicating who was there.
J.J. The owners of the colt seem to recognise His rights, and the position of the colt tied up seems to prove they were true to divine principles.
J.T. That is important; and the immediate environment too should be noted, "Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives". "He sends two of his disciples, and says to them. Go into the village which is over against you, and immediately on entering into it ye will find a colt tied, upon which no child of man has ever sat loose it and lead it here. And if any one say to you. Why do ye this? say, The Lord has need of it; and straightway he sends it hither". Now you see there is a testimony to His rights. The blind man recognised His royal rights in the title he used, but now the blind man, so to say, is usable. That is the idea; the Lord can use him; only he is used as in relation to creation. He has a right to him as Creator.
E.M. Would the bringing in of the mount of Olives suggest that the power at the present moment lies in the Spirit?
J.T. That is the idea. It is in that neighbourhood. There is a group of places, Bethphage, Bethany and the mount of Olives, denoting a certain spiritual environment. It was there, and there is that same thing today, in the presence of organised opposition. We can reckon on a neighbourhood like this, where the colt is tied at the cross way, held there.
E.J.McB. Do you indicate that the Lord looks at Bartimaeus not only as one who recognised the rights, but who is in accord with those rights, in the scene in which he himself was created?
{98}
J.T. Yes; so that in the gospel according to Mark, the position of those secured is not only that they are redeemed, but they belong to the creation. We should recognise that: that the Lord has got creational rights over us, so that the whole position is clear. The creational position is clear, and then we are on redemptive ground as well.
M.W.B. With regard to service, do you wish us to gather that as considering these things we should have before us the securing of material that should recognise the two fold rights of the Lord?
J.T. Exactly; that is what should concern us now when our faces are turned toward the divine centre; because this section really applies to the church, although it is not brought in in Mark; for we cannot overlook what Matthew teaches us. The church is to replace Jerusalem; but it carries forward all the divine thoughts in Jerusalem; and as soon as you assert these the whole power of the enemy is against you.
M.W.B. So one should have this in the heart in any movements in service, not only the relief of man, though that is essential, but this securing of such persons as will maintain the Lord's rights.
P.L. Was Paul seeking to secure those rights in (@1 Corinthians 11), rather the creational rights in the beginning of the chapter, and then the Lord's supper bringing in what would answer to the royal rights; would both be secured?
J.T. Quite so, the relation of God to Christ as Head is the full position of the creation. That is very helpful, shewing that this feature of the testimony marks us as we sit down to partake of the Lord's supper. Partaking of the Supper we are His through redemption.
J.J. What is the difference between rights and authority? Would you say a little about the authority in the end of this chapter? "By what authority doest thou these things?"
{99}
J.T. The Lord had rights in His own Person, and consequently authority, but direct authority is delegated, He had authority from *God*. Authority is delegated, but it would include His personal rights. While He retains man's place in His service His Person was in evidence throughout.
Eu.R. In regard to the Lord's rights as referred to in 1 Corinthians, as the commandment of the Lord, would they be necessary to govern the situation if we are to find this spiritual environment?
J.T. That is it. It is very necessary in view of what we have to contend with now in relation to the church, that we should understand the kind of material intimated in Bartimaeus and in the colt, because you have thus a means whereby the Lord is carried in face of the opposition. "Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power". (@Psalm 110:3). That is the principle here. The people were not willing, but the principle was there in some. It says of Bartimaeus that he cast away his garments, that would be the giving up of the old circumstances, and that he 'started up', meaning there was *energy* in the man. He started up at the Lord's bidding, shewing how heartily he responded to that voice. It is very beautiful.
F.S.M. You see the affection he had for Jesus, answering to the movements of the children of Israel when they went after the ark across the Jordan; and would the next thing be that he was liberated to carry that which was so precious to God?
J.T. That is it; the beautiful order seen here; there is liberty for carrying what is for God. So the creation is brought in as that which would support the recognition of the royal rights.
H.D'A.C. Is it not Jehovah coming into His temple?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. When He looked around in the temple and cleared it, it was regarded as His own. It is not called the temple of God here, as in Matthew, nor His Father's house, as in John.
{100}
J.O.S. Would verse 18 link on with that? It says that the chief priests and scribes feared Him.
J.T. Quite; the enemy was quailing before Him.
P.L. Would you get these thoughts in (@Psalm 45)? "Thou art fairer than the sons of men; grace is poured into thy lips" is it the Lord appreciated as the Son of David by Bartimaeus? Then in the colt is it "In thy splendour ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness and righteousness", and then in regard of the enemies, "Thine arrows are sharp ... in the heart of the king's enemies"?
J.T. All that fits in here.
Eu.R. Why is the colt all alone here; its mother is not mentioned?
J.T. It is only in Matthew that you get the two. Matthew often brings in twos, because he has the church in mind as an organisation. That is, the principle underlying it is two. He uses both the colt and its mother in Matthew, but in the other gospels it is just the colt. I suppose Mark would indicate how one person can be used.
D.L.H. Do we not get the Lord's rights as Man here, as well as His royal rights; His rights as God and His rights as Jehovah? One of the rights of man was that he had dominion over the created things. Everything was under his hand and the Lord claimed that. It seems to be a simple illustration of how He asserted His rights as, I suppose, the last Adam in relation to creation.
J.T. Yes; He speaks of Himself as the Son of man at the beginning of the section. "Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered up", chapter 10:33.
D.L.H. So we seem to get here a kind of assertion of the whole circle of the Lord's rights: an unbroken colt, on which man never sat, was at once submissive and carried the Lord. It was a very remarkable thing from a human standpoint.
{101}
W.C. In Luke they put the Lord on the colt, but here "He sat on it" Himself. What do we learn from that?
J.T. "They led the colt to Jesus"; it was amenable, to being led to Jesus. And then they cast their clothes upon it, and He sat on it, He accepted this action too. So that the colt is usable with their clothes. He acts Himself here in using the colt; in Luke His dependence is more in evidence.
E.M. Would that be a progressive thought? Bartimaeus threw away his clothes, but here they utilise their clothes for His honour.
J.T. These are not clothes to be thrown away; they are suitable to be used by the Lord. Clothes denote our circumstances; sometimes our dignity. All should be available in the Lord's service.
P.L. Would you see in his service to Timothy Paul leading the colt to Jesus? And would Paul's ways in Christ be like the clothes?
J.T. No doubt; the testimony was thus carried by Timothy.
F.S.M. Is there a service today that would answer to finding the colt at the cross-way and loosing him and leading him to Jesus?
J.T. I am sure there is, because if he is tied there some hand did that for his good, he was held there so that when the Lord came by He could use him. Something had happened previously, and now the service of loosing and asserting the Lord's rights over him, and then the leading him to Jesus, may be well regarded as service to younger believers. They are held, it may be, by parental influence at the cross-way; for if the two ways meet, they may go one way or the other; but the tying prevents them from going the wrong way. Were it not that there is a wrong way the tying would be unnecessary.
Ques. Would you connect baptism with that?
J.T. Yes; your children as baptised are held. It is not
{102}
to be a ceremony with you. You bring in the principles of the kingdom and they would hold them.
J.J. "Have faith in God"; what place does faith have in all this?
J.T. We shall come to that more fully later; but it comes in here as the great thing for them. The Lord does not stop to answer their questions. Peter says, "Rabbi, see, the fig tree which thou cursedst is dried up", but Jesus answered, "Have faith in God. Verily I say to you, that whosoever shall say to this mountain, Be thou taken away and cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but believe that what he says takes place, whatever he shall say shall come to pass for him". Then He goes on, "For this reason I say to you. All things whatsoever ye pray for and ask, believe that ye receive it, and it shall come to pass for you. And when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have anything against any one, that your Father also who is in the heavens may forgive you your offences". Now, you have there what would remove this whole system of opposition. Faith will do it. Hence the prayer the spirit of forgiveness is very important in the midst of this inquiry.
G.W.W. Does not faith underlie all these instances we have had before us?
J.T. Surely; Bartimaeus and the disciples leading the colt to Jesus, and casting their clothes on it for Him, imply faith.
G.W.W. Would you say a little as to the last instance about the woman and the treasury? chapter 12: 41 - 44.
J.T. She represents what was there. She is not viewed as the product of the Lord's ministry; but she represents the remnant spirit, what is found there. What He acquired on the way was material to face the opposition, so that He is carried in on it, but what He found in Jerusalem is very touching. He found there something that was really greater than the temple itself; the basis, as we may say, for the new order of things. That is the next
{103}
thing, an element that is taken up with what is of God, her whole life devoted, as we can see, to what is of God. The temple at Jerusalem was too small for what shone in this "poor widow".
G.W.W. Would it be right to say there was the fullest recognition of rights there, because she recognised the rights of God to all that she possessed; that it was at the divine disposal? Might it be said, therefore, that she represents in a way the consummation of all we have been looking at?
J.T. Yes; the excellency of her action; it is a small amount two mites, but it represented great devotedness to God. It was not that the Lord had produced it; that is not the view-point here. He was looking on over against the treasury to see what was happening, and this whole-hearted devotedness was noted by Him. So it seems to me chapter 13 announcing the overthrow of the whole system, and then chapter 14 bringing in a new system of things, means that what this woman represents was too great for what was there. He would bring in another system in relation to the Lord's supper, so that there would be something sufficiently great for an action like this.
E.M. Would that link on with quality rather than quantity?
J.T. Exactly. The quality was so, great that the whole temple system would be overthrown it was not great enough for that. It was all there then and God recognised it, but there was to be something greater. Of course there were other reasons for the overthrow of the Jewish systems. The judgment of God required it.
R.B. Do you mean that this incident is not a development of Bartimaeus and the colt, but something fresh?
J.T. Quite; there was something there. The remnant for a new order of things always brings forward what preceded, what was of God; and this woman represents what was of God in the old system. What
{104}
the Lord brought up from Galilee is another matter. That was His own work, but there was something of God in the old system. It was very excellent, and He would make something suitable for it.
Ques. Do we see sacrifice as the basis of this action?
J.T. Quite; it was all her living, as the Lord says, the "whole of her living". It is love really; devotedness to what is of God, and that deserves something greater than the temple built with hands.
H.E.S. Is your thought that we have here not so much the wealth of the seas, but the wealth there in the remnant?
J.T. Exactly; what was of God. God has had something right down from the beginning, and it is always excellent.
W.R.P. And that something is to be carried into the new thing.
J.T. It is great enough for it. So that the next woman, we shall find, carries on this thought. The feminine side in this section will help us.
Eu.R. Then is this a remnant feature that we might covet to have in our day?
J.T. Surely.
G.W.W. Do you connect it at all with what we get in the opening of Acts, "Not one said that anything of what he possessed was his own", and it was in that way contributing to the advancement of what was then immediately in view.
J.T. And the Lord added to that those that should be saved. It was the greatness of the thing in (@Acts 2). It no doubt extended over a considerable time, but it was to bring out the greatness of the pentecostal result. It was not a temple made with hands.
Ques. Then does Stephen give the next thing? Is his exercise an advance on what had been in the previous chapters?
J.T. I think so; his face shone as the face of an angel.
{105}
What is heavenly is suggested. The Lord had come in connection with the better and more perfect tabernacle, the temple at Jerusalem was not great enough.
J.J. One almost supposes the words of the Lord Jesus quoted in (@Acts 20) concerned this act of the widow, "It is more blessed to give than to receive"; it is more connected with the assembly.
J.T. Quite; it fits in with the high level of Ephesus.
H.D'A.C. There is a scripture, which governs this march from Jericho to Jerusalem both in Matthew and Mark: "For also the Son of man did not come to be ministered to, but to minister, and give his life a ransom for many". And if we follow "in the way", this spirit will mark us.
{106}
THE ABUNDANCE OF THE SEAS (6)
@Mark 14:1 - 9,32 - 2; @Mark 16:9 - 20
J.T. We noted the poor widow at the end of chapter 12, so as to see the bearing of chapter 13, and then the action of the woman in chapter 14, as bearing on the new institution or order of things that is indicated in the celebration of the passover, and the institution of the Lord's supper. What was of God in the old system, seen in the passover, merged in the new, centring the Lord's supper. What was of God in the old system is undoubtedly expressed in this poor widow; and following upon the record of her action the Lord announced the overthrow of the temple. "One of his disciples says to him. Teacher, see what stones and what buildings! And Jesus answering said to him, Seest thou these great buildings? not a stone shall be left upon a stone, which shall not be thrown down". And then He sat on the mount of Olives opposite the temple. That system of things is to be demolished, and faith, according to chapter 11, would have it so; that is, faith in the saints in keeping with the mind of God.
R.G.H. Do you think the disciples were loth to leave the great stones and the buildings?
J.T. The remark of this one would indicate the hold these buildings had on him.
R.G.H. Because it says, "As he was going out".
J.T. As if in the disciple's mind they were leaving something of importance.
Ques. With reference to the widow's mites have you any thought why there are two? They are said to be "all her living".
J.T. No doubt there would be some testimony in the two. She might have kept one back, as we often do. She could have satisfied the most liberal prevalent standard of giving by putting in one of them, which would have been relatively a large amount; but the two
{107}
would mean she was whole-hearted. There were no afterthoughts with her. It was like God in His "unspeakable free gift".
Eu.R. Speaking of faith in chapter 11, would there be an allusion to Jerusalem when the Lord said that faith as a grain of mustard seed would cause the *mountain* to be removed?
J.T. Quite. Faith will not have the mountain in that sense. If faith is active in us, it will not have this outward thing that is so faithless and obstructive of the will of God.
Rem. Ananias and Sapphira kept back part (@Acts 5).
J.T. That is a good example of what we are saying, Ananias "put aside for himself part of the price".
H.D'A.C. But this woman's heart was full. There was Jehovah in His temple, and it was worth while giving under such circumstances.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that there is a danger with us of being occupied with material things?
J.T. I think the stones and the temple would be the religious Babylonish system; what is imposing and holds the natural religious mind. "See what stones and what buildings!" What is represented there has found an immense expression in christendom, and it holds the mind. People find it hard to leave; there is something there that holds them.
J.C.S. Is the temple here regarded as the work of the builders of that day, who disregarded the chief comer stone?
J.T. I suppose that is seen in Stephen's remarks, quoting the prophet, "What house will ye build me?" he widow's giving brought in the divine nature, what it is subjectively; and that requires, not a material building, not a house made with hands, but what is "greater and more perfect".
Ques. Is the thought here that all this stands in contrast to what is spiritual? It says, "He sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple".
{108}
J.T. He is taking up His position in relation to what is spiritual. The mount of Olives denoted that there was to be a great spiritual structure, and that would be in keeping with the widow's offering. That is the position.
E.J.McB. You made a reference this morning to the hill of God. I wondered whether the idea here was taking the hill of God out of the hands of the Philistines?
J.T. That is it. Chapter 14 brings in another order of things, in which what the hill of God represents is carried forward. It is a position of strength; the church became that. Of course, that is more worked out in Matthew; but still we ought to have the whole truth in view in dealing with any part; and that, I think, is the setting here. The new order of things is in chapter 14, and the woman of that chapter has a great apprehension of Christ's personal dignity as God's servant she anointed His *head*. From her point of view He is capable, of introducing another system of things. Chapter 13 shews that the material system is to be overthrown; but the Lord is sitting on the mount of Olives, and we may say she anoints Him in that connection. That is, it is a spiritual thing now; He is to bring in a spiritual order of things; that which is fully to represent God, and which will be great enough to be the vessel of the divine glory throughout all the generations of the age of ages.
We are entitled to bring that in here, to get the full scope of the truth; that we may be great enough to have part in it, because it is greatness that is in view, and in the widest connection. It is the divine nature acting, the widow is acting like God. He did not spare; He held back nothing. The division of the money would enable her conveniently to hold back *part*, but she did not. God could have spared too; He could have spared His own Son, but He did not. The correspondence between God and the widow suggests the necessity for the new thing. Of course there are other thoughts, for the nature and purpose of God required the setting aside
{109}
of the old and the introduction of the new order of things.
P.L. So "God loveth a cheerful giver". Is that suggestive of the love of God for such a one, and that there was no cheerful giving in the temple? This must give way to a vessel that God would love in its giving the assembly.
J.T. What was said this morning in regard of the Lord's hitherto unreported remark and there may have been many of them in (@Acts 20) is very suggestive. It fits in with the truth in its highest setting. It is the chapter that unfolds to us divine love working in the saints; the love in Paul's embrace, and then the love in the elders weeping upon him. It is in that connection you have, "It is more blessed to give than to receive"; so that one is on a very high level in giving on the platform of God in that respect. There must be an order of things in which such persons reside, and in which they have liberty and are to be free from criticism.
The amount spent in this anointing was liberal, and it was criticised; they spoke angrily at her. You cannot conceive of God allowing such persons to be forever exposed to angry criticism. He will have an order of things in which that sort of thing will be well spoken of, rather than discredited.
Rem. So there is "a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together".
J.T. Chapter 13 is the casting of them away, and chapter 14 the gathering of them together.
Eu.R. There is much hesitation with us in giving. We hold back, thinking of ourselves. And while going on with an outward order of things, there may not be the spirit of giving.
J.T. These two women bring us into accord with God. The one has wholehearted devotedness, and the other has intelligence, liberally taxing her means, but intelligent. She knew what she was doing; she did "what
{110}
she could". That is a principle in the new order of things, to do what we can.
Q.M.S. Do you think one woman gave her all to His interests and the other to His Person, and do the two things go together?
J.T. That is right. The first is what is of God, and the second an intelligent apprehension of what was set out in the Lord's Person. This is the kind of Person to serve God. He is her ideal. He is God's ideal. God had already anointed Him; now she is anointing Him; Shewing she had come into line with God as to the Vessel of His service. The widow had come into accord with God as to His nature, holding back nothing; that is the nature of God; His unspeakable free giving; but the woman in chapter 14 has intelligence as to the Person of Christ, that He is the One to serve. The earlier part of the gospel brought it out, and she is intelligent as to it.
H.D'A.C. The one leads to the other, of course.
J.T. Quite; they ought to be combined in us.
J.J. Is it not the spirit of (@Psalm 41), the last Psalm of the first book, that marks this woman? "Blessed is he that understandeth the poor". It is the psalm too in which Judas comes in, "Mine own familiar friend".
J.T. Quite. The poor there is not the poor in the sense of poverty stricken people, but what Christ was here in spirit.
T.H.T. Would it be right to say that if the buildings are to be demolished (chapter 13), this woman would draw attention to the foundation? Paul speaks in (@1 Corinthians 3) of the foundation that is laid, and then he refers to the saints as "temple of God". Is she on that foundation?
J.T. Quite; that is a good suggestion.
E.J.M. Is that why He speaks of "My body"? She pours it on His head, but He says, "She has beforehand anointed my body for the burial".
J.T. He adds to the woman's thought. He has a
{111}
vessel in mind, for the great thing God has in view is culminating in a vessel; that is, the assembly is finally a vessel for the glory. It is developed from the Lord's body, @1 Corinthians 10:16,17.
N.McC. Why is burial brought in here? What is the significance of it in Mark's gospel?
J.T. It would shew that the woman understood what was existing, that is, the murderous attitude of the Lord's enemies. "The chief priests and the scribes were seeking how they might seize him by subtlety and kill him". She understood that. Murderous hatred of Him was the atmosphere around, and she proved that she was in complete identification with the Lord. She knew what was going to happen, and so it is the idea of embracing an opportunity. She might never have one again. She did it "beforehand". It was too soon literally, but it was accepted. It was the embracing of an opportunity to shew how she regarded Him; that in spite of the fact that He was the One invested with the service of God, He had to die. She knew what was existing. I think it teaches us not to let an opportunity pass; and how the Lord values the seizing of an opportunity that He affords us. It may pass away and we may not get it again.
G.W.W. All the other women were too late with their spices; they did not reach His body with them.
J.T. Quite; she had the advantage, being ready beforehand.
G.W.W. She seized the opportunity and it was the only one of doing it.
J.T. I do not suppose she got another.
W.R.P. Do you think it means that if the temple system of things had to disappear, the Lord had to disappear too, in that connection?
J.T. Yes; coming in as the Messiah He accepted the guilt of the whole system sacrificially and glorified God through death in respect of it. It is very affecting that as identifying Himself with the nation He had to go into
{112}
death. There could be no new system there could be nothing but eternal void as to the creation unless He died sacrificially. That is, chapter 14 could not be without the dying of the Lord; and this woman, therefore, is beforehand, and she expresses intelligence in her anointing. The Lord during the passover intimates that the purpose of God both as to Israel and the church is secured in His death.
W.R.P. This anointing would introduce the new thing, would it not?
J.T. That is the idea; and the Lord's commendation of her shews how intelligent she was. Some have an understanding of things beforehand, others afterwards, but it is very fine to understand and know what to do as but divine opportunities are afforded.
Ques. Why does Bethany come in in this connection, and also the house of Simon?
J.T. That has to be noted. It is a position of reproach: "Simon the *leper*" And then, as the woman in the temple represents what is of God in the old system, so Bethany represents the best of the remnant under the Lord's hands. This woman would represent that.
Ques. Would that touch our local setting in our meetings at all?
J.T. I think it does. There is a lot of instruction that may be followed up from the scene at Bethany. It denotes the place of Christ's influence in His lifetime here, in regard of the remnant; so that it is the intelligence side of the remnant; the woman in the temple is devotedness. They afford a blend that is to predominate in the new order of things. We need intelligence; and that is what the woman of Bethany had. It is a very fine action, because the Lord says it is to be mentioned wherever the gospel is preached; shewing how much it conveyed subjectively, and to save from clericalism. If this is announced wherever the gospel is preached, converts will never come under the influence of the
{113}
clerical system. They will recognise that this is the kind of ministry, and will refuse what is spurious.
D.L.H. Is there any thought here that "If even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer"? I mean, is the thought of burial the passing out from the scene even of Christ as after the flesh, in view of the introduction of Christ on a new platform.
J.T. That is most helpful. So that the new order of things is in the light of that action; it is Christ dead and buried; but then risen and glorified. Christianity is therefore Christ as He *now* is and *where* He is.
G.W.W. Why did you say this delivers us from clericalism?
J.T. Because she anointed, Christ. Clericalism is utterly out of accord with *His* ministry. Nobody would accept the clerical principle who understood this woman's act.
H.E.S. Why is she called simply a woman here and not named? Is it in any way an indication of the state that the Lord is looking for in us?
J.T. It is the *subjective* side. John brings out the *personal* side in naming Mary.
J.J. I suppose this intelligence will remain as long as the body of Christ is here, because the body of Christ being here, the temple is here.
J.T. John would shew how the temple enters into this. "He spoke of the temple of his body" which they understood after He was risen, chapter 2. The idea of the temple is the place in which light is, but the body is the anointed vessel. "The Christ" in (@1 Corinthians 12) is the anointed vessel for *diffusion* of the light.
J.J. And entering into the thought of the temple and the body, would help us to exclude clericalism from our minds.
M.W.B. What will enable us to be intelligent beforehand? One feels that is a very important point you have
{114}
struck. Many are wise after the event, but to be wise before the event seems to be very desirable.
J.T. I think it is in the development of discernment. One has often thought of the divine current, the way it flows; and if you are in the right state you come into it without being able to explain perhaps, and yet what you are doing shews you are in it.
One has often used Peter at Joppa as an illustration of this. The end of (@Acts 9) shews he was in the current of God's mind; he was not at Jerusalem. Earlier it had been said that the apostles were still there; but now we find Peter passing through all quarters, and he went down to Joppa, and was in the house of Simon the tanner by the sea; and the word to Cornelius was, "Simon, who is surnamed Peter". His *movements* are in keeping with what God is doing; and now he goes up to the housetop to pray, and becomes in an ecstasy, and the sheet comes down; so that he is made *intelligent* now as to what God is going to do. The sheet is the mind of heaven come down; and now he knows it directly. Before that he was in the current of the thing and ready for it, which is most important. As to any crisis there are those who look back and write tracts explaining things fully; but they could not write definitely in the actual crisis, because they were not in the divine current. It is a person in the current who has right instincts and sees at the time or beforehand what the drift is.
M.W.B. It is an immense point in service to be moving in the current, otherwise we may be too late as those other women were.
J.T. That is what this woman represents. She comes in beforehand; she is in the full light of the position instinctively. Perhaps she would not have said what the Lord said of her, but that was what her action implied, indicating the state she was in.
J.J. The Lord had shewn the current before; He had explained how He was to be delivered up to the chief
{115}
priests and scribes and put to death, and she was in the flow of that.
J.T. That is it exactly.
H.D'A.C. Faith does not anoint a dead Christ. Do you not think she had the light of resurrection?
J.T. No doubt. The Lord said she anointed Him for burial, but no doubt she had the sense that He would rise.
Eu.R. The gospel would go out from a complete vessel, so to speak. The Lord would secure the assembly according to Corinthians, and the light would go out from that vessel, the gifts being set in it.
J.T. That would result from what we have here.
N.McC. In regard to being in the divine current and availing ourselves of an opportunity beforehand, is that the force of the Lord saying, "Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world, what this woman has done shall be also spoken of for a memorial of her"? The gospel has to be accepted, as it were, beforehand, on the principle of faith.
J.T. Quite. The mentioning of her action, in the sense of the Lord's direction, at every gospel preaching.
Rem. I notice that the New Translation renders it "*these* glad tidings". I wondered if it was the gospel in the way that presents the attractiveness and worthiness of Christ, rather than the meeting of man's need.
J.T. Quite. *These* would be the things *He* had been going on with. He had served in the gospel; the gospel is almost personified in this book. It is the great feature, and He had been ministering it, and she recognised His proficiency in the service, and I think her action would save converts as they are instructed in the import of it. They would think of the vessel through which the light comes, and in which it is to be continued. There never should have been a revival of the system that is overthrown in chapter 13 in christendom, had what this
{116}
woman did been kept in evidence in the preaching.
A.N. In answer to a question as to the peculiar feature of this gospel J.B.S. once said it was as if the Lord said, I serve a poor sinner in such a way that I make a poor sinner love me, and this woman is an example of this and so she is prepared to expend the ointment upon Him.
Ques. Would you say that the woman got intelligence from sitting at the Lord's feet?
J.T. No doubt. We are not told who she was. If it were Mary of course that would be absolutely true.
A.S.L. Is it open to all the saints to be in the current which, as you have said, is a very important matter to be in the current of what God is doing, and would that be tantamount to being led of the Spirit, the normal spiritual state, so that, if any crises or difficulties arise, being in the current you would detect what the difficulty was?
J.T. Exactly. It is most important to have that before us. We may see in verse 12 that the new order of things developed out of the passover. It says, "And the first day of unleavened bread, when they slew the passover, his disciples say to him. Where wilt thou that we go and prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover? And he sends two of his disciples, and says to them. Go into the city, and a man shall meet you carrying a pitcher of water; follow him. And wheresoever he enters, say to the master of the house. The Teacher says. Where is my guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples?" Throughout this chapter and the next, one sorrowful feature is the poverty of the material that He had, after all His influence over them, and training in general, how poor they were. Judas appears as the traitor, of those actually selected by the Lord; but in spite of all this in His own followers, He now introduces something as to which He can say, 'My' My guest chamber, My disciples, and every heart that loves Him
{117}
yields to that. He has something He can call His own, and that is what runs through the new order of things, that is, the church. It is what *He has*. His own possession.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that if we are brought into the full appreciation of Christ as this woman was, we shall also love all that is His own?
J.T. Yes. He is now indicating His supremacy; and He sends a message, "The Teacher says. Where is my guest chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples?"
M.W.B. Is this the region to which you referred this morning, where His rights are secured?
J.T. Just so. He asserts, them in the colt; but now He is asserting them in a man who had a house in Jerusalem; and it is 'the Teacher' who sends the message and He ask for '*My* guest chamber'; as if He had such latitude there that He could speak thus; and then of '*My* disciples'.
H.D'A.C. In a city that would not give an inch to Christ He could find a large upper room and call it His own.
Ques. Is that seen in the overcomer in Philadelphia?
J.T. Yes; Philadelphia would afford room for Christ. Whatever the overcomer has he would yield to Christ. It belongs to Him and that is what love owns; so that now He has a guest chamber, and He has got disciples; and His thought was to link up with them the history of Israel in a spiritual sense. It is all to be gathered up in this new order of things. He partakes of the passover with them, which was really the beginning, of the nation, so there is nothing lost. All the rest is simply let go; it is man's doing, but He takes up all that was of God, and carries it through.
Eu.R. So that the testimony is never broken.
J.T. That is it; it is important to keep that in mind.
Ques. Is that the point to which the material has to be brought, 'My disciples'?
{118}
J.T. That is it. You can understand how such persons as Bartimaeus and the woman that anointed Him would fit in; how they would readily recognise the Lord's claim to what belonged to Him, and what could be greater than to belong to that new order My disciples?
E.S.H. Isaiah says, "Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples", (@Isaiah 8:16).
J.T. There it is. The whole testimony is now bound up amongst them, but He is beginning, most touchingly, at the passover. I suppose there had never been one like it; and He says, "I will no more drink at all of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God".
Ques. Why is the memorial absent from the Supper in Matthew and Mark, and connected with the woman in both cases?
J.T. Luke alone affords the *memorial* side, as emphasising the Lord's *absence*, in keeping with Paul. These two earlier gospels are more in keeping with the ministry of the twelve, and whilst they make provision for the church, they do not emphasise the Lord's absence.
Rem. The woman in that sense suggests the affections of the saints. Himself borne in their affection rather than in the memorial itself.
J.T. Quite. What you get in Matthew and Mark, in that respect, is the idea of the Lord's *body as* food because the testimony to be borne is onerous; Matthew and Mark give more the full measure of the opposition, in connection with which the testimony is to be rendered. It is not so much the memorial of Christ, but whether you can go through, and carry the idea of a vessel through, and escape the influences of the current religious system. That is what is in mind in the thought of food. The body is food; it is not His flesh here, but His body. "Take this: this is my body".
Eu.R. He would have us go in the strength of it, so to speak.
{119}
J.T. Yes; the food that is suggested here.
Eu.R. "With bread he strengtheneth man's heart", (@Psalm 104:15).
J.T. Well, quite. So you go on from that to the mount of Olives. That is, what Christ is in His body, and what God is in the covenant, leaving out the memorial side. Those two things appear in the institution of the Supper in Matthew and Mark, and from that we go to the mount of Olives meaning that that alone is sufficient to maintain us. That is the Spirit, because this mount would mean that all must be in spiritual power.
J.J. Would that be also seen in the way they went up, singing a hymn? In the face of what was before Him that was a marvellous thing.
J.T. And that brings up David's ministry, which strikingly involved power. The whole force of the enemy was brought to bear on David, but in spite of that he introduced and maintained the service of song. It is in the sense of victory, and consequent liberty, that they can have recourse to singing. How can we sing unless we are free? It was the power of David's kingdom that set Israel free for that. They sang at the Red Sea, but it was not continued. It brings out the power of Christ as the true David, that He can inaugurate a system in which God is praised in song. But they go on to the mount of Olives from that point; the spiritual trend is now *upward*. Thus the Jewish remnant, merging into the church, became liberated from the earthly reprobate system. It was by the power of the Spirit.
H.H. This singing would suggest the holy sufferings of Christ put into song, so that every heart in its measure could join in it.
J.T. That is what the Psalms mean. David was the "sweet psalmist of Israel"; he brings out the holy sufferings of Christ. The singing is a very suggestive thing in Matthew and Mark. We might have expected it in Luke; but in Matthew and Mark it is in the presence
{120}
of the greatest possible pressure, the whole power of evil combined there against Christ, and that is what David stands for confronted by all the power of the enemy he could be the "sweet psalmist of Israel".
Ques. *Is* it not rather striking that they sung a hymn and not a psalm?
J.T. Quite. I suppose the idea of a hymn is what is for God. David provides for the service of song and maintains it in the order of the twenty-four courses. It is an important feature of the position today.
D.L.H. Do you not get the singing at the beginning of Luke's gospel? You have Zacharias and then Mary and Elizabeth, all with something to say. They are all on the song line.
J.T. There are priestly contributions. And so with the angels, but it is rather what was said. What comes out at the beginning of Luke is the spiritual buoyancy of things. We have poetic contributions Godward in the beginning of Luke in Mary and Elizabeth and Zacharias and Simeon. Poetry would convey the outgoing of feelings, but singing is beyond that.
R.B. You spoke earlier of the teaching. Have you in mind that poetry is the outcome of embracing the teaching?
J.T. It is, but there is the additional idea of *music*. What is said in poetry is not in itself music. We have not only the poetic composition with David, but the singing and "the chief musician".
M.W.B. Is it the expression of feelings?
J.T. Poetry is the expression of feeling, but singing is more so, the person of the singer is more in evidence, the living voice expressing the person feelingly. Directly a composition is set in music it is capable of carrying our feelings to God in an acceptable way. I believe that is the force of it, and that is what you get here. It is mentioned that *they* sung a hymn. It is more to bring out the mutual side of things with the
{121}
feelings of the moment, how the spirit of Christ prevailed, expressing itself in this way. There were precious mutual feelings. They sung a hymn and went to the mount of Olives, a most beautiful movement.
A.S.L. It is a very different thing to get up and read a very beautiful hymn from the whole congregation joining in the *singing of* it.
J.T. One has heard a hymn given out that could not be sung a tune not being known and then *read*, but the effect was flat indeed. It is not only the words but the united voices of the singers that God values.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting the intelligence of the woman enters into the capacity to sing in this way?
J.T. I think she is representative of the spiritual state that is there and which is capable of being drawn into His company so that *they* do it; there was a merging in affection there, that they unite in the thing.
A.N. Is the singing suggestive of a state that exists, or is it to reach a certain state?
J.T. I think it may be both. It is the outcome of a right state existing, but this is enhanced in the service. One has often felt that.
H.D'A.C. If there is a desire to celebrate God, the Spirit that creates that desire will also give the form of words in which God is to be celebrated.
Ques. Would Miriam express that? "Sing to Jehovah, for he is highly exalted".
J.T. Quite; she represents the subjective state, for all the women of Israel are with her in her service. But the song of Moses and the children of Israel in the first part of (@Exodus 15) is more objective. It is Moses leading; but when Miriam comes out with the women following her, we have the general state for the moment indicated.
R.G.H. The singing of Habakkuk is the result of exercise.
J.T. And he *advances* in it. Habakkuk begins lower, but he ascends to a stringed instrument. That is, there
{122}
may be advance in the singing. Habakkuk ends: "To the chief Musician. On *my* stringed instruments".
A.N. What was behind my question was that at times there is singing to excess, which tends to lower the spiritual state of a meeting rather than to raise it.
J.T. Yes; I think the hymn-book is too much thumbed at *certain* pages. We have got on a high level theoretically as to the hymns we give out, but there is a lot of wealth in the hymn book that is not utilised, just as in the Scriptures Some hardly ever read the old Testament, whereas it is full wealth; and I think the hymn book is treated in the same way. I believe the Lord would teach us to utilise what there is, so that there may be variety.
Ques. Is a spiritual song an advance on a hymn?
J.T. I should not say that.
J.J. In (@Colossians 3) it is, "Singing with grace in your hearts to God", which proves what was said.
Ques. Is there a special connection between the cup and the singing?
J.T. There is, for it conveys the new covenant. "This is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many". So that would enter into it; in fact, rather confirm what has been said that what was sung, was sung to God, because the covenant brings in God.
Rem. It would induce a song.
J.T. Yes; what God is, coming into the heart.
Eu.R. It is very affecting that the Lord should lead in this just before Gethsemane.
H.H. What about asking unconverted people to sing at a gospel meeting?
J.T. But you do not ask unconverted people to sing. The idea is that the *Christians* present sing. If the unconverted people join in that is their affair; they are committing themselves. It puts them under responsibility.
M.W.B. You referred earlier to the Levites as in
{123}
Numbers, and then to the Levites as in Joshua. Would the one rather bear on the first part of these remarks you have made in these meetings; and then the Levites as in Joshua, secure and maintain the spiritual side?
J.T. Quite; I think that is good; that part of their inheritance which refers to the sanctuary. I suppose Luke rather develops the *heavenly* levitical side.
W.C.G. Is there importance in what is spoken of in 2 Chronicles, that when the singing reached one sound, then the glory of the Lord filled the house?
J.T. Does that not shew what music is to God? not only the composition, the words themselves, but the music; there were not four thousand composers of psalms, but four thousand *singers*, shewing the importance of singing.
R.B. Why does it say, "The singers went before, the players on stringed instruments after"? (@Psalm 68:25).
J.T. Singing is a vocal expression; the person who sings is expressed, as already said. A stringed instrument would mean the ability of the person to sing and play together, to use the words as well as the music; but a wind instrument limits you to the music. The stringed instrument brings in more the intelligence of the singers; and I have thought that 1 Corinthians -- some of us were speaking of it lately -- at the end brings in divine sentiment; it brings in the stringed instrument in the great place given to resurrection. After all the directions as to the order of the assembly, then you have the resurrection; and after that the first day of the week; as if the occasions for sentiment that should be expressed in singing were all there, but the Corinthians were not using them. I mean, the first day of the week is one of the finest elements as to sentiment that can be brought into the singing, because of such memories, such evidence of life in Christ, and the bearing of the love of Christ, and of the love of God. An eternity is in view and singing ought to be the outcome of that.
{124}
Ques. Would the first day open up a new period?
J.T. It opens up eternity, that is what we should be looking into. The eighth day indicates a new period or departure in God's ways.
Ques. What was the song of the Lord in Hezekiah's day in connection with the burnt offering? What aspect would that bear now?
J.T. I suppose it shews the intelligence and spiritual wealth of the moment, the place that David's ministry had. David's ministry in the Old Testament corresponds pretty much with Paul's in the New Testament; full recovery would include this.
Ques. What would be the glory coming in? (@2 Chronicles 5). Would it be God Himself giving us the sense of His pleasure in our song? Do you think we should have some sense of that when we raise our songs, of what His feelings and pleasure were?
J.T. I am sure we should. I suppose when we come to Gethsemane we get occasion for notes that we do not get elsewhere. We have already touched on the feelings of Christ; and if our songs are to have any depth we must enter, into Gethsemane; because the composition, the actual wording of hymns is important. Depth of feeling is what marks the psalms, and I think Gethsemane and the cross afford the field in which to move if we are to acquire depth of feeling. There is the height of things, which I think most of the hymns we have had for the last quarter of a century are occupied with, and rightly; but there is also *depth* in divine things. "That ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height", (@Ephesians 3:18). One feels the early hymn writers had more the thought of depth and piety, with little idea of length and breadth and height, and they are defective on that account. But they have the depth, and I believe Gethsemane and the cross afford the field for us to acquire depth of feeling, giving tone and body to our worship.
{125}
H.H. Will not the remnant as set out in the Psalms discover in a time to come that, although they have gone through, or may be going through much suffering, yet the Lord Jesus has gone through much greater suffering for them? Will there not be with them the depth of feeling, and consciousness in their own spirits of how Christ has suffered?
J.T. Yes; and the Psalms will help them; but we have occasion in our dispensation for depth, of feeling that neither the Old Testament saints, nor the remnant in the future can have. Paul led the way in this, the Lord saying, "I will shew to him how much he must suffer for my name".
J.J. Does this expression, "Abba, Father", which the Lord only uses once, shew the depth of His feeling?
J.T. I was going to note that. It is formally used of Him only, although Christians use it (@Romans 8:15). And you have the original word He used. I think it is a question of standing alongside of Him and entering into His feelings and affections.
Ques. Is there depth in the song of the twenty four elders in Revelation?
J.T. Quite; I should think that would fit in here.
Rem. Peter and James and John were taken to Gethsemane, as well as to the mount of transfiguration, both to the glory and to the scene of suffering.
J.T. That raises an important point as to refinement, as to that which excels. I suppose we may rightly take Peter and Paul, as representative of the excess of experience in the suffering of Christ; especially Paul, who is concerned to "fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly".
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that the use of all these original words in Mark's gospel would shew the depth of feeling that the Lord had, and that we should have similar depth of feeling?
{126}
J.T. Yes; the Holy Spirit carries them forward in the exact words used; and this is clearly that believers now should enter into their import and share in it.
F.S.M. Is there not a strong spiritual link between the gospels and the Psalms? Has it not been well said the gospels cite what the Lord passed through and the Psalms express what He *felt* when He passed through them? So should we not in our consideration of such a gospel as this, think of the psalms that express the Lord's feelings?
J.T. I am sure that is right. I confess I know very little of the Psalms, but I can see they are intended to promote intelligent and deep feelings in us toward God and toward Christ, also toward one another.
Eu.R. Is this part of the way the Lord had to take to remove the system of bondage and liberate the singers?
J.J. Paul carried forward the words, "Abba, Father". He entered into the sufferings and feelings of Christ more than any one.
J.T. Quite; Peter and James and John were there. In a very poor way, it is true; but undoubtedly they got impressions that remained with them.
Eu.R. We need ever to remember that the privileges into which we are brought, and of which we taste the enjoyment, have been at the cost of this of the sufferings of Christ.
J.T. Quite. In the last chapter we have brought out the slowness of the saints, our slowness in faith. This gospel greatly emphasises the want of faith in the apostles, but it would remind us that they were not singular in this respect. The want of faith is what marks us. So that the Lord upbraids them. It says, "Afterwards as they lay at table he was manifested to the eleven, and reproached them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they had not believed those who had seen him risen". The need now is ability to accept the testimony. All we have is on the principle of accredited
{127}
testimony, hence the immense importance of faith; We must all be conscious of how slow we are in accepting testimony.
A.S.L. On the other hand we should be profoundly thankful that we have the testimony of living witnesses. They are worth listening to and believing.
Rem. And there is no breakdown in the testimony. It is maintained in all its strength, and we have it today.
J.T. The testimony goes on and it is a question of believing it. This last chapter greatly stresses faith. Unless we believe the testimony of God we cannot rightly present or maintain it.
A.S.L. Is not that the great test in these last days? The question is whether we are believers of the truth.
J.T. Quite so; and so you have the emphasis laid on the commission here. Believing and being baptised one is saved; disbelieving is condemnation.
J.J. Is verse 9 of importance? On rising from the dead He sees the object for which He had been into death.
J.T. That is what is meant by the great prominence given to the women at the sepulchre, on the morning of the resurrection, suggesting the great subjective result which the church represents.
{128}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN LUKE
@Luke 1:35; @Luke 2:25 - 32; @Luke 3:21,22; @Luke 12:11,12; @Luke 24:48,49
I wish to speak about the Holy Spirit, encouraged in the assurance that there will be not only a readiness to hear, but a measure of capacity for taking in any thoughts presented as to Him. I believe that it is of God to emphasise the presence of the Spirit. Indeed, it has occurred to me of late that it would be a profitable inquiry to see how He is presented in each of the books of Scripture, and with this in view I Save ventured to take up Luke, so that we might see how the Holy Spirit mentions himself in this book. For we have to bear in mind that, whilst the Lord says of Him, "He shall not speak from himself", that does not mean that He does not refer to Himself, for in truth He is the subject of testimony, as the Father is, and as the Son is. Indeed, we are said to be baptised to the name of "the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". So that He fits in; He had His own place in the testimony; and I thought that the consideration of Luke in this regard would help us as to the dispensation viewed as in grace.
Luke is concerned as to how the gospel should reach men; the vessels through whom it should come; and so you find with him great prominence given to heaven, that the gospel should come to men clothed with heavenly influence. Hence, he introduces at once a great heavenly dignitary; for it was to be expected, we being what we are, that in the service of the gospel there would crop up a desire for personal distinction in it, such as painfully manifested itself at Corinth. So Luke would introduce the idea of personal dignity in Gabriel. Who of those at Corinth could measure up with him? The apostle in speaking to them refers to "the tongues of ... angels", but here we have at the outset presented to us, not simply an angel, but a heavenly dignitary.
But I did not wish to speak about that, nor about the
{129}
visitation from heaven which Luke records, most interesting as they are for he would clothe the gospel with personal dignity, and with a heavenly atmosphere; that the thing might carry with it all possible commendation nothing to forbid, nothing to prejudice, but all calculated to invite; so that the most might be saved, that the greatest possible result should accrue. One is impressed with the divine forethought and preparation recorded by Luke, so that the gospel should be untrammeled; that nothing should be attached to it or detract from it, so as to render it unacceptable. Hence the Lord Himself is presented in Luke as personally attractive in His preaching; the manner in which He read die Scripture and His deportment, both in standing up and sitting down, and in speaking all was marked by the grace that God intended should adorn the proclamation of the gospel.
Now I wanted to dwell upon the Spirit, as I said, and what impresses one at first is the filling by Him of persons. Indeed, Luke throws out at the beginning a sort of atmosphere which would disallow all corruption and render null all fleshly taint. The incoming of the Saviour was to be guarded thus; and so we have a remarkable set of vessels filled with the Holy Spirit; thus shutting out from the environment of the Lord's birth all taint of contamination; for a group of persons appear, *filled* with the Holy Spirit. It is an important matter; for a half filled, or partly filled vessel is sure to be contaminated. Hence you find the first mention of the Spirit in this gospel is that He fills a person from the very outset of his being - John the Baptist - a marvellous thing! There may be an inquiry as to its possibility; but how else can we explain the movements of an unborn babe, as the sound of the voice of the mother of Christ falls upon the ears of his mother? What can be the thought, but of wonderful divine preparation, so that the incoming of our Saviour in such lowliness and outward
{130}
weakness, should be so greeted and so protected, that there is the acknowledgment of Him in an unborn babe.
Then the announcement of Gabriel himself; it is most interesting and touching to note the manner of his address to Mary. And when I speak of Mary, the thought of secret history comes into one's mind, of secret history with God. Who can tell what that history was? The angel Gabriel -- his name is given -- says to her, "Hail, thou favoured one! the Lord is with thee". Can we doubt that He had been with her? Can we doubt that He had watched over her as a unique vessel? Can we doubt but that He went far up the stream in her line? Can we doubt that there was extraordinary preparation in her, to be such a vessel, to be so honoured, so greeted, so saluted, by a great heavenly dignitary? The proof of all this is evidenced in her calm and subject demeanour in such august circumstances. And then in answer to her remarks he refers to the Holy Spirit, who alone could bring about the great design of eternity. "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and power of the Highest overshadow thee". What a scene is suggested! An operation of operations, the like of which had never been known or thought of by men as such! The Holy Spirit had been employed in garnishing the heavens, and brooding over the face of the deep, and right along had been engaged in the divine operations, but now, there is an operation of operations: "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and power of the Highest overshadow thee, wherefore the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God".
I wish to dwell for a moment on this, that we may apprehend what happened. Gabriel says, "that holy thing". Had the angel said, That holy Person, or That holy Babe, the thought would have been weaker, but it is a question of what will be. We have to understand the distinction between *what* the Lord Jesus is, and *who* He
{131}
is. The former speaks for itself. It is something to be noted, it is absolutely, intrinsically holy. Holy babes relatively there were, such as the babes of believers, but *not holy things*. No person ever born before or since was a "holy thing"; there was only one holy thing it was absolutely, intrinsically, essentially holy. It is *what* He was, the marvellous production of divine power; and so we have here *what* in due course was called the "Son of God". That is to say, what He was soon manifested *who* He was. Hence His query of His disciples was as to who He was. It had come out; what He was had demonstrated itself, and now He is called "Son of God".
Proceeding from this passage I wish to shew you how He is guarded by the Spirit as a Babe. The idea of the *thing* being introduced is made clear, and then we have "a *babe* wrapped in swaddling clothes", as it says, "and lying in a manger"; and later brought up to Jerusalem. I wish to dwell on what was in Jerusalem, that is, "a man … whose name was Simeon". Jerusalem here is not yet viewed as hostile. It was still the centre for God on earth, and there are grouped here very precious features in this still divinely recognised city. One would love to be consciously in the centre; I believe God would have it so, that as giving us the Spirit He would link us on with the centre of His things. It delivers and saves us from mere localism and nationalism.
Mention was made to me a little while ago of a meeting in Scandinavia far away in the Arctic circle, the only one there, yet some one who had been there had said that he felt at the centre of things as among them. Look at that! Not that one would wish to occupy you with those dear brethren unduly, but what can it mean but the evidence of the Spirit of God, for what are miles to Him! what are geographical distances to Him! As we are in the Spirit we are in the centre of things, and so Simeon was in the centre of things. He was in Jerusalem. That is what is said of him. Spiritually everything
{132}
gravitates there; and as in the centre of things we miss nothing; current spiritual events are known to us; we are conversant with them. Anna was there too, and she missed nothing. Then it says of Simeon that the "Holy Spirit was *upon* him". Now you have not only the vessel filled that idea is in chapter 1 but a vessel anointed; and that one in the very centre of things, who has the mind of God; to whom it had been revealed that "he should not see death before he should see the Lord's Christ". And "he came in the Spirit into the temple", and, as there by the Holy Spirit, the Child is brought in, and he takes Him in his arms.
I wish to dwell upon this because the opposition now is on account of the smallness of things outwardly. This marks our own times; how much therefore it is incumbent upon us to recognise the Spirit, the anointing; so as to be able, so to say, to hold the Child. I allude to the Child for a moment as referring to the outward smallness of things; but how intrinsically precious at this moment! What a spectacle for heaven to see the priest with the Child in his arms, in the full light of God regarding it! What an awful darkness is spread abroad today around us, especially with regard to the Person of Christ! The best refutation of the error is the priest with the Child in his arms, and the light of God in his soul regarding it. It is God's salvation, and God's salvation seen. What a word that is for us as the powers of darkness are felt abroad!
As Samuel took a sucking lamb and offered him up a whole burnt offering to the Lord, having poured water upon the ground in acknowledgment of abject weakness, God thundered on the Philistines and routed them. It is the holding of the Child, as anointed by the Spirit, with the light of God in our souls, that routs, the enemy. I believe the Lord is doing this in a little way; I believe the Child, so to speak, is in the hands of holy priests at the present time. One would love to see it more definitely.
{133}
Then there is the blaze light in Simeon's references to the Child as blessing God everything is made clear. "A light for revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel". The former is the very word that covers our present position as in this dispensation; the revelation or unveiling of the gentiles still holds. God is God, and the dispensation remains unaltered. The patience, of God is marvellous, that the world is still in reconciliation; and God would put it upon us to maintain it in every way. It may be in smallness, but the character of the thing, the principle of it, is never to be let slip. It is the gentiles¬ day. The glory of God's earthly people is imminent. Christ is that. We know it; we have got the light that Simeon had in our souls. We know what is coming; the glory of God's earthly people, for the fathers- sakes, is near. No one can be with God without cherishing that testimony, "for the fathers- sakes"; and Christ is indeed seen here in relation to the house of Jacob in this book; He is the glory of God's earthly people Israel.
Now I pass on from this. We have viewed Christ in outward weakness; we have held Him, as it were, in our hands and blessed God! How much enters into this! Our very assembly privilege, as well as our public testimony, is in the Babe in our arms. We stand by Him. The sword may pierce through our souls, but our privilege is to stand by Him. But I pass on to the position in chapter 3, involving the full position of the Holy Spirit in a vessel. God gives us a view of that. The church is that now. We do not and cannot see it concretely, for it has failed outwardly; but the Holy Spirit in this regard gives us Christ as the Vessel great enough to receive the Spirit, and to move by His power, for that is how Luke presents the subject. He is a dependent Man, and comes up out of the water praying, and sees the heaven opened, and the Holy Spirit coming down in bodily form as a dove and resting upon Him. It is
{134}
the Spirit, the Person, as I may say, in His entirety in that Vessel.
And then *He began* to be about thirty years of age. That comes in afterwards, as if you have the full thought of manhood there, with the Holy Spirit upon Him. There is nothing to grieve the Holy Spirit in that blessed Man; for one idea of a dove, as I understand it, is sensitiveness; love doubtless too, but extreme sensitiveness. There was nothing there to grieve the Spirit in the least degree. *All the fullness*, we are told, was pleased to dwell there. Who can compass that? But there it is. The words "of the Godhead" have to be added simply to make the force clear in English, but the word is "For in him all the fulness was pleased to dwell", (@Colossians 1:19).
But then He *moved* in the power of the Spirit. In chapter 4 we read, "But Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan"; so that, in this wonderful picture we see what we do not see now in the church. It was seen at Pentecost, but here we see *the full* thought of God in a Vessel. He is about thirty years of age, and He moves by the Spirit. He returns in the power of the Spirit from Jordan, and is led by the Spirit *in* the wilderness -- that is the force of it -- to be tempted of the devil. He returns to the conflict in the power of the Spirit; for that is how Luke presents it. So He goes into the synagogue at Nazareth, and we have that beautiful picture which every preacher of the gospel should consider before preaching the way in which He read the Scriptures and spoke. I think you have in these three settings the Holy Spirit as God intended Him here in the testimony, as the means for the maintenance of the dispensation of grace. It is not in speaking only, it is in being the thing, filled, anointed, and then all that shewing itself in our demeanour, as in our preaching. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings". There was present in Him the full evidence of this.
{135}
Well, I may refer to other passages than those I read, and there is one in chapter 11 that we should notice; that is the desire for the necessary furnishing, in view of our assembly gatherings. The early part of chapter 11 has reference to the furnishings in a locality. I cannot go into details, it has often been spoken of, but it comes in now in relation to what I am saying as meeting current conditions; calculated in a very distinct way to order and furnish our meetings; that we should know how to come together in the light of the church, agreeably to heaven. It should not be mere crystallised routine, but in the freshness of the Spirit; and hence the Holy Spirit is presented there as available for the *asking*. I refer to that, for we all should be concerned as to our local furnishings, and that is the way to meet them. They are to be met in the power of the Spirit of God.
Then in chapter 12 there is the public testimony which rightly follows; the inward order and furnishings corresponding with heaven as by the Spirit of God; and then the public testimony; how we are to behave, as brought before magistrates and authorities and the like. True enough we know little of that; there is very little of it today. In fact, I suppose the Lord means that when He says to the remnant in Thyatira, "I will put upon you none other burden. But that which ye have already hold fast till I come". He has made a wonderful way for us, so that the authorities leave us alone; they are not opposed in general. That is of God. We accept it, we pray for them; but then there is the idea of public testimony that will incur persecution, and chapter 12 presents this. So the Lord says. Do not think of what you are to say beforehand, for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour. It is not simply that He gives us what to say, but He *teaches us in that hour*.
That is an important matter. It supposes that we have already been accustomed to be taught. Of all persons in the world, Christians understand teaching, for they have
{136}
got to unlearn and *learn* so much. Before conversion we know nothing at all spiritually; we have everything to learn; and so there is the teaching of grace, which is first, the teaching of the Lord, and the teaching of the Spirit. When the Levite is in the service and comes under reproach, and has to make answer, he has got to be a quick learner, and he can be as in the divine school. It is not a short course merely. Let no one assume that the scholars of the world learn everything in the college. They learn there of course, but they get principles of education, and learning goes on all their lives and they acquire the way of learning quickly. So it is in Christianity; we have to come to the idea of quick learning, not simply hearing continuously, but learning at once. That is acquired ability; that you can learn in a moment; and then there is the teaching corresponding with this, so that the thought comes to you and takes form in your soul immediately. Who can effect that but the spirit of God? Who else can teach you in the very crisis, when you have just got to make your answer? Not only does He put the word in your mouth, but He *teaches* you what to say, and it would stand in relation to all the truth; it is not an isolated thing. The Holy Spirit is the "Spirit of truth", and He teaches in relation to the whole, system of truth; and He can do it quickly.
We have remarkable examples in Paul's defences, say before the emperor, or Agrippa, or before the Jewish council. I would commend to you all the study of those defences, of the great witness of Christ in the testimony. How the Holy Spirit gave him the thing, and taught it him, as I may say. I would love to dwell on the speech before Agrippa; and then what he says when "At my first defence no man stood with me". Undoubtedly it was the right word, got for the moment. "But the Lord stood with me", it says, "and I was delivered out of the lion's mouth". You may depend that the answer was Spirit taught. All forsook him and fled; alas! that there
{137}
was such cowardice at that moment; but the Lord stood by His great witness.
I want to go on to the last scripture, and what I wish to dwell upon in closing is "the promise of the Father", how the Father is brought in at the end, so that we may see fully what the dispensation is. It is "The promise of *my* Father", but before that the Lord says, "*Ye* are witnesses", not yet "My witnesses". That is to say, it is not here that He is calling them to the witness stand; the point is that they were eye witnesses. In the Acts it says, "Ye shall be my witnesses", but here the emphasis is on them, on what they were. The New Translation shews that '*Ye*'. They were cognisant of what appeared in the Lord's ministry; they have not only been to school, but they have seen things. They were not hearsay to them. We should learn to see things, so as to become witnesses of them, that is, persons competent to speak of them as knowing them. That is the idea. But then that is not enough. To be sent is another matter, jailed into the witness box. And so the Lord says, "Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you".
Now you see we are in the presence of the Father. This is the closing touch, that is to say, it is God in grace and in love too. It has been remarked that the name always stands in relation to grace. "The Father judgeth no man". Here we have His *promise*. What is the promise? Some inquire. What is the unspeakable free gift? It is better to let it stand as it is and rest in it. It is an unspeakable free gift of God, for who can compass the extent of the unspeakable free gift of God? It is better to live in it. That is the idea; for the dispensation is impregnated with the idea of an unspeakable free gift, and that must entail the Spirit. There is the gift of the Son for us, and the gift of the Spirit to us The one enhances the other, so to speak, and together you have the fulness of divine giving. What a weight of glory rests upon us as having the Spirit of God!
{138}
So the Lord here says, "*Ye* are witnesses"; you know these things, but He adds in effect. Do not attempt to speak about them until the promise of the Father comes upon you. What could any one of us do apart from the Spirit of God? Even although the disciples were witnesses of the most marvellous powers, yea, the very vessels of those powers, yet the Lord would not allow them to speak of them until they received the promise of the Father. So the testimony is to be presented in the power of the Spirit of God. There is no other way. Anyone attempting witness apart from the power of the Spirit of God, discredits the thing that he presents. Even a Peter, a James, or a John, although having been on the mount of transfiguration, could not preach the gospel rightly without the Spirit of God.
So that He says, "Tarry ye in the city", meaning that it is not now a question of going a journey, as in Matthew; not a question here of the exercise of the servant to get his 'word', but what comes in sovereignly. We can reckon on this, it is a question of promise. I have not got to work for something that is promised me; it is a question of promise, and what a promise! "The promise of my Father", He says, that is to come *upon* you; and then, "But do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high". There are the two thoughts, the promise of the Father bringing in all that the Father is in grace; and then the power from on high, that is, moral elevation. Literal elevation to be sure, but it is moral elevation here also; it is "from on *high*". Hence the witnesses do not descend to the level of man, or the world, in their testimony.
Then the word here is 'clothed', "till ye be clothed". We were speaking about the Lord's clothes today, what was said being very suggestive. Clothes do not convey the idea of acts of power. That is, a man acts by his hands, and so on; the hands are the symbol of a man's power to do things; but when curative effects are seen through
{139}
the garments, that is another matter. It raises the question as to my circumstances, what is round about me. So the whole position is "from on high"; it is not only while one is preaching the gospel, or doing things as with your hands, but power emanates from your very clothes, so to speak. In fact you have "greater things" in the Acts even than with the Lord. The people brought out the sick on couches, so that the very, *shadow* of Peter might fall on them. That indicates how things stood, what mighty power was there, not only in the preaching, *but going out* from the apostles; they were thus clothed. And so with Paul; napkins and aprons taken from his body were laid upon the sick and they were cured. The Spirit of God says that these were "no ordinary miracles"; they were extraordinary; they were miracles going out from the bodies of the apostles, from their clothing. God wrought them for the sake of the testimony. The maintenance of it is not only in the preaching, but in the persons and circumstances of the preachers, indeed of the saints generally. Power should go out from us, and it is power "from on high". Hence things are carried through. Luke would help us to understand the ministry of the Spirit, and to rely on it, so that the testimony should go through until the end.
{140}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN ROMANS
@Romans 5:5; @Romans 8:14 - 16; @Romans 14:17; @Romans 15:13
My wish in regard of this meeting is to help more particularly those who are younger among us. We have not especially thought of them in our meetings, for this has not been a young people's conference. It had all grades in the family of God in view; for John, who is the family man, grades the saints fathers, young men and children, and these grades should be in mind in ministry. It is the last grade that I have in mind at this time, and for this reason I have selected Romans, which is particularly calculated to meet the needs of young believers.
My thought is to speak of the Holy Spirit as seen in this epistle; and what one would say to all, and especially to young believers, is that the best Friend we have on earth is the Spirit of God, answering to what is in heaven; for what is there is here in principle; we can never limit a divine Person. So that in the presence of the Holy Spirit here we have, as I said, our best Friend on earth. It is important that He should be regarded in a personal way, that believers should become acquainted with the Holy Spirit. The Lord in His communications of love to His own at the supper table in Jerusalem, ere He died, spoke much of the Spirit as another comforter; One who, by the term He uses, was to be understood as taking charge of the affairs of the saints here. He spoke of Him as the Spirit of truth, sent by the Father in answer to His begging for Him; He spoke of Him as sent forth in the Son's name by the Father; He spoke of Him as proceeding forth from with the Father (meaning that He had perfect first hand knowledge of the Father's thoughts about the Son; the Son being the subject of testimony, the Spirit should bear witness of Him); and then. He should send Him Himself; and as the Spirit of truth comes. He brings into this world a demonstration of righteousness, and of sin, and of judgment. You see,
{141}
therefore, a divine Person is here, and His functions are in relation to the saints. He is *another* Comforter.
Now I want to shew how He operates, as seen in this epistle, and first in regard to *the hearts* of believers. He is presented indeed earlier in relation to the Lord Himself as "the Spirit of holiness"; reminding us that what accompanies the gospel is the Spirit of holiness. He is also presented as the Spirit of life; the Spirit of God; the Spirit of adoption. All these designations are in relation to our souls- experience. A profitable address might be given on each of those designations; but I just mention them now, so that you may have in view the comprehensiveness of the Spirit's functions and relations, as presented in this fundamental epistle. I say fundamental, because it is well to be grounded in the foundations; so that young people may have a basis for a superstructure which God will not fail to rear.
But I wish to speak about the Holy Spirit in relation to our *hearts*. The heart is a sphere in which you would expect Him to be especially interested, for God would secure His people through their hearts; through their intelligence, of course, but the highest intelligence is through the eyes of the heart; die spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God is through the "eyes of your heart", (@Ephesians 1:18). Hence the importance of recognising this first service of the Spirit. He knows that the end in view in the gospel is a heart matter; and so, in the type in Exodus that is what God would stress in speaking to His people. He says, "I have borne you on eagles- wings and brought you to myself", (@Exodus 19:4). This was after they had murmured. Jitter, they had complained after they had talked about going back into Egypt; God knowing well our proclivities and how the things of the world cling to us even after our conversions, delivers out of them, bearing us on eagles- wings to Himself. That is what marks His early dealings with the people after they had passed through the Red Sea, after
{142}
they had sung of His victory. One complaint after another, but no reproofs, no punitive action on the part of God. It was the reign of grace; it was the era of grace.
Thus, in answer to their demand for water in their murmurings. God said to Moses, "Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock". That is the idea. Instead of smiting the people, the rock was smitten; and "the rock was the Christ". That touches the heart; it is intended to touch the heart; that He was smitten instead of me when I deserved it; when I had shewn by my wayward, rebellious and murmuring spirit that I deserved it, Christ was smitten. He was "stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted", as we read. So that the Holy Spirit comes in type and the water flowed in order that the people might have *another state*.
And then immediately Amalek attacks them, and the whole divine system, we may say, is engaged to give victory to the believer; for that is the idea. Moses and Aaron and Hur and Joshua, are all actively engaged, so that the believer, as having the Holy Spirit, should prove His power. The intercession of Christ on high in Moses, and the skill of Christ as a Warrior in Joshua, are brought into action, so that the beginnings of the believer, as possessed of the Spirit, should be marked by victory; that the young believer should get a *taste* of it, and as he gets a taste, the thing will increase. That is to say, what began in the type in (@Exodus 17) ended in Joshua, in the people being set in possession of the land. It was the same power, but in increased measure; and it is continually increasing, for there is no limit. It is a divine power here, given without measure.
It is a question, therefore, of capacity in the believer, and so in the type after this God says. Now I want you to be for Me, a chosen, priestly nation. He would have them for Himself, for Jehovah's inheritance is His people; and that elevates the believer at once, for he is of
{143}
the inheritance of God. You see how valuable the believer is to God; His heritage is His people, but then He would have His inheritance. Ephesians speaks of "the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints". It is a marvellous thought! and directly it gets into the soul it elevates it.
The believer belongs to God; he is the inheritance of God. God says, Now I want your hearts, but I want to open up My heart to you, so that you may know what a God you have:
<blockquote>"In the desert God will teach thee <br>What the God that thou hast found, <br>Patient, gracious, powerful, holy, <br>All His grace shall there abound". (`76:6)</blockquote>
That is in the wilderness. We have to know that God, and so He sets about at Horeb to make Himself known to them. I do not say at Sinai, for that is a question of demand, but Horeb, the mount of God where the covenant was made; there they spent a long time, and God opened up His heart to them. That is the *principle* of it. I know it was but partial, for the death of Christ had to take place for the lull disclosure of the heart of God. "He spared not his Son", we are told. He commends His love to us, as we are told in our chapter. He is so desirous that we might know it, and that it might be in our hearts. Think how God condescends to commend a thing that should never need to be commended the very best thing conceivable, the love of God! I am not speaking of persons, but of the love of God. What a thing it is! and God condescends to commend it to us; reminding us of how slow we are to value what is most excellent.
Philippians speaks of excellency, "That ye may judge of and approve the things that are more excellent". It is a fine habit. God commends His love to us, "in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us".
{144}
But that is not enough. He intends that what He has commended should become resident in our hearts, and the Holy Spirit serves in that connection. He sheds abroad, says the apostle, the love of God in our hearts. Now this is most important for every young person, and for all of us, to have the consciousness of the love of God actually shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit; a transaction by the Spirit of God; not simply coming to us, taking possession of us, sealing us, but bringing in this thing into our hearts, the love of God.
Now I pass on to chapter 8, a chapter, thank God, much read among us, and I hope understood; so that I do So intend to go into the details of the teaching relative to the Spirit, only that I would say that it answers in the types to (@Numbers 21) and what follows. It is an experience well nigh forty years after that of which I have spoken. But it is not contemplated that this should be the case with us. It is well, however, to note the number of years that elapsed between Horeb and Beer, the well of which it is said, "Gather the people together, and I will give them water". It is well to note that; so that we might not be 'objective', merely, in our apprehension of the truth; but that we may see that while the objective side is presented to us in the gospel, to be received on the principle of faith, the Holy Spirit in the Scriptures would teach us that a time -- however short or long -- elapses between that and the full formation in us that corresponds with it. That as God worked on the principle of time in (@Genesis 1), so He works on the principle of time in our souls; for we are still in time. Hence we find in Genesis that life does not appear till the third day. We have light on the first day; and then we have the heavens on the second day, all of which is what I may call objective; that is, what is *presented* to me, something outside of me, but which is intended to affect me and govern me.
Then on the third day you have the dry land appearing.
{145}
Now the dry land alludes to what is subjective; because it is said immediately, that it is to bring forth of itself: "Let the earth cause grass to spring up", etc. Of course, it needs the heat of the sun and the atmosphere; it needs water, although there is nothing said about rain until the flood; but it needs moisture. Thus on the third day that is, two days elapse, and then you have what we speak of as subjective, pointing to a result worked in us, a latent thing brought into existence by the work of God. No one should be content until he begins to realise the power of fruitfulness, of life operating. It begins at the new birth.
In this chapter, (@Romans 8), we read of those who are "after the Spirit" or "according to Spirit", as it should read. That includes the initial work of the Spirit the new birth. This chapter contemplates the possession of the Spirit by the believer. Before the Spirit worked in us we were "according to flesh", and we thought only of the things of the flesh, but the work of God in the soul leads to thinking of the things of the Spirit; we are "according to Spirit", *we are* that. That is not objective, it is the state of the person. Now these are most important and practical things, and I am speaking of them in connection with the lapse of time, with that principle as to God's work in our souls. Two days would be a testimony as to the time needed, according to @Genesis 1. Two days spiritually imply much; three implies ample testimony. Seven would be a *complete exercise*; so that we need not, dear young people, think of waiting for forty years for the subjective result. It should be practically immediate, but on the principle of lapse of time; and this is calculated to keep us humble and dependent, for we must wait on God.
I wish now to shew how the Holy Spirit in chapter 8 brings into evidence the sons of God. To be sons of God practically we need deliverance; and this book is to effect that. The experience of chapter 7, which perhaps
{146}
is not much known by us, nor so much dwelt upon as it used to be, is essential. Every young believer should take that chapter up and work it out. It is, as it were, a problem. I know of no greater problem in the Scriptures than that chapter; but the greater the problem, the more the advantage when it is successfully worked out; and when this one is worked out the enemy has no more, advantage over you through the sin that dwelleth in you. You acknowledge humbly that it is there; but you have it kept under lock and key so to say. You have power to do it, for the Holy Spirit becomes like an armed official acting all powerfully against a criminal whose sentence is pronounced. He restrains it. If it acts, you know it acts, and judge it; you regard its action by itself, and you are not brought again into bondage through it. "Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" is the cry, and the answer is immediate: "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord". He has done it, but He does it by the Spirit. By His death, of course; for there could be no Holy Spirit for us, nor any deliverance save by the death of Christ; so that He is the Deliverer, and the Deliverer becomes the Husband, as we learn in chapter 7: 1 - 4.
But then chapter 8 is to shew how the thing is effected in detail. It is by the Spirit. The condemnation of sin in the flesh in the death of Christ having taken place, a mighty Power comes into the believer and takes up His residence there (for the idea is *dwelling*): "If so be that the Spirit of God *dwell* in you", and He takes up His residence unchallenged. It is a poor thing if the Holy Spirit has to contest for His presence in the believer every moment of the believer's history. That will not do. The idea is that He is to reside, to have undisputed possession of the house, and if He does. He will give you a blessed time. Many of us know what wonderful times the Spirit of God accords us. The more latitude we give Him the better the time, the more enjoyment, the
{147}
greater victory; "the Spirit is life", and "the mind of the Spirit life and peace". "God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh". It is *condemned*. How the love of God enters into that, sending "his own Son"! It appears twice in the chapter. And what for? "That the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit".
Now that alludes in the types, as I said, to (@Numbers 21), where you have the brazen serpent lifted up, as you will remember, and following on that the springing well; The two things stand out, the one condemnatory of sin in the flesh, and the other an active power of life, a well springing up: "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it". So there is *movement* towards Canaan in that chapter. It is a chapter to be noted specially for the suggestions of energy; and it is military; "the book of the wars of the Lord" is mentioned. How you would like to get into that book! Well, this is how we get into it, by recognising the Spirit, and as the Spirit takes full possession there is victory after victory, and no more murmuring. It is "the book of the wars of the Lord", and then 'brooks' are mentioned there, and 'poets'. It is a chapter full of stirring things, all of which have their answer in the condemnation of the flesh. God having dealt with it judicially in the death of the Lord Jesus; and in the recognition of the Spirit of God. It is victory! It is a chapter of buoyancy; and so the people go right on towards the land. It says there, that they go as far as "the top of Pisgah". You say. That is a look into the land. No doubt, but what is stated there is "Pisgah, which looks over the surface of the waste", (@Numbers 21:20). It is a backward look, so that you may know better 'the God that thou hast found', not that you want to go back over it. No. The backward movement is over forever, but the backward look is that you may think of the God whose
{148}
love and whose support you have proved, so you may love Him all the more. And that is what comes out in this chapter: "those who love God". The wilderness brings out what God is to us in His love, and so we love Him, and there is nothing too good in His mind, for those who love Him. "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him", (@1 Corinthians 2:9). And so it is here. He has foreknown us, He has predestinated us. He has called us. He has justified us. He has glorified us those who love Him.
Now I wish to dwell on the thought of the sons of God. I have already anticipated it, but I will turn back to speak of deliverance, because we cannot enter into the idea or realise the thought of sons apart from deliverance. You may get the idea objectively, as I said, but to know it in the soul is another matter, and so "Because ye are sons", we learn elsewhere, "God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". (@Galatians 4:6). Now I touch sonship, "As many as are led, by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", verse 14. So in the type in Numbers, as I said, the movement is in the direction of Canaan. The backward look is just to enhance God in our minds and hearts, to review what He has been to us, but we are already moving, not by the light and guidance of the tabernacle now (that practically disappears for the remainder of the wilderness journey), it is a question henceforth of the power within. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God", that is the power within, "beware sons of God", verse 14. And so in the type, as they drew near to the Jordan, they were all sons; they were led typically by the Spirit of God; such are the sons of God. Moses took great pains to instruct them in the book of Deuteronomy that they might be characteristically that. "Ye are sons of Jehovah", he says, and he tells them many things they are to do, so that they
{149}
might go into the land in the dignity and liberty and intelligence and glory and refinement of sons; that they should be in it according to God.
That is (@Romans 8) in a general way. Other things might be said about the Spirit. We have the first fruits of the Spirit; and moreover He witnesses with our spirit that we are children of God, a touching and precious thing. He tells us inwardly that we are children of God, verse 16. We have thus the comfort of being the objects of divine care here. The Holy Spirit reminds us of that. Be our circumstances severe, under pressure we may be, and what not, but the Holy Spirit would remind us touchingly in our spirits that we are children as well as sons; that we are children of God, and hence objects of the Father's care in regard of every matter relative to us, in the wilderness. So that we may boldly say, "The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me", (@Hebrews 13:6). We may nestle in that knowledge under the Father's wing, for love will do its best for us. "Behold what manner of love" (it is the *manner* of it) "the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God", (@1 John 3:1).
Then He intercedes for us, we are told, "The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered". Wonderful fact! there is perfect representation in that intercession of the needs of our souls, with *groanings* that cannot be uttered. God understands them all. So you see, dear young believer, what you have in the Spirit. You may not know how to pray as you ought to pray (the Lord teaches us how to pray, and we should learn from Him); but if we do not know, the Holy Spirit makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.
Then God Himself searches our hearts; you see what interest heaven has in our hearts. "He that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according
{150}
to the will of God". And then "we *do* know" (by the knowledge we have of God) "that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to purpose". All that is (@Romans 8), and you can see how God brings you on gently, the Holy Spirit moving you inwardly, moving your affections and intelligence, so that you are moving towards Canaan. Egypt is behind forever. You go into Canaan by attraction, but in the power of the Spirit, not led by the *hand* any more. You are no longer a child to be led by the hand out of the land of Egypt we go into the land in the dignity of sons. You follow the ark through; you see it before you two thousand cubits ahead, in all its beauty and power Christ going into death. How admirable! how it touches the hearts of the saints as they see the Leader of their salvation going forward and dealing with death, so that it disappears from view. It is cut off in the height of its power, as the feet of the priests who carry the ark touch its waters. Hence, they went over by attraction, as I might say, in the dignity of sons, but as loving Christ. The apostle says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha", as if he abhorred the thought, and pronounced a curse on any one that does not love Christ. So that we go over in the power of the Spirit of God as the sons of God following Christ, for He goes first. He is the Leader of our salvation. We go over Jordan as loving Christ; we are raised with Him by the faith of the working of God, and we are quickened with Him.
Now I want to say just a word about the kingdom. It is a drop, in a way, from what I have been speaking of, but the kingdom is a term that covers the whole position while we are down here. Although Romans shews that there is power in the Spirit to enter into Canaan, this being our place, yet the wilderness remains during our life in flesh and blood, but it is where the will and testimony of God are maintained, and the kingdom has its
{151}
service in this connection. It is the guarantee for our protection and deliverance in view of the evil and the opposition that there is. It is not a question of dislodging the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Amorite; that is not the idea of the kingdom. That is a military matter; not but that the kingdom implies military power, for there was military order in the wilderness as in the land; but the *order* in the wilderness is much more pronounced, because it is to call attention to the permanency of the kingdom as here, as covering our position in this world.
So in chapter 14, after the apostle speaks about the authorities, "the powers that be" for whom we pray and whom God uses, he speaks about the kingdom of God; that is *direct* from Him. The kingdom of God is that in which God rules directly. The kingdoms of this world God uses, but He governs through them indirectly. Hence, the kingdom of God is brought in in chapter 14 over against meat and drink. By going in for the things that are common to men, that the flesh goes after, by going in for them without control, without spiritual intelligence, we may destroy the work of God. That is a serious matter; the work of God is most precious, and therefore 'the weak brother' must be handled carefully. But I cannot go into that; I only wish to shew you that the kingdom of God is over against these natural things, and that it is "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit".
Now that does not necessarily mean when we are together. The kingdom of God, as I said, is a permanent thing. In the types it is seen in Numbers in the ordering of the tribes militarily. Each man pitched by the standard of his father's house, and they were all arrayed in relation to the tabernacle, and God dwelt in the tabernacle. That is to say. God dwelling there influenced the whole area of the tribes. The influence spread around from the dwelling of God to the whole
{152}
camp; so that it was a kingdom, and Moses in a way was king in it. It is said of him that "he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together". Moses had acquired that place. He was not always fully owned, for rebellion after rebellion shewed itself, but I am speaking of the principle of Numbers, and it is the kingdom of God. It principle of Numbers, and it is the kingdom of God. It is a permanent institution in the wilderness, it is the rule of God as dwelling among His people; so that it applies to me in my house, in my business, as I walk in the streets. Whatever I do I am in the kingdom of God and under its protection.
But what is in view here is the enjoyment that there is in it; that it is an area in which there is righteousness, in which there is peace, and in which there is joy in the Holy Spirit; that ensures giving conditions even when we are not together. When we are together, we come on to a different plane; but living conditions are assured to us in the wilderness through the kingdom of God. Righteousness is the first thing, practical righteousness, of course. The righteousness of God is demonstrated in the epistle, and the answer here in us is practical righteousness; so that every man in Israel, from twenty years and above, had his own place in relation to the centre. That is the idea of righteousness; that you do not veer away from your appointed place, you are governed by the will of God. Moses the mediator being there conveys the will of God, and that is what comes out in Numbers. Every one occupies his place, he is in righteousness, and he stands in relation to his brethren and considers for them. He sees that the occupation of his assigned position is essential to the welfare of the whole. Everything is divinely ordered by God in the camp. It is the kingdom of God; and I occupy my assigned place. I am in righteousness. Then I am in peace. I do not quarrel with my neighbour if I occupy my assigned position; and then the Holy Spirit is at
{153}
liberty to fill my heart with joy. I have got it always; in every relation of life it is granted to me by the kingdom of God "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". You can see, as I have said, 'the weak brother' would be cared for in that. The powers that be will not care for him; weak people do not get much favour in the world; they are not much thought of; but in the kingdom of God every provision is made for the weak brother; he is not to be stumbled.
The last thing I had in mind is the *rejoicing*. Chapter 15 is full of energy, but I just refer to verse 13. "Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Spirit". I thought, dear brethren, that we could hardly finish our meetings with a better verse than this, because the Lord gives us good times in these 'holy convocations', but when we disperse we are apt to drop down, and not maintain the high spiritual level on which we have been, and it seemed to me this verse is very practical for us.
One might say much about the chapter. It is full of energy, as I said. It is the chapter in which the apostle speaks of the immense radius of his labours. "From Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum", he says, "I have fully preached the gospel of Christ". He was not a bit jaded. He says, I am going to come to you too. He was going to invade the Latin Empire, as he had covered the Greek Empire. He had that in mind, and he said he thought of going to Spain also. No conqueror ever operated with such energy as this. What a mighty work was his! "From Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum" he had fully preached the gospel of Christ. One would have loved to have heard him. How well he did it! "If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost", and then he speaks of the "radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God". That was what shone out in
{154}
his preaching. He *fully* preached in the East, and was ready to come on to the West.
The levitical energy that marks him in this chapter is most stimulating, and so you see the power in this word of his: "Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, so that ye should abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit". Well, let this mark us, dear brethren. It is a question of dependence on God, the God of hope; for as He has helped us during these three days. He can do more for us. He is not changed, He is the God of hope; He inspires hope, so that the thing is to go forth in hope; and then to be filled with "all joy and peace in believing" in the power of the Holy Spirit. May God grant it.
{155}
READINGS IN COLOSSIANS (1)
@Colossians 1
J.T. In view of current exercises and services amongst us, which I believe indicate some progress, I thought this epistle would serve as calling attention to a certain danger and tendency ever with us to stop short of the will of God. What is said of Epaphras may be taken to represent desires that I believe fit at the present time, that the saints "may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God", chapter 4:12. That was his burden for the Colossians, combating, as the apostle says, for them in prayers. I was connecting it in my mind with the early chapters of Joshua, and particularly with the use of the word 'lodge'; this indicating that the territory near the Jordan, as first reached, was not to be a permanent encampment, but just a lodging place. Lodging in a place in a primary sense indicates that a short stay is necessary and that you are going on further.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that the truth of Colossians is a lodging-place for something beyond?
J.T. That is it. You will remember that David was obliged to reign for seven years and six months at Hebron which is a similar position. I mean, Hebron stands in relation to Jerusalem, as the territory of the Jordan stood in relation to the whole land. David was obliged to reign there for seven years and six months; not on account of his own exercises and state of soul, but on account of the divided state of the nation. As the nation united on him and anointed him at Hebron, then he proceeded to Jerusalem. Jerusalem in that section of Scripture represents the fulness of the will of God and the position corresponding with it; the land stood in contrast to a small part of it at the Jordan. This epistle is aiming at a forward movement. A very important point had been reached, but the great danger of coming short of the whole purpose of God existed.
{156}
J.R.S. Do you regard this epistle as having direct reference to a spiritual constitution, as a means by which power is gained for entering into the land?
J.T. It deals with a certain point reached a very important point; that is, in the types, the entering into the land; and the danger of contentment with having touched that, without going up and taking possession. The state at Colosse was evidently somewhat stunted for the exercise of Epaphras his prayers and his combat shewed that he felt there was a stopping short. Undoubtedly his exercises and communications to the apostle led to the letter being written; so that he does not proceed immediately after the salutation to open up the counsels of God as in Ephesians. He is free to do that in his letter to the Ephesians; but he does not in this case. He speaks about his prayer, that they should understand the will of God; and then he proceeds to bring in the Person of Christ, to act on the affections of the saints; that the idea of attraction should be accentuated; for this is one great feature in crossing the Jordan. The point is whether it can be accentuated by a special presentation of Christ, for it is very full here.
J.J. Is that the reason why more prominence is given to the Person of Christ in Colossians than in Ephesians?
J.T. I think so. Evidently they were not wanting in affection for Christ; there was no urgent need of the truth of His Person being presented in Ephesians.
P.L. Would it be like the ark appearing before them in (@Joshua 3)?
J.T. Yes; Colossians is the antitype of the opening chapters of Joshua.
J.J. What would you say of Caleb and Joshua? Were they in a Colossian position in their souls, or were they further on?
J.T. They were further on, answering to the state of things at Ephesus. What comes out in Rahab helps, for she is the link of faith between Egypt and the inheritance.
{157}
There is nothing said about faith in the wilderness in @Hebrews 11, but it is a remarkable fact that faith actually existed in the land before the children of Israel entered it. Rahab had an apprehension of the power of God in the passage of the Red Sea, and she had an apprehension of the power of the Spirit. She represents the work of God apart from what the wilderness represents; that is to say, the work of God is the work *of God*, and is true to itself; we can rely upon it, We may be disappointed in certain wilderness results that we may see, for the influence of such ministers as Moses and Aaron was bound to affect the people beyond their state. I think that is what we should notice: that ministry is likely to affect us beyond our state. So that Rahab does not represent the result of ministry, but the work of God; and that is really all we can rely upon. We may be sadly misled by the result of external influences, for if the influence or the occasion of the influence be removed, the true underlying state will become manifest, as was seen in the Judges. As each judge died, the people did worse than their fathers; shewing that the influence of the judge had held them. So it is a question of the work of God; nothing less is of any permanent value.
Eu.R. Would it be right to say that unless we connect the action with the Lord (corresponding with the type of Moses and Aaron) the work of God is not liberated and available for the will of God?
J.T. Well, that is a feature too; but the work of God is the work of God, you know. I mean. God presents His work apart from the instrumentalities through which it may be effected externally. Take for instance *the* man in (@John 9). As far as we can see he had no ministry as we speak of it. The Lord had opened his eyes by a procedure that is very touching, but that was all; that was the work of God, and what came out in him shewed that there was a moral, effect, although he had no further external help until he was cast out. The Lord
{158}
said, "that the works of God should be manifested in him". It was the work of God, but there was no other help; his parents did not help him, but the work of God shewed itself in a full result. The Lord comes back after giving plenty of opportunity for the work of God to shew its strength in him, and says, "Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God?" and he says, "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" The Lord answers, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he", and he worships Him. The full result is thus seen.
Eu.R. In his case there was obedience, for he went and washed.
J.T. Quite, that is the effect of the work of God. That is the position at the Jordan; they had had a most powerful ministry, they had been under Moses and Aaron, and were led so far, but now the question is, Will they go *the whole* way? I believe a good deal of disillusionment takes place; for after all we have got to come down to bedrock, and it is a question of the work of God. All else will go, or fail us.
F.H.B. Do you mean that our intelligence may often be beyond the work of God in us?
J.T. I think it is usually, so.
H.E.S. Is that why emphasis is laid so much on the work of God? The Lord will only trust that according to (@John 2). "But Jesus himself did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men, and that he had not need that any should testify of man, for himself knew what was in man", verses 24, 25.
J.T. Exactly; there had been a mighty ministry marked by miracles and many believed on account of that, but the Lord did not trust them.
Ques. Would the work of God be illustrated in the challenge that comes to Ezekiel, "Shall these bones live?"
J.T. Yes; it was a question of the power of God.
W.W. Would this chapter call attention to the vast working of the kingdom into which we are introduced
{159}
the "kingdom of the Son of his love", so that there should be encouragement to move forward in the power of the work of God?
J.T. That is it; the work of God will shew itself as Christ is presented, as in the case of the blind man, who was equal to the great fact that the Son of God was there before him. He was ready for it; not because he had been under good ministry, as we speak, but because of the work of God which shewed itself in such a marvellous way in him. It never failed him in any crisis in the history given; he was always equal; and indeed he advanced in power in dealing with his opposers. Then the Lord takes him up; "Jesus heard that they had cast him out", for complete rejection is the result from the side of opposition. "They cast him out", it says, and when the Lord heard it. He finds him, and says to him, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" He is equal to that; he is quite ready for it. It is not a question of ministry from others, but of the work of God: "That the works of God should be manifested in him".
H.H. Would that allow for the epistle to the Romans coming before this? Would the teaching and light and the work of the Spirit in the deliverance set forth in chapter 8 all come in under the heading of what you are saying?
J.T. Yes, so far as the actual work of God in the believer is concerned; of course ministry is seen in Romans.
F.H.B. Do you understand that the work of God prepares us for the reception of light?
J.T. It does. It is remarkable how the man in (@John 9) came into the knowledge of divine things, and how able he became in answering his opposers.
J.J. Does he not illustrate in a sense the three positions you have often referred to Ziklag, Hebron and Jerusalem?
J.T. Quite. We do well to take notice of Rahab's
{160}
position because it puts us in our proper place externally, that is to say, we have might to anything on the line of nature. She had no right to anything; and moreover, she Had a bad reputation. I mean, it disposes of the flesh at once, if you take her up as a type of yourself as you are bound to do, if you want to go into Canaan, you are bound to admit that is the point. She is the next person mentioned by the Spirit of God as having faith; but what was her character and history? That puts us in our proper place as entering the land; you have no status of your own at all; it must be a question of God, "His great love wherewith he loved us".
F.S.M. Would that be the line in John's gospel pretty well throughout?
J.T. Quite. Man in the flesh has no status at all; he *must be born a new*.
Ques. Is your thought that the principle of new birth, with which we start, continues in the Christian course?
J.T. That is what I understand. It affects the whole person, and the effect remains.
J.C.S. And the work of God does not allow for any carrying over from the old order.
J.T. Just so; and what happened at the Jordan is to shew how the thing that we *may* carry over has been dealt with by God; "the body of the flesh" is put off in the circumcision of Christ. It is left behind; it has no claim on us. Even in regard of the system of ordinances, "He has taken it also out of the way", chapter 2:14. But Rahab, without any ministry or help from others, as far as the record goes, had faith, that is, she was a subject of the work of God. She had flax in her house, and had spread it out on the roof, meaning typically that she was beginning to judge her state; and she used that to cover the spies. It says, moreover, that she sent them forth "another way"; she had the idea of another way. Then another thing is, she *continued* in Israel, as the Spirit of
{161}
God tells us (@Matthew 1), and we know that she did from the fact recorded that she is in the royal line.
G.W.W. Would the flax being there point on to the fine linen? Flax is the beginning of this.
J.T. Quite; she is on the way to it. Without the raw material we cannot have the fabric. The Lamb's wife is to "be clothed in fine linen, bright and *pure*".
G.W.W. What relation has ministry to the work of God?
J.T. I suppose we shall see here what it was in the apostle; the ministry of the gospel and the ministry of the church. I think it introduces divine authority; that is, one of the first elements in ministry is that it raises the question of the authority of God to take us up and form us; to put *His impress upon us*. That is to say, the work of God is like the earth coming out of the waters in (@Genesis 1); there was latent power in it: "Let the earth bring forth". But then you want to control what is brought forth; and I think that is the idea, that ministry represents the authority of God; in fact, it involves here the image of God. At any rate, the first thing mentioned here of the Lord after redemption is that He is "image of the invisible God", verse 15. All the effects of life in the universe must come under His impress; otherwise it does not correspond with God. Things must correspond with God. The earth in a moral sense has got away from God, and there is no correspondence at all; but the divine thought is that the fruit or result of life should bear the divine impress; and I believe ministry effects that; the sense that God has to say to me; that He has a will and thoughts about me; thus I am gradually led on to and correspond with the idea of what God is in Christ: "Who is the image of the invisible God". I think ministry should have that in mind, that you are representing God. You are not producing the life; nobody can produce life but God.
G.W.W. So the will should come under the
{162}
influence of God, that is, the knowledge of God would go with the formation of image.
J.T. That is what I thought; no one can produce life but God. The Lord says that the Father quickens and the Son quickens. That is God's prerogative; but ministry is to bring in the impress of God on the fruit of life. God develops what He pleases; He "giveth it a body as it hath pleased him". That shews the importance of being under God and representative of Him in ministry; because the persons who listen to me are sure to be affected by me not only by what I say, but by what I *am*, and I do not want to put a false impression on them.
Ques. "The Lord working with them"; would that be the way?
J.T. He works with us; but then you see, according to Mark, which is the gospel for ministers. He selected certain ones that they might be *with Him*, that is, that they should take on His impress.
H.E.S. Is it in keeping with the ministry that the apostle said in Ephesians, "Be ye therefore imitators of God"? Is that the thought?
J.T. Quite; they would get the thought of God from those who ministered the truth to them primarily the apostle himself.
Q.M.S. Do we see Paul with a due sense of the end of the work of God in (@Acts 20) when he said, "I commit you to God, and to the word of his grace", after having declared the whole counsel of God to them?
J.T. Quite; there is the further thought there, of course, of their need of God.
A.J.H.B. In the beginning of Genesis it is said that Adam was placed in the garden to till it, and I wondered whether that was rather the thought of ministry. Before sin came in you find him occupied to bring about the divine impress in connection with what God had effected, which was life.
{163}
J.T. That is good. "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness". In keeping the garden he is occupied with life, and he would be concerned that it should be in accord with God. Moreover, he could name the animals; for I suppose before sin came in, each animal represented some thought of God. The idea of life suggests that God is the living God; He is the Author of life and every feature of life must represent Him in some way. Adam was able to name those living creatures that came before him, and God did not alter any name he gave; shewing that God recognised the intelligence He had placed in Adam in regard of the result of life.
Ques. Is your thought that one may receive ministry and yet there may be a lack of the work of God in the soul?
J.T. Of course, and almost from the very outset. The epistle to the Hebrews with other scriptures shews that certain were even made partakers of the Holy Spirit, but there was no work of God in them. Powerful ministry may carry you along, even if unconverted; and may carry converted people far beyond their state.
H.F.N. In Romans it says, "Destroy not the work of God". If the work of God is indestructible, I would like a little help as to why that should be said.
J.T. I believe what is alluded to there is the bearing of the person's action. I do not see that the work of God, as we are speaking of it, is destructible; what God does in this sense is done forever.
A.S.L. But as far as the person referred to was concerned, in what he was doing he was working in that direction.
J.T. Quite. I think you can see how important it is to view the work of God by itself. God is certainly entitled to do that. Then you see that ministry as from God conveys what He is authoritatively; and it implies His designs; the idea of architecture, design, and general
{164}
beautification as to things in the divine realm. Therefore, in ministry it is a question of the formation of things, the work of God taking proper form, taking on the divine impressions. Apparently the saints at Colosse needed full knowledge. The bearing of the epistle would shew that what they needed was to the end that they might be "filled with the full knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, so as to walk worthily of the Lord unto all well pleasing, bearing fruit in every good work, and growing by the true knowledge of God". That is what they needed; and that would bring in the idea of Godlikeness. The new man was to be "according to the image of him that has created him", chapter 3:10.
E.S.H. What part has prayer in regard of the work of God?
J.T. Well, you see how the apostle here is praying for the Colossians, that they might "be filled with the full knowledge of his will". The work of God goes on all the time with us, unless our wills begin to act. Then, of course, it stops, but normally it goes on in relation to what is presented to us objectively; in relation to whatever pattern God is working on. If He is working in relation to the heavenly, the work proceeds on those lines, and it is for the ministers to understand that; that as Paul insists they are *working with God*.
A. S .L. What would you say is the evidence of a work of God in any soul? People may have a good deal of intelligence and be able to speak of things and explain them, but what is the evidence of the work of God in a person?
J.T. The initial evidence is submission to the will of God, and a readiness to take in divine thoughts. Mary of Bethany was subject, and sat at the Lord's feet; she was ready to take in His thoughts.
A.S.L. Rahab, whom you started with, would be a very good illustration. You mentioned her as illustrative
{165}
of the work of God. I mean, she had faith in God, and was sure that the people would be triumphant.
J.T. Exactly. Of course a great deal could be said as to the accompanying things, in the initial effect of the work of God; but the apostle is concerned about workmanship, to "present every man perfect in Christ". Mary of Bethany sat at the Lord's feet, and I believe that is a principle. Unless He is definitely before the believers, gifts in the exercise of the service are sure to be unduly distinctive in their minds; and that is where the Colossian danger lay. The Corinthians were grossly occupied with the persons that ministered, or professed to minister; they had their own preferences; they were comparing this one with that one, and so forth. The Colossians were not so gross as that, but there was this danger; the apostle is anxious that no man should deceive or mislead them. It is a danger, that lurks always where we are disposed to take certain ones as references in the ministry.
Now Mary of Bethany would never view persons in that way; she would value *all*, and I believe the meaning of her sitting at the Lord's feet is, that whoever the gift it is a question of what the Lord is saying. That is a sure evidence of the work of God that you want to hear what the Lord is saying through whomsoever it may come. It is a question of what the Lord is saying, and we know from the way the Holy Spirit came in at Pentecost, that there would be diversity: "Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all", @1 Corinthians 12:4 - 6. The idea is to bring divine Persons into their proper place in our vision. That is, Christianity is a question of Persons; we are baptised to the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Any, intermediaries are simply for our good, and not to become objects, except that we regard
{166}
them in love, and respect them for their work's sake. It is a question, therefore, of what God will do; and that, I am sure, is the best way. It is the work of God, that one is concerned as to what God is saying or doing.
P.G. And the work of God would develop the instincts by which one would distinguish the voice of the Lord in the ministry.
J.T. Quite, the apostle says to the Corinthians that they were the evidence themselves of Christ speaking in him; that is the point he makes.
W.W. It says that Rahab sent back the spies "another way"; would that indicate that she received them in faith's way and sent them back in love's way?
J.T. Quite; it was not the ordinary way. If a Greek philosopher were to come in among the saints at Colosse he would direct them the *ordinary* way; that is not another way; the other way is the divine way. Going up to the mountain and *hiding there* agrees with Colossians.
Ques. Is it possible to receive ministry apart from the work of God?
J.T. Yes; the unregenerate human mind is capable of going a long way in the things of God. (Compare @Hebrews 6).
G.W.W. Would you say the real object of ministry is to bring the soul, the subject of the work of God, under the influence of headship, and so there is a presentation of Christ that would bring about that result?
J.T. That is what I understand; you are led on to headship. Paul said of the Thessalonians, "*Ye* became our imitators", and immediately adds, "and of the Lord", because he would not appropriate his followers. There was a presentation of God in him amongst them, and they followed on, but he did not hold them, they "were added to the Lord", and that made way for headship. The end of this epistle is to get us on to the full thought of headship, that as holding the Head, we
{167}
might "stand perfect and complete in all the will of God".
Ques. Would the effect of the epistle be seen in the last chapter, to "present every man perfect in Christ"?
J.T. That leads to the full thought; it is "every man"; the full end is collective, as in Ephesians. In Colossians it is presented as the burden of the prayer of Epaphras *standing* "perfect and complete in *all* the will of God". The prayer of the apostle, chapter 1:9 - 11, is in full keeping with this. I think the two pillars in the front of the temple would perhaps help. In those two pillars there was a presentation of what God would effect. They were beautifully ornamented. In 1 Kings you have the separate heights of the pillars; but in 2 Chronicles their total height, and I suppose the latter would mean the fulness of the divine thought. You may reach the height of one, so to speak, but to get to the height of the *two*, you reach completeness. Obviously the idea is to represent what God can effect; so in Peter and John at the gate of the temple you have what God can effect in men like ourselves, so that attention is called to *them* there: "Look on us". There was something there representative of God; it was not Christ personally; but it was enough to call the man's attention to, and he was healed, brought into power in that action, and "held Peter and John". That was an immense start, but he would go on; he *continued* with them. God shews what He can do; not only what is effected in Christ personally, but what He can effect in men like ourselves. That is the idea of ministry. Being myself the thing I present, I affect accordingly those who listen to me; and it leads them on to the full thought; for the great objective is the "full grown man". Alongside of those pillars there was spiritually the means of bringing others into what they set forth, in the altar, the sea, and the laver.
H.W.S. "Growing by the true knowledge of God"; would that be the way the thing is effected in the soul?
J.T. Yes, that goes with it, only there is the fulness of
{168}
divine thoughts set out in Christ, specially in view of Ephesians.
G.W.W. Can there be any progressive work in the soul apart from development in headship?
J.T. Well, God works in us in relation to the headship of Christ. You would be concerned to so present Him to your hearers that their minds are led in the direction of Christ as Head.
G.W.W. That is what I am trying to get at.
J.T. You are on that line, and that is the end in this epistle; that we are led on to an apprehension of Christ in relation to the land, the whole purpose of God.
Eu.R. It speaks in the early part of the chapter of the glad tidings "bearing fruit and growing"; would that involve the work of God?
J.T. It would. Now after that he goes on to the Father: "Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light, who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love". It is a question of authority, but authority of a peculiar form; not exactly the kingdom, as in Romans, but the "kingdom of the Son of his love"; he has carried us along to that; you are brought on. It is still authority. As far as I see, the kingdom will never end at all; it goes on. It will become more and more attenuated, so to speak, but it will go on. Even in eternity the Lord is said to be subject; He delivers up the kingdom to Him who is God and Father, "that God may be all in all", (@1 Corinthians 15:28). It says, "The Son also himself shall be placed in subjection" a marvellous statement! Obviously the idea of the kingdom goes on, for God is to be God, and man is to be man. It is not necessarily asserted, but ever there. So here we are being led on from the kingdom, as seen typically at the Red Sea, the authority of Moses as in the wilderness. At the end of Deuteronomy Moses as king corresponds somewhat with what we have here; he was
{169}
"king in Jeshurun", that is, a king in the midst of an 'upright people'; the point, however, was not so much what he was to God. But here it is what Jesus is to God the 'Son of the Father's love'. It is a most precious experience to be under that rule!
H.H. Would you say the kingdom according to this thought goes over Jordan?
F.H.B. Is that the carrying on of the thought that God is the Head of Christ?
J.T. Quite; that is another side of it. It is a remarkable statement that "the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection"; mark, it is the *Son*.
Eu.R. Does this fit in with what you were saying as to David being crowned king at Hebron?
J.T. I think it would be more like Solomon's reign the Son of the Father's love. It introduces us really to the book of Proverbs. Then I was thinking of the peculiar setting in which the Person of Christ is before us, and how He is Head in the creation and in redemption, and then, how a dual sort of ministry runs right through the ministry of the reconciliation of all things and persons: the ministry of the gospel, and the ministry of the church. As the Lord helps us we may see how the mediatorial position of Christ is retroactive. It is seen in Him as Man here, and *we begin with this*. It is the Son of the Father's love in redemption, and the mediatorial idea must centre in the Person of Christ as Man. That is what was in the mind of God. He puts Himself in touch with the creation and with men in redemption through Christ, not only that it goes forward, but it is retroactive in its bearing. The thought reacts and goes back to the very beginning of things; that all must be through mediatorial service.
H.H. Your suggestion of what is retroactive accounts for a great deal of Scripture not hitherto understood. Does it not carry you back to such a scripture as
{170}
(@Proverbs 8) and all that which anticipated the coming in of Christ as the Son?
J.T. It does; it explains much. What is stated even there began with wisdom acting here in relation to *men*; you are carried back from *that* point.
F.S.M. Would the ministry of wisdom in Proverbs lead to the inquiry of "What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?" Is that the objective?
J.T. Yes, it is God in relation to the creation. The results in the book of Proverbs are most interesting, and that inquiry is by a man who speaks of his abject ignorance; he takes a low place in that chapter, chapter 30. That is a fine inquiry: "What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?" The woman of worth in the last chapter is the subjective result.
G.W.W. Perhaps you would explain what you mean by 'retroactive'; it may not be very plain to all of us.
J.T. Well, take Peter's remark as to the Lord: "Being put to death in flesh, but made alive in the Spirit, in which also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah", (@1 Peter 3:18 - 20). That is retroactive; He was not there personally; it was His Spirit, but it was the Spirit of the One that was becoming Man; it was the Spirit of Christ in man, that preached in Noah.
G.W.W. You mean that we find the workings of the Spirit of Christ before Christ was personally present as Man?
J.T. Quite; it is the Spirit *of Christ* not the Spirit of God; "the Spirit of Christ which was in them".
G.W.W. "Searching what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them pointed out, testifying before of the sufferings which belonged to Christ, and the glories after these". (@1 Peter 1:11).
J.T. Peter helps in that particularly, shewing that the operations before, whatever the instrumentality, had
{171}
in view the incarnation. That was the one thing divine thoughts centred in, and whether things were done mediatorially before or after, Christ is the Mediator.
J.R.S. And you are regarding that as being in this chapter?
J.T. That is how the truth is presented.
P.L. "By whom also he made the worlds". (@Hebrews 1:2).
J.T. That implies His deity, but it is woven into the principle of His mediatorial position. Then it says here in verse 15, "Who is image of the invisible God". That is stated of Christ here as the One in whom we have redemption; and then. He is "Firstborn of all creation; because by him were created all things", and so forth. That is to say, the very existence of all those created things gives Him the first place, because it is not simply that He was the instrument, but it was by *His* power; the first preposition 'by', verse 16, means that it was by His power the things were done; but all on the mediatorial principle, as remarked. The second 'by' in verse 16 is instrumental. (See note. New Translation).
J.J. So I suppose the appearings of the Lord in various forms in the Old Testament are prospective in view of His incarnation.
J.T. Yes. Referring again to verse 16 if you employ a man to do a thing, he is the instrument by which it is done; but in the creation there was more than that in regard of Christ. He does the thing in His own power, and that fact gives Him the first place firstborn; He must have that place; but it is wrought into the principle of His mediatorial position. Thus the truth of His Person is worked into our souls as we apprehend this mediatorial service.
A.S.L. And He has done it too for Himself: "All things have been created by him and for him".
J.T. That is the end in view.
G.W.W. It is remarkable that J.N.D. in the verse in
{172}
Ephesians leaves out "by Jesus Christ". He says, "God, who has created all things", (@Ephesians 3:9). Although it was the One whom we know that did it, yet it was God that did it; and that establishes the divinity of His own Person.
P. G. It says that all the fulness of God was pleased to dwell there.
J.T. You have, "By him were created all things, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth, the visible and the invisible, whether thrones, or lordships, or principalities, or authorities: all things have been created by him and for him. And *he* is before all, and all things subsist together by him". The first 'by' there indicates that the power used in creation was resident in Him, so that *He is*; it is not what He has become in these early statements about Him; it is what He is, as indicated in the things that He has done. He becomes Head too in redemption; but all is in the right of His own Person. But in verse 18, "that *he* might have" indicates that through death He has acquired something. The fulness dwelt in Him and by Him effected reconciliation. Here He is instrumental, but the fulness of the Godhead resided in Him.
G.W.W. Is the thought to lift the soul up to the greatness there is in Christ?
J.T. I am sure that is so. The thought of the Person of Christ so grips the affections of the saints that they go forward. It is peculiarly needed as we come over Jordan, hence the prominence given to the ark there.
G.W.W. Would you be prepared to say where you think the Colossians were, in view of what is set forth in the crossing of the Jordan?
J.T. I think they are regarded as over.
G.W.W. That is, they have reached the position you spoke of as the lodging place. It is not to incite them to pass over, but a presentation of Christ to them in the lodging place.
{173}
J.T. That is right. The principle of Colossians is entering.
G.W.W. So that the end in view is that they might advance from the lodging place into the full thought of God for them; is that the objective?
J.T. Exactly. They are risen with Christ by faith, chapter 2: 12; that is another thing to notice. It is a question *of faith*. Colossians does not mean that I am risen literally, but by faith; it is a certainty because of the known power of God; it is "through faith of the *working of God* who raised him from among the dead". And what goes with that is the quickening In virtue of this there is power *in the believer*; for it was stipulated that a man out of each tribe was to take a stone out of the bed of the Jordan and put it on his shoulder and take it up. That required power; it is a symbol of the power of each tribe. The whole are regarded as over Jordan "by faith", but in addition there is the work of God, so that a man is able to take up a stone. That is not a matter of faith, but actuality. It is in keeping with what God has done, but only in a very small way. It is the power working in my soul. The power of God was seen in the ark the power and glory of God. Those men could not force the Jordan back. It was forced back God did that but they take up the stones. And in these stones, taken and placed where they lodged, there is the witness of the power of God in us; that we are risen (by faith) and quickened. Quickening enables us to enter into association with Christ where He is; it is *with Him*.
Eu.R. Is that involved in verse 2? "Strengthened with all power according to the might of his glory".
J.T. Exactly; that is what the apostle desired for them. I think the thing was there already; so to speak they had carried over the stones: "In the which also ye have been raised with him". But the Colossians had not yet taken possession of the land and were in danger, as we were remarking.
{174}
J.J. So although the Spirit is not directly spoken of, it is implied all through?
J.T. It is *the work* of the Spirit that is implied. It is beyond Romans; because taking the stone up out of the bed of Jordan implies power the power of life.
J.J. Does the mediatorial power of the Spirit come in in Colossians?
J.T. It does come in. "Love in the Spirit", chapter 1:8, is a mediatorial principle; that is, it was life of that kind.
P.L. The man puts the stone on his shoulder; does that suggest constitutional strength?
J.T. I think it does. It is the result in us of the quickening power of God. They were to prepare themselves "victuals", (@Joshua 1:11), and this would have in view the needed constitution for the great undertaking ahead.
G.W.W. And is all that an apprehension of what is set forth in the ark? There is power to take up such a movement.
J.T. Yes. Colossians in that respect is a question of being brought into correspondence with Christ. In Him is all that is needed, but we are brought into it by the work of the Spirit.
J.C.S. Is the thought that it was the same power morally that drove the Jordan back?
J.T. That is it. He does "exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh *in us*", (@Ephesians 3:20). That is it; there is no other power.
Ques. Would fighting ability come in here?
J.T. That does not come in yet, but there is the preparation for it. What I think should impress us here is the Person of Christ. He is so presented to our hearts as to enter into our constitution, because it is interwoven with the truth of creation and the truth of redemption.
{175}
J.R.S. What is the order in this way in which His glory is presented, starting with "image of the invisible God" and ending with being Head of the assembly?
J.T. It goes further than that. It ends with, "In him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell". You can see how forcefully the truth of His Person is presented, for it is interwoven with the truth as we should receive it in our souls; that is, the truth of the Person of Christ should be in our souls, as we have the truth of our salvation, and the knowledge of the creation. The thing is to have the truth of the Person of Christ in our souls; so that it begins with "the image of the invisible God". Everything is to receive the divine impress. Besides the literal creation, as in (@Genesis 1), there were 'thrones, principalities and authorities' all were created by Him and for Him. His headship of the church was through death. Then, "All the fullness … was pleased to dwell". There is a moral thought in that it was *pleased* to dwell in Christ. Nothing at all was lacking in the fulness. All that God -- the Deity -- is was there in Him, and was pleased to dwell there. Reconciliation is to bring us into accord with that. This leads on to the church being God's dwelling, by the Spirit, (@Ephesians 2).
G.W.W. You are consciously in accord with that.
E.R. And the church is equal to it.
{176}
READINGS IN COLOSSIANS (2)
@Colossians 2; @Colossians 3:1 - 11
J.T. In this meeting we may see the relation between verse 15 of chapter 1, Christ the "image of the invisible God", and verse 10 of chapter 3, in which the new man is said to be "renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him". Pursuant to what was said this morning about the divine impress being on all, it may be remarked that the Colossians evidently had reached the *life* stage, that is, life in a practical, substantial sense, and the object, among other things, in the epistle is to place the divine impress on that. The presence of life is indicated in the fact that they had love for "all the saints" and "love in the Spirit". The carrying of the stone in (@Joshua 4) by a representative of each tribe would point to this; they were in life, and were set down in relation to one another at Gilgal, but the divine impress was to be worked out, and the stones were to be a memorial. Their children should ask them what they meant. "What mean *ye* by these stones?" that is the first question; the second question is, "What mean these stones?" First it is, "What mean ye by these stones?" as if the onus is put upon the saints to convey the meaning.
We have already seen the enlargement given in (@Colossians 1) to the Person of Christ, and His headships; and then the ministries of Paul are evidently to work those features out in us, on the principle of divine representation.
H.H. I was struck with what you have drawn attention to, first, of Christ Himself being the image of the invisible God, and then the reference in chapter 3 to the new man as "renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him". Is the thought that that image is transferred to the believer?
J.T. Yes; and the new man in this epistle is
{177}
suggestive of what is young or fresh; so that the idea of image is to be impressed on fresh young life, but in the way of knowledge renewal of knowledge. The idea of renewal, "renewed into full knowledge", is that it is to be new in the sense of being different from what the Greek or the ceremonialist would have in mind. Colossians has in mind the freshness and energy of life in the saints as set in relation to one another; not necessarily gathered together, but set in relation to one another, as indicated in the twelve stones; that the "image of him that created him" should be in the new man.
H.H. Would you say in regard of Colossians generally that it does not suppose the saints as convened?
J.T. That is not the point of view. It is our being united in life, whether we are convened or not. The apostle speaks of the 'order' that marked them, and this would allude to them as gathered together.
H.H. Is the thought that the work of God is such, that God can put His own impress upon it?
J.T. Yes; and that would fit in with present current conditions. There is a good deal of energy, but we need to be representative of God.
F.H.B. Does the new man represent the sum of God's work in all the saints?
J.T. I think so. Colossians is dealing with the saints as a whole, although the saints at Colosse were immediately in view; but what I have remarked is only to indicate what we may see. I think we ought specially to notice the headships of Christ in chapter 1 and the ministries of Paul; because these come in with peculiar weight in Colossians. It is not arbitrary, but more that they are presented in their own weight. The headship of Christ in creation is the effect of His own power then His headship of the church through redemption; and then His being here as an instrumentality for the Godhead His deity asserted in that the fulness dwelt there;
{178}
the Godhead reconciling by Him all things and persons; and then the ministries of Paul following on that all coming in with their own peculiar weight. Thus it is the idea of ministry, not so much authority by itself, as what appeals to you in a moral way. Paul was the minister of the gospel and the minister of the church.
H.H. Would you say that the truth of the greatness of Christ is brought in in order to lift the saints up to appreciate what the assembly is, as that of which He is the Head?
J.T. I think so; it is to impress and attract us. Thus we are led into the full purpose, of God, drawn into the fulness of the mystery. The mystery is not fully stated in this epistle, but the apprehension of Christ as Head will lead us into it as in Ephesians.
H.E.S. Are the two thoughts of image referred to here somewhat on the line of the gospel and epistle of John? In the gospel it is, "Which thing is true in him", and in the epistle, "Which thing is true ... in you".
J.T. Yes. The epistle corresponds because it is a question of what is true in us. It is what the life is and whereat is; it is in Christ it is seen. The subject really is life in that epistle; but here, whilst life is brought in, it is rather as that on which God through Christ can place his impress which is another line. Colossians has heaven in view; our hope is laid up there Christ is in us, the hope of glory.
Eu.R. Is the assembly unique in that it says He is Head to it?
J.T. Yes. It is *the body* in Colossians "Head of the body", chapter 1:18. That is the full idea as adding to His glory.
D.L.H. What is the exact bearing of the mystery in chapter 2, "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge" verse 3?
J.T. The full thought is in Ephesians, God heading up all things In Christ, things in heaven and things on
{179}
earth. The church being His body He is Head over all things to it. It is brought in here as a corrective or saving element, as he says, "I say this to the end that no one may delude you by persuasive speech". He brings it in, not so much to develop the mystery, as to bring out that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge were there, and, therefore, they did not need anything outside of it.
D.L.H. Was not the danger at Colosse reverting to human wisdom, so that the fact of the treasures of wisdom and knowledge being wrapped up in the mystery is brought in to divert them from that?
J.T. That is how it stands, because he goes on to say, "See that there be no one who shall lead *you* away as a prey through philosophy and vain deceit", and so forth.
A.S.L. Then it is the mystery of God in this chapter; not the mystery of Christ exactly, but the "mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge". As you say, it is the full thing and all that is hidden in it.
J.T. That is the thought. The Colossians apparently were not equal to entering into it fully; so that he does not proceed with it, but brings it in to shew that the treasures of wisdom and knowledge were there.
J.R.S. It says, "And *he* is the head of the body, the assembly", and that is followed up immediately by, "Who is the beginning"; what is the point in that?
A.S.L. That is a very wonderful word, "Who is the beginning".
J.T. "Who is the beginning, firstborn from among the dead, that *he* might have the first place in all things". It is not 'from' the beginning, but that He is it; He is the beginning of everything that is for God.
H.F.N. Would you mind saying a little more on the thought of securing the material? Did I understand you to say it was that on which God could put His image?
{180}
J.T. I think that is a point we should specially notice; because it is a question of life in Colossians; that is, life by quickening. It is, therefore, not simply the Holy Spirit in us as life potentially as in Romans; but it is life by quickening. Life was seen at the passage of the Jordan. In the types, in this respect, the Holy Spirit begins with (@Numbers 21). He is life there potentially and from the time of the recognition of Him the people move on; but there is more than that as you reach Jordan. It is a question of the *effect* of the Spirit; so that the stone lilted out of the bed of Jordan and carried out on the shoulder by a representative of each of the tribes, denotes that the *persons* are marked by power.
M.W.B. Are you speaking of life in a subjective way now?
J.T. Exactly; the believer is not only 'reckoned' alive, as in Romans, he is alive by the quickening power of God.
M.W.B. Life is sometimes spoken of objectively, and I only wanted to get clear that you have what is subjective before you.
J.T. I have; what in the types is seen in twelve persons representative of the whole nation, under the direction of Joshua, each taking a stone and carrying it up and placing it where they were to lodge. There is life (in the sense of power) there; but then that life is now in a new sphere, and it is a question of how it is to be regulated and impressed. I should like that we may get hold of that. The title of God to all the creation was in view in the passage of the Jordan; and so the headships of Christ, brought in in relation to His Person, are intended to impress us. He is introduced as "image of the invisible God". We are on new ground. It is no longer a question simply of intelligence objectively; we are in a new position and alive in it. Rahab, as we said, is the link here. It is not a question now of the effect of a powerful ministry in the wilderness; but rather the life in itself manifested. Evidently the apostle had
{181}
not been there. Colossians is to bring out the thing *itself*; and the greatness of the headships of Christ, as in chapter 1, and the ministries of Paul, I believe, are intended to impress us with their great weight; not so much formal authority as in the wilderness in Moses, but by their own weight, because the Person of Christ is interwoven with the truth itself. As in redemption and creation, the headships are intended to impress us, and so are Paul's ministries.
M.W.B. That is why you are emphasising the newness, freshness of the life. It is imperishable. Do you link that with what you said at Worcester as to the girl of twelve years of age?
J.T. Yes; she is a good illustration of it, so that great care is taken that it should be stripped of everything that would becloud it; and hence the great care in the opening of Joshua in regard to the position in Canaan, so that there should not be a taint from all that preceded, nor anything that should becloud the thing that was there, but that it should be there in its own intrinsic worth. Hence you get, as I said, the evidence of life in the carrying up of the stones and placing them together; and there was the idea of 'victuals'; food is needed. It is a time when there is great need of sustenance from suitable food; as was said with regard to the little girl, something should be given her to eat.
Then you have the stopping of one kind of food and the introduction of another; that is, the transition from the manna to the heavenly food. It is a delicate position because it is a change of food, as in the bringing up of a child, and everything is reckoned carefully so that the life according to God should be in the land. Rahab was already there. She had not come under the influence of the ministry of Moses, but she had heard of what Jehovah did at the Red sea that is, in the death and resurrection of Christ; and of what they did, which points to the power of the Spirit of God in the saints.
{182}
She had heard about those things, and she knew the effect of the tidings on all the inhabitants of Canaan was that they were as dead men. That is an evidence of something by itself; and faith is attributed to her in Hebrews, after being attributed to Israel as to the passage of the Red sea. "By faith they passed through the Red sea", and now faith is in the land in a person that had not come under the influence of Moses. Then you have the idea of food, first the victuals and then the change of food. Then we have the circumcision, six hundred thousand or more all circumcised at once; that is to say, you are brought down to a state of weakness, for the flesh profits nothing. That is the position here. There is thus room for the power of God to act.
M.W.B. It is remarkable that Agag was slain at Gilgal: "And Agag came ... delicately. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past ... . And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal".
J.T. He was slain by *Samuel*. The fact that Saul was at Gilgal did not add anything to him, and did not give him one atom of discernment or power, shewing that the outward thing is of no value, without the corresponding effect in us. Gilgal became discredited afterwards, coming under the influence of the flesh. Amos says, "At Gilgal multiply transgression".
J.J. How do you regard the other twelve stones put into the bed of the river?
J.T. Those in the Jordan are a testimony that we have, been in death, and that the life we have is not acquired in the flesh at all; it is a life out of death. That is the principle of it. We have been "buried with him in baptism". The stones set in Jordan was *Joshua's* act. Christ shewed His disciples His hands and his side as risen. There is the evidence in Him that He has been in death, and thus we have been there.
P.L. It says of Rahab that Joshua saved her *alive*, would that go with this thought of life?
{183}
J.T. That is good; and then the idea of continuance that we noted this morning. She continued "to this day" in Israel. And she had the Colossian trait of hiding; she hid the spies, and also directed them to hide themselves on the mountain.
A.S.L. Would @Colossians 2 give the idea at all of an experimental passing through the Jordan and coming out of it on the other side? The apostle says, "Ye are complete in him", and then goes on, "In whom also ye have been circumcised with circumcision not done by hand, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ; buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead". And then, "Quickened together with him". I thought perhaps that referred to something they had experimentally been through in getting on to this new ground.
J.T. That is right, and so it is the position at Gilgal that is in view; they had reached that point. The hiding place suggests that they were not to remain there, as already said, but Gilgal is a camping place; they returned there after their conquests; it implied habitual self judgment.
A.S.L. Have not we got to resort there?
J.T. Yes; "mortify therefore". I do think God is helping the brethren as to our meetings and ministry, but I believe He would raise the question with us as to the extent of His work in us, for that is all that counts, and I believe the more you consider Rahab the more you see that she represents it. The thing is there that God values; but her public history is intended to be humbling. Life is evidenced in faith, intelligence and confidence. God is aiming at getting that life in its fulness, so as to impress it, because there is to be a family in heaven, as well as a family on earth, which is moulded on a certain pattern. The idea of life underlies everything for God;
{184}
but God moulding or patterning the families is what is so important. He intends to bring out the greatest result from us, and hence the importance of development in life, and the removal of what hinders it. The epistle of John helps us in this, it directs us inwards, to make soundings, to see where we are as regards the work of God; leaving aside all that we may have learned from books and the like, to find out just what is the extent of the work of God in us.
H.H. "Christ in you" I was wondering whether that would fit in with what you said about Christ being so interwoven with the truth viewed subjectively.
J.T. That is the way it is presented in Colossians; I think "quickened ... with him" means that Christ had a place. They had followed Him over Jordan, so to speak. They were lovers of Christ. They were quickened with Him, and raised with Him, but not here said to be seated in the heavenlies in Him. The mystery here is "Christ in you, the *hope* of glory".
H.H. That is the thought of life.
J.T. That is it; Christ is our life, chapter 3:4. Then there is the *hope*, the glory is not yet reached, chapter 1:27.
A.S.L. Quickening is not by faith. We are risen by faith, but quickening is the work of God.
F.H.B. And it applies to *persons*. It is not only having the Spirit potentially, but the person is quickened.
J.T. The whole person is affected.
A.S.L. And it is in contrast to a state of death.
J.T. And the fact that they were quickened is seen typically in the carrying up of the stones; that was the evidence of power. Quickening is from a state of moral death "dead in offences and in the uncircumcision of your flesh".
Ques. How would the expression in Galatians fit in with the subject of life here? "The life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God", (@Galatians 2:20).
{185}
J.T. "The life which I now live in the flesh" is his life in the wilderness. It is not what we are dealing with here. Colossians is over Jordan; (@Galatians 2:20) refers to Paul's life here; but being by "the faith of the Son of God". What Christ is in resurrection and glory filled his heart.
A.S.L. That is rather objective.
J.T. It would be; but here we are seeking to get at the position that the saints are brought into in living affections, which is by the Spirit. It is not only local; there is too much localism, but I think the Lord is helping us to be general in our affections, to love *all* the saints. This is a great position; because the full apprehension of Christ as Head, and of the mystery, is that which supersedes this world altogether, and that which is to abide when this world is gone. The saints have not come to that generally, so there is exposure to an impress of another kind, such as clever speaking. The first danger pointed out in chapter 2 is "persuasive speech"; we have to be on our guard against that. Gift of course would carry with it ability to express it in speech, but persuasive speech has to be watched, and then learning too; the apostle is contemplating what is a danger under *these circumstances* "philosophy and vain deceit, according to the teaching of men, according to the elements of the world, and not according to Christ".
M.W.B. Would the contrast to that be coming under the influence of the headship of Christ and the mystery?
J.T. That is most important; they come in in the way of impressive weight. Then in chapter 2 the idea of the mystery is something in which everything in the way of wisdom and knowledge is hidden. That is a great thought to get into the soul. It is brought in as a saving feature; and then the correspondence with Christ that marks us, objectively, in His circumcision and His resurrection. "Buried with him in baptism"; it is now a question of *with* Him, correspondence with Him, which
{186}
love delights in. In Him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead *bodily*; so that there is no need to go outside of Him; all is there and available for us.
A.S.L. Not holding fast the Head is characteristic of the false teacher.
G.W.W. Is what you have in mind that we are not engaged now with Satan's opposition to a certain life for God in the wilderness; but his opposition to the Christian passing on into the enjoyment of life in *its own sphere*; a system of affections, which is proper to that life?
J.T. Quite; and working out in the saints universally loving one another, manifesting the traits of the new man; for God would impress on us the image of Him that created the new man.
Ques. In connection with the stones being taken out of Jordan to which you referred earlier, have you in mind the affections of all the saints?
J.T. They are set down together as representative of unity, twelve of them; it is unity in life. Our hearts are to "be encouraged, being *united together in love*, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God".
Eu.R. Does the family at Bethany stand in that relation?
J.T. It does. It is pretty much the idea in (@John 12), and so Christ coming in would impress them. He would be owned as Head there.
Eu.R. You do not get "neither male nor female" here, do you? Chapter 3:11.
J.T. No; you have it in (@Galatians 3), where sonship is presented as taking us out of the realm to which the law applies. The testimony here is in view in the new man, and so man and his wife are noted in Colossians. The type in Joshua helps us as to all this; you have this new life in evidence, and pains taken to strip it of everything that would becloud it, so that you might have the thing
{187}
itself; and then the nourishment that it needs. It is carried along to this point on wilderness food, special victuals being mentioned in view of going over the Jordan and carrying the stones out of the bed of it. But now you need another food, (@Joshua 5), "the old corn of the land". The manna ceases; it is a most critical position, because if I cannot live on the old corn of the land, I must succumb. We must learn that the manna has ceased. Then the position is changed. At the end of (@Joshua 5) a man appears to Joshua with a drawn sword in his hand, meaning that now as adjusted to the new position, and having taken on heavenly food we are regarded as heavenly warriors. Colossians does not lead us that far, but only shews the bearing of the truth that the Lord would lead us on from this point to the full heavenly position designed for us as in Ephesians. So that now Joshua himself, the leader up to this point, and the link really between Moses and the captain of the Lord's hosts, has to learn that there is another leader.
J.J. Is the point evident in Colossians where the food changes?
J.T. Chapter 2 makes way for it, but this epistle hardly takes us to the position to which the "old corn" applies. We are led up to that point where we begin to see Christ in heaven; the "old corn of the land" is *Christ in His own sphere*. I do not know much about it, but I see in it that there is a point to be reached by us, and if we reach it and hold it in our souls we shall be right as to all else. That is what God is leading us on to, and to this end we specially need to understand life as seen here the thing in itself; but whilst you are quickened, when you come to the thing you enjoy, it is *Christ*; Christ is our life. As in this life we are united practically, and thus the grace of Christ works out in a collective way the new man.
H.H. The new man is more than an individual thought; it is collective.
{188}
J.T. It is collective, including all the saints. It is not a question of our being together, as in Corinthians, but collective in the sense of including all the saints. The same traits are seen in the saints everywhere, Christ being all things and in all.
H.H. It is more than a kingdom thought.
J.T. It is; and even more than an assembly thought, as in 1 Corinthians. Although it enters into that, it is a question of what God is effecting in all the saints.
E.J.McB. That is what is proper to all the people of God.
J.T. That is right, for if God is operating in me. He is operating in relation to all the saints. That is an important thing to remember; if He is operating in any one of us. He is operating in relation to all; so Colossians and Ephesians treat of the *whole* work of God, especially Ephesians.
J.J. Does (@John 6) help at all in connection with the change of food?
J.T. Yes; it is for the individual. But I do not think (@John 6) takes you over Jordan. It is for life, of course if we eat we live but Canaan contemplates all the saints; it is God operating in all the saints. We must never lose sight of that, hence the *twelve* stones in (@Joshua 4). (@John 6) is Christ as bread come *down* from heaven; the old corn is Christ *in heaven*.
H.E.S. You spoke of the new position; is quickening always in view of our being made to live in connection with the new position?
J.T. That is the idea; you are quickened with Christ; you are thus in association with Him in the new place. Many have missed it in making quickening an objective thing; whereas it is to bring you consciously to the new position so as to occupy it suitably.
M.W.B. Is that why the positional thought of risen is linked with faith; whereas quickening is not so?
J.T. Quickening is actual. I think you will agree
{189}
that if God is working in you. He is working in you in relation to all the saints.
M.W.B. So whilst it might be reached individually, yet what is reached is proper to all.
J.T. And further, if you reach a point in your soul normally, you wish all to reach it. That is love for all the saints; life works out in that way.
Ques. Had Rahab reached it when she said, "I know that Jehovah has given you tile land"?
J.T. She is very humble in her remarks, but in truth she represents the life that has been reached. We must view all that appears in her in a spiritual way, and in the light of the antitype.
E.R. Does not the thought of '*with* him' help us to understand it?
J.T. The point in chapter 2 is to be brought into correspondence with Christ. You are circumcised in *His* circumcision, risen *with Him* "through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", and then you are quickened *with Him*. It is all in association with Christ. God will have His people in His land, not as units, but all circling around Christ.
G.W.W. Does the matter of the stones in Solomon's temple help at all? They were subject to certain operations in order to take their place on mount Zion.
J.T. It is the same idea.
G.W.W. They were not operated on simply for their own sake, but in view of a certain position they were to occupy. Is that the thought?
J.T. Exactly. Peter takes that up in the living stones.
A.S.L. So it is emphasised in Ephesians that there is *one* new man, not millions of new men, but one new man.
J.T. In Canaan everything points to Christ. That is Colossians; you are standing in relation to Christ. The new life, however small, stands in relation to Christ, and that is what we come to here: "Christ is everything, and in all".
{190}
J.C.S. Is that what you meant by a sphere where Christ is everything, and is cherished as Head in the affections of the saints?
J.T. That is right.
H.H. I would like to ask what you understand by the manna? It went over Jordan; it says, "The manna ceased on the morrow, when they had eaten of the old corn of the land".
J.T. It is what Christ was in everyday life here. You find it everywhere, for He entered into all human circumstances, sin apart.
H.H. It is still food for the saints.
J.T. Food as in the wilderness, but not as in the land, it will never sustain you in the land. You will not find it there, because Christ is not in heaven in the circumstances in which He was here, He is in other circumstances. That is what the mount of transfiguration means, that you might see, in a sense, what is *up there*.
M.W.B. Do you not think we need to know more of that side of Christ *what* He is *where* He is? One feels how little one has touched that side of things.
J.T. Well, I think that is what we may come to here; so chapter 2 is a sort of adjusting chapter. It is the application of the death of Christ in certain relations to adjust our souls, so that we might be free of everything that would becloud this precious, new, fresh, life which is in us. Philosophy and vain deceit, the traditions of men and ceremonialism; then the "law of commandments contained in ordinances" had all been nailed to His cross. That ought to touch our hearts, because the *nailing was in Him* but in this connection it is that He took away everything that might becloud or clog the saints in the development of this new life and their entrance into the sphere which divine love had prepared for them.
Ques. Is it not true that we experience in our present conditions both the wilderness life with its food, the
{191}
manna, and have the privilege of entering the land and enjoying its food?
J.T. That is right. The two things run along together; but what we are dealing with here has to be reached; and you will never reach it on a special occasion unless you learn it in your own soul, and are brought into adjustment with Christ through His death, so that you apprehend Him as head in heaven. As it says here, "From whom all the body, ministered to and united together by the joints and bands, increases with the increase of God". This new, fresh life is linked up with Christ as the Head, and through the bands and joints there is increase according to "the increase of God".
J.C.S. Is it right that each holds the Head for himself, but it is the Head of the body we hold?
J.T. Exactly; you hold Him in relation to all the saints, and thus you are in unity If we are to enjoy the assembly in its highest privileges this epistle has to be reached in our souls; we have to understand what it is to pass over and be in a new life, entirely outside of wilderness conditions. It is a wholly spiritual matter, depending not only on the possession of the Spirit, but on His work in us.
J.J. Do you not think if we understood the divine image was to be impressed on all the material, it would give us a very much greater appreciation of all the saints?
J.T. Yes. Colossians, like Ephesians, contemplates "all the body". To hold ourselves in relation to the vastness of the body is an enlarging thought. "Holding fast the head", ministered to and united together by the joints and the bands, there is the increase of God. The whole organism is living.
H.H. Christ is the Head of it, and so I have to ask myself how far I am familiar with what the body really is.
J.T. It has an enlarging effect upon us, disposing of mere localism and nationalism. You get to see the
{192}
largeness of the thing of which Christ is Head, and that in every part of it it is living.
Rem. If one speaks of the stones as representative of the tribes, the two and a half stones were never taken back to the Jordan.
J.T. That is a saving feature, for they were left in the land. The two and a half tribes went back, alas! A very sorrowful thing, but the stones remained. *Their* children would never ask them about those stones; but the nine and a half tribes would have to give an account. They reared up an altar called Ed, a "great altar to see to". That also was over Jordan, as if they might go over if they pleased. But God does not like my saying that I will go over there if I please, especially as I have already said that I will *not* go over. (@Numbers 32:19).
The two and a half tribes are specially noted in the early part of Joshua as having gone over. They are credited with that. They went over in military order. But it says, "When your children ask hereafter, saying. What mean ye by these stones?" those who were there would be obliged to give an account. The children of the others would not ask, being absent from the land. What will our children ask us today if we are living like ordinary men? They would not have to ask us anything, because we are in keeping with what is around. It is the *new* thing they ask about. They say. What do you mean by these stones? Our manner of life and outlook are different from all others, and our children do not know what this means.
G.J.E. Would the answer we give be "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body"? (@2 Corinthians 4:10).
J.T. Yes. There is an evidence of the power of God; that is the answer. The thing that our children should see is the *new* life; that is what will lead to the inquiry; but if I am living, although a Christian, like my
{193}
neighbours, my children will not ask me anything like that. They will not need to; what they see is common.
Ques. Should we not expect these questions?
J.T. We should, if we are different from what is current. The children say, "What mean *ye* by *these* stones?" They are present.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the bearing of the order referred to in verse 5 on this subject?
J.T. The hymns we have in our meetings, the good order we have when the breaking of bread should be, and what should be done before and after. I think we have had help from the Lord on those lines but that is not enough. The apostle was not satisfied as to Colosse, although he rejoiced in their order.
Ques. Did the two and a half tribes break up the order?
J.T. They broke up the order God had intended when they went back. There are those who would do that now, and break-up the unity of God's people in principle. Some of us were speaking lately about the heap Jacob and Laban set up (@Genesis 31). Jacob set up a stone first, and asked his brethren to gather stones into a heap, and they ate on the heap; but it was an eating that meant they were to be separated: "The Lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another". They ate in view of being separated, as if they would agree to differ; but that is contrary to the tenor and spirit of Christianity. The idea of eating is that we should be together; the Lord's supper is "when ye come together", and the twelve stones at Gilgal mean that we should be together. They signify unity in life. The two and a half tribes broke that up outwardly in leaving Canaan.
J.S. That would not fulfil Paul's joy. If we are all thinking the same thing we shall not sit down and eat on a heap of stones.
J.T. It would be agreement to differ. There was no
{194}
idea of unity in 'Galeed' it was a mere *heap*. There were certain engagements between Jacob and Laban of a negative nature, but no evidence of love or a desire to be together.
Eu.R. How do these joints and bands operate?
J.T. They refer to the saints in relation to one another, as we have been saying. That idea certainly could not be indicated in the two and a half tribes. "Joints and bands" contemplates our being together in life knit together in love. Each one functions in love, all under the guidance and influence of the Head.
W.C. Then do you think if we are out of unity we eat on the heap?
J.T. It is that sort of thing. We are content to maintain an outward fellowship, but there is no link in affection and life because love abominates separation. "When we are absent"; we do not want that, we want to be with one another; and I believe the Lord is helping us in getting together, but we must refuse the principle of agreeing to differ.
P.L. So that we are in love together at the lodging place; and the love we enjoy there will move us on to love's own home.
J.T. Quite: "The place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in", (@Exodus 15:17).
C.H.W. How do the joints and bands help in regard of the increase of God? Is that in regard to the impress you have referred to?
J.T. It is an allusion to the human body. The different parts in the body all function for the increase of the whole, but all flowing out from holding the head. The use of the word 'body' shews the marvellous result the death of Christ contemplated the nearness, the intelligence, the innate sympathy existing among the saints. The church thus the acme of God's work.
C.H.W. I mean in regard to the increase of God.
J.T. It is the idea of the growth of the body. All the
{195}
members of the body are essential to a regular growth. The increase of God fits in with what we are saying in regard of divine impress. It is normal growth through His gracious work in us.
J.J. So it is not the assembly in its abnormal broken state of things, but more the work of God proceeding in a spiritual way. The broken state of things is a very practical difficulty to the realisation of what you have been saying.
J.T. It is, but it is well to have the right thought, and if there is a little bit of life amongst us, to remove everything that would not help it forward. We must not Stop even with order, for there is much ahead, and so there must be vitality in the members, all working in love.
F.H.B. There is a danger of stopping with order and making too much of it.
G.W.W. When we think of the tremendous impulse all this would give to the testimony, we can understand how the god of this world would seek to induce idleness in our souls, so that we do not move on into it. There can be no real true answer to God's thought at the present time, unless we do move on into this.
J.T. That is the great idea of God in Ephesians. Joseph is the great end reached in the blessing of the tribes in (@Genesis 49) and (@Deuteronomy 33). In Genesis Jacob's blessing is secured to every one of the tribes *in spite* of adverse conditions; whereas in Deuteronomy all is in the full current of the Spirit of God; the flesh is not in view at all. There is a current in (@Deuteronomy 33) which secures the blessing in power; whereas there is a current against it contemplated in Genesis; but Joseph is reached in both cases. In Genesis, "From thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel", but in Deuteronomy you have the two sons of Joseph mentioned. "These are the myriads of Ephraim, and these are the thousands of Manasseh". That is the saints as "in Christ". You get the full thought of God, therefore, in Joseph.
{196}
H.H. Do you think in Deuteronomy we have what is suggestive of the possibilities for the present moment "Let Reuben live", "Let Asher be blessed with children", etc.?
J.T. Yes; the chapter referred to gives us the *variety of features* effected by the Spirit in the saints. It involves the unity of the Spirit.
Ques. Is the objective you have referred to in (@Ephesians 4) "the increase of the body to its self-building up in love"?
J.T. Quite; that is the effect of holding the head. Then there is the impress of God which comes in here, in chapter 3. It is the idea of image in the way of intelligence, the kind of intelligence, the renewal of full knowledge: "Renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him". The idea is that all mere human knowledge is shut out; it is "renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him"; it is that kind of knowledge.
J.J. "The stone of Israel" is the head of the corner, Christ crowns everything in that way.
M.W.B. Do you mean the mind is impressed with what is presented to us of God, in Christ, as the image of God?
J.T. That is what I understand: "Him that created him" would refer to Christ, God being there, according to the Colossian view point.
M.W.B. And what is impressed is altogether different from anything that has ever preceded it.
J.T. That is the idea, because 'renewed' is what is different, as not known before. So we are not marked by ordinary human intelligence, but by a new kind altogether; the saints are marked off in that kind of knowledge.
Ques. Does a comparison with the similar expression in Ephesians help, where the new man is an entirely new creation?
{197}
J.T. It does. You have a kind of knowledge that shuts out national distinctions and all distinctions that men know in this world. It is a different thing from anything that men know; the world is not built up on that at all; it is built up on the idea of nations and men and women, and the like social distinctions. The knowledge marking the new man is different; and that will bring out reproach. But you have the image of the Creator, that is the character of the new man. We have different creations, but this is the Creator of the new man; for the new man is a creation.
J.J. Would you say from verse 12 it is likeness rather than image?
J.T. Quite; in detail it is what you put on.
Ques. Why do you think it says, "the things which are above", rather than the Person of Christ?
J.T. It is assumed that the Person of Christ is already in your heart, and you are brought into correspondence with Him, which is chapter 2, but I think the "things above" mean the whole, domain into which we are brought. Moses looked into the land and spoke of its different features: "That goodly mountain, and Lebanon". The Holy Spirit having come out, brings a knowledge of those things, the things above; that is, the whole domain into which Christ has entered: "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit". (@1 Corinthians 2:9,10).
Rem. I have often thought we might find that verse very difficult to define and say what things were there.
J.T. God has prepared things for those who love Him: "Things which eye has not seen and ear not heard". God takes account of what we are, and prepares things for us. I believe what Moses spoke of indicates what the place is, and our Moses is the Spirit, in that sense. The twelve spies went up and brought down
{198}
evidence of the fruit of the land; but the two spies of Joshua brought Sack evidence of the kind of life that was there; they brought back tidings of Rahab, which was in keeping with the fruit of Eshcol. The twelve spies explored the whole land, and the grapes of Eshcol indicated its fruitfulness. The One who brings tidings to us is the Holy Spirit who "searches all things, even the depths of God". What a domain of things He brings into view for us!
M.W.B. Do you think that is why the word "things above" is used and not "things in heaven"?
J.T. Yes; elevation and greatness generally: "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ, seek the things which are above, where the Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God". The things on the earth are thus eclipsed.
A.S.L. "Not on things on the earth"; it is over against that. There are things above and things on the earth.
F.H.B. And the things are not something separate or apart from Christ; they all centre in Him.
G.W.W. Is it the same thought in Galatians, "Jerusalem above ... which is our mother", that from which we derive character?
J.T. Yes. Then we have to notice (@Hebrews 12) "Ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven; and to God, judge of all; and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to Jesus, mediator of a new covenant; and to the blood of sprinkling, speaking better than Abel". They are all above.
W.C. There are things from beneath. The last few verses of chapter 2 would be in keeping with these; what is of Satan.
H.E.S. Are the affections connected with the Person of Christ, and the mind with the things above?
{199}
J.T. Just so. The word in chapter 3:2 is 'mind'. It is a question now of intelligence. The heart is secured by the Person of Christ; but now it is a question of intelligence as to things above, which leads us into Ephesians.
{200}
DIVINE ANOINTING
@2 Corinthians 1:21;@1 John 2:27;@Luke 4:16 - 22
I am thinking, dear brethren, about divine anointing, hoping that the Lord will help us as to the import of it. It is a familiar expression, but perhaps we may be helped further in our understanding of it. What comes out in Scripture shews that it represents God's rights in administration or service, and thus correspondingly shuts out mere human ability; God from the very outset of His operations indicating that whatever the instrumentality or instrumentalities employed. *He* had had to say in the operations. We find, therefore, that the idea of the anointing has a very wide bearing, and brings God in authoritatively and in suited dignity in the instruments used. We find in the book of Ezekiel the idea connected with a great being whom we have to regard as now fallen, who is spoken of as "the anointed cherub that covereth". Thus before ever men were anointed the idea existed, and God anointed some great personage for a definite purpose. The king of Tyre is taken up as the immediate personage in (@Ezekiel 28), but the Spirit of God has more than the king of Tyre in view. So we have an inlet into angelic service, how God employed, and does employ, angels; but in the service rendered there was that which denoted that it was on God's part, it was not done independently, it was not done in the person's own power.
So, in coming into our own realm, the creation of (@Genesis 1), the creation as we are in it, we have the thought introduced in a very familiar and simple manner, in Abraham and others who are said to be God's anointed ones. Even in those early days what was being done bore the divine stamp. God said He reproved kings on account of His anointed ones, shewing what they were to Him: "Touch not mine anointed ones", (@Psalm 105:15). They were moving under God, and God had an obvious
{201}
part in their movements, they were not ordinary people. They had part in ordinary affairs outwardly like other people, and they prospered in material things too, but there was a distinctiveness about them that marked them off, even in the presence of kings, so that ultimately these anointed ones could bless kings, for their distinctiveness, their dignity, their moral authority, indicated the anointing. Thus God marked them off as His anointed, standing out in dignity and moral power, and in Abraham's case enabling him to rebuke a king.
I am speaking very simply, dear brethren, because I am impressed with this, that God would put dignity and power upon His people in dealing with men in this world. He has a hand in our movement's with the result that there is a constant rise in power and dignity in the saints before the eyes of those with whom they have to do immediately. So that as you see with Abraham, he could rebuke the king of the Philistines. So with Isaac. They were few and of small account in this world, but there was something that marked them off from men, and caused a gradual rise in power and dignity, so that they did not have to lend their shoulders to servitude; they were not brought under the power of this world, there was a superiority about them that lifted them above the current of the world. So that Isaac was able to speak on more than equal terms with the Philistine king, although he brought the general of his army and his friend with him, as an evidence of military power and social influence; but it was not enough to overwhelm Isaac. And then in Jacob you see the same thing; he stands before Pharaoh and blesses him. The Holy Spirit, commenting upon a similar occurrence, says that "the less is blessed of the better", (@Hebrews 7:7).
Now what comes out is that all this in Genesis leads up to a great position: Joseph is a fruitful bough by a well, and the branches run over the wall, and "from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel", chapter 49.
{202}
That is the position in Genesis, Then in the typical books that follow you have the ministry or administration of it, and the way it is to be diffused and to reach men; that is the principle. So you have the anointing of Aaron and the anointing of the tabernacle and its utensils, with all that pertained to it, for God intends to shine out and to operate, and to shew Himself in a domain dignified by the anointing. He has to say to every part of it; no other rights are recognised there.
Now that is to reflect on our present position; there are no rights to be asserted among us, save God's rights. The anointing makes the position too dignified to admit of any human assertion of rights. God puts in His claim in the most positive manner in the anointing, so that in the tabernacle and its utensils anointed you get what typically represents the heavens and the earth; and then Aaron is anointed in relation to that, and you have a domain in which God's rights are asserted and maintained. The One who ministers there serves in the sympathy that belongs to the divine nature; for in. Aaron it is a question of the manhood and priesthood of Christ. All that God *is*, embodied in a Man, in order that what God is may be brought in in the most sympathetic manner in that whole domain; and that God Himself may be served in it.
Now you see what Exodus and Leviticus denote what a scene is presented! And what *a* Person is anointed in that scene! So that we have the rights of God in every detail asserted in the priest, but in the most sympathetic manner, for they are not arbitrary. What can be better for us, dear brethren, than the rights of God? The more they are asserted the better; for what are they today but His, rights in grace, or rather in mercy? It is a question of His right to be merciful and gracious, and the more we admit these rights, both in ourselves severally and in the whole domain in which God is operating, the happier and richer we shall be.
{203}
Now I want to come to 2 Corinthians, because the anointing is specially mentioned there. It is not formally mentioned in the first epistle, though it is involved in the expression "the Christ" in chapter 12; but not as implying that the Corinthians were marked by it, for they were not; they were marked by the very opposite. Although having the Holy Spirit, and as in that sense anointed, they were marked by man's doings and sayings and party spirit, which is the very opposite of the anointing. That is simply the world, and walking according to men, and is, I need not say, degrading. But still, there it stands, "As the body is one and has many members ... so also is the Christ", "the Christ" alluding to the saints as anointed as in relation to Christ, but it is not formally applied to the Corinthians. But in the second letter it is implied, for they are included, as I understand, in the idea with the apostle himself: "He which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God".
Now, dear brethren, I wish to seek to make clear the import of that statement, appearing as it does in the second letter, which is based on a certain effect in recovery from the first letter. It indicates that the anointing refers to something of God in the person anointed; that it is intended to enable us in a dignified positive way to convey to others what we are enjoying. If God has saved me, has justified me, has given His Spirit to me, has brought me into the joy of the kingdom, "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", then I say. Well, I can speak of that, and indeed I should; but the anointing means that I have power to speak of it effectively, that I can speak of it rightly, and in force, so that it affects others. It is not a matter of incidental comment, but the thing impresses you, and you are enabled to speak of it effectively. But, as I said, we have to bear in mind that the anointing is in the second letter to the Corinthians, not in the first. Not that it could
{204}
not be spoken of in the first in abstract way, but it is spoken of in the second in a positive way, and what follows is that He has sealed us and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Underneath the anointing is the sealing, the fact that you belong to God, that God had put a stamp on you, that you are His; He has right to you. But then, what have you got? Well, you have got in your heart the earnest of the Spirit that is something. And there I may liken you to Jacob in Bethel, for in this respect we may read these epistles into (@Genesis 28).
The idea of the anointing was already there; Abraham was one of the "anointed ones". (@Psalm 105), and that has to be borne in mind if we are to understand aright Jacob's action in pouring oil on the stone. It was but very little, the stone was hard, denoting hard circumstances; it was his own selection, he set it up himself; it was one of the stones of the place, and he took it and used it for a pillow. But you see there was something there, something had come into Jacob's soul that had never, been there before. I cannot dwell on it; you all know the chapter; but it is so important for young people to lay hold of the idea of something coming into the soul, changing the whole texture of the person. Jacob was trammelled as yet by much of the flesh and nature, selfishness and natural ambitions, and other things, but there was something, perhaps indefinable by himself, which was there, and he was able definitely to take that stone and set it up and pour oil on it; there was spiritual intelligence and purpose in that action.
Now to shew us the bearing of the anointing, dear brethren, in the next chapter you see the energy, of the man on behalf of others. He went his way to Haran, and looked around and saw a well, and three flocks of sheep lying there. I only touch on that; I want to shew you that the anointing of the stone spiritually alluded to Jacob himself, and was to shew itself in his energy; he
{205}
served 'by love'. He did not roll the stone from the well's mouth until Rachel arrived with her father's sheep, and then he rolled away the stone and watered the flock; he served by love, as I said. That is the divine way to serve, the effect of the anointing; and it is within the range of the youngest as well as of the oldest, to serve by love; it is heaven's way. You say. The world serves by love. No, it does not; you will not get any service by love in the world. Serving by love is a heavenly thing; it comes out of heaven. It is in the Person of Jesus that the thing is fully expressed, for Jacob was a type of Jesus.
We have not far to go for objects of affection. As soon as Rachel arrived Jacob said, "My brethren, whence be ye? And they said. Of Haran are we", and they knew Laban. Earlier Jacob could speak of the time of day, and that the flocks should be watered, but he did not do it; that is to say, he could speak of the need of things being done without doing them, but as soon as an object for his affections appeared, he rolled away the stone and watered the flock. He is a type of Christ. What he did is typically the product of heaven brought down, and brought within the range of the youngest believer to serve by love. The greatest power in the whole universe is love; and it begins in a small way; if you have a brother or a sister an object for your affection near you, you can serve by love. Jacob rolled away the stone without any apparent difficulty.
But as he came back to Bethel twenty years later, he set up "a pillar of stone"; the idea is increased in his mind. That is why I am connecting this passage in Genesis with 2 Corinthians; it is very much like Jacob's second visit to Bethel. In this letter we have the new covenant. The apostle discerned a change in their state; self judgment had taken effect. So he is able to open up to them the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, the new covenant, and then the ministry of
{206}
reconciliation; he brings in the two thoughts. One reconciled, having the love of God in his heart, moves here pleasing to God. You see a person who loves is like Jesus. "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us, and *we* ought for the brethren to lay down our lives". The love of God learnt in the heart leads to similarity to Jesus; and similarity to Jesus brings out the divine approbation. It is sure to do that. God has His own way of bringing to the heart the sense of His approbation, a most blessed thing.
So that the life of a person truly in the good of reconciliation is a life for the pleasure of God. It is a most practical thing. God has refreshment in every little bit of service rendered by a person who is truly in the good of reconciliation. Hence in (@Genesis 35) Jacob sets up a pillar of stone; not now simply a stone that had been his pillow, or a mere piece of stone, but "a pillar of stone". The idea of a pillar is more permanent; and the substance of this is stone, it is something to remain; and Jacob is conscious in setting it up that he has been pleasing to God. And how pleasing? God came down and spoke to him, standing by him, not at a distance as before, and Jacob so revered the spot that he set up a pillar there, and poured a drink offering upon it; that is why I linked it with 2 Corinthians, for there is no doubt that spiritually the stone pillar was there.
There was something for God at Corinth. The Lord had said, "I have much people in this city". (@Acts 18:10), and the tone, so to speak, was set up. But there had not been continued pleasure; the Corinthians retrograded and man got in. But now there is a change and God speaks of the new covenant, and reconciliation, so that the idea of the anointing can be brought in. God was pleased with them as they were repenting as to the evil among them. Jacob was conscious in the second visit to Bethel that God was pleased with him, addressing him by name -- surnaming him -- and ennobling him. In
{207}
effect God said to him. Your name is to be Israel henceforward, and My name is God Almighty. What a marvellous occasion! God Almighty standing by Jacob; his name changed to Israel; and speaking with him; and then a stone pillar is set up with a drink offering and oil poured upon it. Thus you have the idea that there is something that pleases God underneath the anointing. That is to say, in our preaching or other services, unless there is the consciousness in motive, of pleasing God, that I am moving in relation to the great anointed Man, like Him in motive, the anointing must be ineffective. There must be that underneath it which pleases God.
I will come back to that in relation to the passage read in Luke, but I wish to shew how this principle is applied to our education, and that is what John dwells upon. The anointing here implies more than simply oil poured on, it is a sort of rubbing in. That is what we need; many of us take things on too lightly when it is a question of education, and that particularly applies to the young; but there is this thing that God, as it were, rubs in, so as to enable us to shut out all man's teaching. I do not mean the teaching that is necessary for ordinary service or to earn a livelihood, because for these things we need a certain education; but I am speaking of what relates to God, and of the superiority of the teaching, of what is here called 'the anointing', 'the unction'. It is received from the Holy One. It is not called the Spirit; it is something known, as received.
Now the question is, dear brethren, as to the use of it the fathers, but to the little ones in John's family. The apostle addresses us as a class, yourselves, a very suggestive expression! I think the Lord's supper brings that about; and as to this, one would speak specially to any one who is not a partaker of the Lord's supper. 'Yourselves', as used here, is a very precious word, it refers to a special class of people. The Lord's supper
{208}
brings us together in the most touching manner; it began with the Lord making a selection. He never intended His supper to be an open thing; He never intended it to be common to every one; He intended it to be jealously guarded, as for those who love Him. He selected those that were to be with Him when He instituted it. He sent ahead to make preparation for it; and He placed Himself at table when the hour was come with His disciples the twelve were with Him. He said, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer"; and then, "This is my body which is given for you", and in keeping with that 'you' we have 'yourselves' in this passage. You also get, "Beloved ... keep *yourselves* in the love of God", (@Jude 20,21). You must not be outside of this, dear young people, nor can the Lord's supper be exposed to unhallowed hands; it must be kept within the setting in which Christ instituted it. It is a select affair, and brings about a sense of privilege; this is implied in 'yourselves'. "The anointing", says John -- and how qualified he was to speak of it! -- "which ye have received of him ... teacheth you". "Ye need not that any man teach you".
Now this is a most practical thing, especially for our dear young brothers and sisters, that they might be preserved in the sense of what they have received, as receiving the Holy Spirit and using it, in their understanding of things, in their communications in regard of divine things. It is thus that we get, as I may say, the tabernacle anointed however you look at it, we have this thing *ingrained* in us, so that there is a rigid exclusion of man's influence and man's teaching and man's thoughts. We are kept together thus, dear brethren, in holy dignity as in intelligence, for in this passage it is a question of spiritual intelligence. We have received the unction from the Holy One, so that we are kept together, a holy circle in a positive way by the anointing. There is a dignity about all our communications with one another,
{209}
both in our ordinary relations and in our comings together. There is something marking us that indicates God's rights, something that is of God, and that man cannot imitate, nor cope with; he has to give way before it, he cannot stand before it; it is God in His holy dignity amongst His people.
I wish now to shew you how this appears in perfection in the Lord Jesus, because God would have us to see the perfection of everything, and this is always in Christ. God would bring us to that level in everything. But I am speaking for the moment of the anointing, and would have in mind more particularly now those of us who are older and who are specially laying ourselves out for the service of the Lord and His people; that we may see how the thing is to be carried on in correspondence with Christ. What you find in @Luke 3 is that as the Holy Spirit comes down on the Lord Jesus, it is in a bodily form as a dove, and there is the Father's voice to Him, "Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased". What I have been saying is verified in this; there was something there to be anointed an infinite something, but *in man*; the Father was pleased with it, heaven was pleased with it. As He came up out of the water and He was praying, a dependent Man, heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit came down in the form of a dove and abode on Him. Then the Father's voice indicated His pleasure in what was there: "In thee I have found my delight". One dwells on that with peculiar restfulness, on what was there, so well known to heaven, and, alas! So little known to men.
Then it says, "Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age"; I wish you to take notice of that, it is what He began *to be*; the service of God in the anointing is to be in those who are fully matured; that is in view, levitical maturity. It is not a mere historical fact that He was just that number of years old, but He "began to be about thirty years of age". Now you see the idea in
{210}
what He was, not simply that He was born on a certain date, and so many years had elapsed, of course there was this literal period, but really you cannot measure the life of Jesus by ordinary years. No, beloved, one day of that life is like a thousand years to God. It is what he was, who can say what was there? God conveyed it in that wonderful expression from heaven, "Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased", and how well pleased! Every *moment* of that life was for the pleasure of the Father. He was cast on Him from the womb. Think of that! What a life! And every breath of it filled up with motives and feelings and emotions all referring to God. What a life that was for God!
God has His own years. His own days, His own methods of measurement. We cannot limit God to finiteness. The Holy Spirit came down in a bodily form upon that blessed Person and abode upon Him; there was in Him a resting-place for God. As we read, "In him all the fulness was pleased to dwell". (@Colossians 1:19). While that entered into time it involves the infinite, and so room had to be made for time as God reckons it. Who knows the Son but the Father? No one! We observe and we worship. Those years were wonderful years to God. They were not the attenuated years of some of us; how little there is, alas! As Jacob said, "Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been", (@Genesis 47:9) he spoke for most of us; but not so with Jesus, a short life, thirty three years or so not half the span of man's allotment, but what a life! Who can measure it but God!
Well, now you see that is the idea which is underneath the anointing. There was all that; He "began to be about thirty years". He is fully matured; He is a model now for us all; He is seen praying. We have arrived at maturity, such maturity as implies that my personal motives are to be wholly set aside. Not that Jesus had any different motives, but the servant now is to be dependent entirely on God, the flesh profits nothing.
{211}
The flesh is repudiated, the anointing is enough; and so I yield to the Spirit. The Lord is "led by the Spirit in the wilderness". That is another thing; He is entirely now in the hands of the Spirit, and that is really the full thought in the service of God. He was "led by the Spirit in the wilderness", and He was tempted and came out victorious He overcame. Then He returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee and came to Nazareth, where He was brought up. You see He waits until He comes into the circumstances in which He was brought up; circumstances which are the most testing for us, for our relatives know us best, and we are not likely to get any help from them unless they are spiritual. That is a warning. Nature is utterly profitless and will not stand by you; your father, mother, or brother will fail you on this line; it cannot be trusted. So our relatives become the test, for they know us, and unless they are truly in the testimony they will be critical, they will oppose, and the opposition will be constant.
And so in His service the Lord reaches Nazareth, where He was brought up, and He enters into the synagogue and stands up to read the scripture which speaks of His anointing. The Holy Spirit loves to portray the full position of the anointing in this passage. It is "Luke, the beloved physician", who is used of the Spirit of God to present to us this unique setting out of the anointing in the perfect Servant. And so we have the position; He *stands up*, to read, and He *finds* the scripture. Then as He rolled up the book and delivered it to the attendant, He sat down. Then He began to speak, saying, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears".
Now look at the moral weight of all that is thus depicted; what shines out in His movements, in His standing up. His finding the scripture. His reading. His sitting down, and His speaking. He says, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears". That is the idea of ministry; that is not simply future or past events, as
{212}
in prophecy -- that has its place; but it is, this day; to bring Scripture as it bears 'this day' to the ears of the saints. That marks an anointed ministry; it is not the unfolding of prophecy, you see, right as that is. I believe that in the early days of revival, ninety years ago or so, prophecy had a great place; it was in order that the saints might locate, their position. Prophecy unfolds the mind of God as to the future, and opens up the position so that you might see where you are; a most important matter. But when you know where you are, when you see what God intends for you, then the question is how does Scripture apply to you now? The point is what God has to say as to the saints *now*. That is the important thing, the way the Scriptures are brought to bear upon us today -- "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears". And what a fulfilment! Alas! they did not have circumcised ears and hearts, as the sequel shews, but I am speaking of the anointing and how it is fully set out in Christ in this passage. There was a fulfilment in power in the ears of those in the synagogue of Nazareth that day of that wonderful word, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel".
I would commend to you, dear brethren, this matter of the anointing, that the idea may pervade us all as it pervaded the tabernacle, and that it may be seen especially in those who are ministering the word, that the Scriptures may be brought to bear on us today in power. May God bless the word.
{213}
Pages 213 - 382 -- "My Willing People", Britain, 1930
MY WILLING PEOPLE
@Philippians 2:13; @Exodus 35:4,5,20 - 22 (first clause); @Psalm 110:3
I am thinking, dear brethren, of *willingness* in the saints, willingness to do the will of God. It will be remembered that the Lord speaks in spirit in the Song of Solomon of the chariots of His *willing* people, and, it will be remembered, too, that in 2 Corinthians the apostle Paul speaks about willingness, and that, according to this willingness or readiness, "a man is accepted according to what he may have".
I was thinking of that as a basis for a word at this time; for we are, although believers, prone, to be unwilling. It is said of the elder brother in the parable, that he would *not* go in (@Luke 15). God would induce willingness and put us at the very outset in the way of it, by setting before us the very best things by way of attraction for it is well to habituate ourselves to it initially, and God makes this easy, so to speak, for the young believer, in affording him so much to attract. As the Lord says, "My yoke is easy, and my burden is light". And so, as taking the people out of Egypt, God makes the way as easy as possible. He led them not in the way of the Philistines lest they should see war, and resented not any of their murmurings or complaints until they reached the great source of supply, that is, the mount of God. After that, as He opens up the infinite store house of His resources to them, at least typically. He formulates His will, and then begins discipline -- for it is not love to suffer our wills. It would not be love for God to suffer our wills, or the growth of the flesh, even in the sphere of grace: but He
{214}
allows the young believer much latitude -- not to sin, of course -- there is never any latitude or excuse for that -- but in the type, there is very great consideration for the youthful believer so that he should not be discouraged at the beginning, but should see that the will of God is good and that it is perfect. It is first good, then perfect. He is to prove that, and a period under the influence of grace will indicate to us that the will of God is *good* and perfect, so that we habituate ourselves to obedience, resigning ourselves to it. As it is said: "Present your bodies a living sacrifice ... which is your reasonable service". We begin to prove this, that the way is delightsome. And then God opens up His storehouse of resources, so that, as the rigours of the wilderness way for there are rigours and hardships -- begin, we are already accustomed to drawing upon the resources that God has opened up to us.
So I ventured to read in Philippians, a book that may be likened to the book of Psalms, only on a higher plane: a book that should be read even from the beginning of the believer's pathway. It is a book of experience. The Psalms are that, too, but the epistle to the Philippians is experience on a higher plane and much more compressed. In no life have we got compression as in the life of Jesus, and this epistle touches on that life, from the moment of His decision to empty Himself, being in the form of God, from that moment until the cross, yea, the exaltation, we have the life of Jesus in a few short verses. It is infinity put into a few verses, as I might say, but enough to give us an inlet into *that life*. A day of that life was more in the divine account than a millennium of a life like mine. Contrast the life of Methuselah 969 years, and the life of Jesus! The life of Jesus was, in point of time, but a very small part of the life of Methuselah; but the one was attenuated so that the Holy Spirit says nothing beyond the years.
{215}
The life of Enoch was three hundred years after he begat a son; Methuselah, lived all these three hundred years, but the Holy Spirit lights on nothing as reflecting the life of his father. A long life, nearly three times that of his father, but his father's life was "with God" -- he "walked with God"; but Methuselah's life was featureless. We do not want that; we want our lives filled with; the will of God; and not the will of God in a perfunctory sort of way, but for His pleasure. Our wills enter into it, so that our lives are full, if need be compressed, for God reckons by days and by millenniums. One "day is with the Lord as a thousand years", but that must be a day into which much enters; it cannot be a day barren of results for Him. God never intended any day to be, barren of results for Him. So, if a day in His mind be like a thousand years, what a day it must be how full! Who can write the history of such a day? No one but God. And it is of such days, beloved, that the life of Jesus was made up; days so full of delight for God, of the maintenance of the will of God, of pleasure to Him, that every moment of every day, as well as every day of every year, was filled up thus. And what must be "the *day* of eternity"? The idea is of what is compassable -- but compassable by whom? Who can take it in, beloved, but God? He can take it in. As He alone can take in the life of Jesus in its fulness, so He takes in eternity. He 'inhabits' it.
Well, what I have said will convey to you what is in my mind, and my desire is that we should all take into account willingness; that our lives may not be featureless, that they may not be uneventful in the eyes of heaven; that we may not be passed over as unworthy of notice; that the divine eye may see something that it can take account of and name as distinctive of each of us; that our lives, in other words, may be worth recording. Our names are recorded, true enough, in the book of life as believers; but there is also the question of our *lives*.
{216}
Do you think that it is too much to regard God as recording the events of our lives? Not at all. He numbers the very hairs of our heads. We read of a book of remembrance written before Him for His people, (@Malachi 3); also that He writeth up His people, (@Psalm 87). We little take in, even in physical things, how minute *God* is in His dealings! The things that are made are said to be a testimony to "His eternal power and divinity", (@Romans 1:20), for in them the invisible things of Him are clearly seen. So that it is not at all too much to think of the divine record including the *lives* of the saints, for what are the lives of the saints, think you? They are but the expansion, of the life of Jesus that is what they are; and such life is always delightful to God! As it is said to the apostle Peter: "Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life", (@Acts 5:20). The life of David was very compressed. We read of "the times that passed *over* him", (@1 Chronicles 29:30), all his reign and his might, and so forth. It was recorded, as one has often remarked, by three of the most spiritual men of his time, or of any time -- Samuel the prophet, Nathan the prophet, and Gad the seer.
Now you will see the importance of what I have before me, of willingness in the saints to do the divine pleasure. So Philippians encourages us, as touching on the life of Jesus from His emptying Himself -- profound expression! We refer to these expressions reverently. Being "in the form of God", He took "a bondman's form", and being "found in figure as a man". He humbled Himself, "becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross". That is the mind of Jesus -- the descending mind of *love*.
And then we have the life of the apostle spread out before us, his sufferings and his motives and his aspirations. He pressed "toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus", after having
{217}
told us that his great thought was to "arrive at the resurrection from among the dead"; that he should be conformable to His death, that he should not be behind in the sufferings of Christ. Well, in the presence of that -- the infinity of the life of Jesus, and then the finite reflection of that life in the apostle -- he says to us: "It is God who works in you". How can we hope for anything of what I have been speaking otherwise? "It is God", he says, "which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure". That is going on. One rests in that: God working in us. We look at the physical system and speak of it as the work of God. He made the heavens and the earth, bringing things out of chaos into order in the 'days' -- all "very good". But we often overlook what is going on in *our own selves*, a far greater thing -- something that will survive as the physical world passes away; that work is going on in us. Ephesians links it up with the heavenly position, but it is brought in here in connection with the divine pleasure, the willing and the doing of the will of God. That is, Philippians looks at our position here which flows out of the work of God, as all emanating from the descending of Christ and His death. One would appeal to the young people -- one always loves to do that -- because we who are a little older would wish to bring them with us, not simply by way of external influence, but by the way of *showing*, them that the thing is very good, that there is something in it, something worth while! In fact, one has often referred to the epistle of John where our faith is said to be victorious: "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith" -- that is to say, we are going on with something that *is* victorious; it has always been victorious, and it always will be. You are coming into that. You did not inaugurate it, I did not inaugurate it, but the thing is there, victorious from the very start, and it is for us to go on with it, "even our faith". So that the point is to
{218}
encourage the young believer to come in, the thing is worth while, 'the willing and the doing of God's good pleasure'. What a thing that is!
If one of you young people going to school or college were to be told, so that you were certain of it, that you had a little bit to do in the formation of Mars, you would say: 'What a wonderful thing!' And you would tell everybody: 'I had a hand in that'. Well, now, you see what you may have a hand in is far beyond Mars or any of the other planets -- the willing and the doing of the divine good pleasure now. 1 Corinthians teaches us that we are called into the service, we are fellow workers with God. Think of that! I only refer to that to amplify what I was saying about the willing and the doing of His good pleasure. God is going on with something that He calls His good pleasure, and we are called into it. His work in us is for the willing and the doing of it, but the willing comes first; I am in it heartily, I am in it heartily. The thing is marvellous, magnificent, and I have part in it -- the willing and the doing of the divine pleasure! God is working in us to that very end.
Well, now, that is how the thing really stands for the youngest or the oldest of us, and I want to show, specially for the young again, from (@Psalm 110), that the Lord is referred to. "Thy people", it says, "shall be willing in the day of thy power", (@Psalm 110:3). It is a question now of Christ and of what He brings in. He is set at God's right hand till His enemies be made His footstool, according to this psalm. He is a "priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek". Your heart is bowed in the presence of this great Person who died for you. You say, 'He is worthy of all this dignity, of all this glory'; and in the coming day His earthly people will be willing. As He says in Spirit in the Song of Solomon: "My soul set me upon the chariots of my willing people", chapter 6:12. How delightful for Christ
{219}
that His earthly people who rejected Him here shall be willing in the day of His power. We think of Him thus and delight in the thought. But then. He is already in power, not outwardly, but really -- He is at the right hand of God. "Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool", that is how the psalm begins. He is already in power, and He is operating in power for us, and so it is a question of what this psalm means for us -- whether *we* are willing. What marks the church in the type is "Wilt thou go with this man?" "I will go". That is the principle. Rebekah is a type of the church, of which we form part; we are of her great anti type and we should not be behind the type. How beautifully the church is typified for us in (@Genesis 24)! Rebekah is seen in grace and humility -- drawing water for the servant of Abraham and for his camels. Then when she is challenged; when her brother and her mother keep her for ten days, they said: "Let us call the maiden and inquire at her mouth": "Wilt thou go with this man?" What a word for the young people here! She has no hesitation whatever; she represents the church, that feature of it, and says: "I will go". And so it is in this psalm -- "thy people shall be willing".
Now, how about this, young people? What I do in secret is the fast consideration; not what I do before the brethren only; that is to say, what is the disposition, the attitude of my heart? If the willingness be there to do, you are accepted according to what you have; a man is accepted according to that. The psalm says: "Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power". How does it stand in the secret of our souls in regard to Christ's claims? We have our own natural desires. I know well enough that natural desires are stronger in young people than in older ones, and we older ones must remember that. But God presents a superior attraction to anything you can get here, and
{220}
that is Christ. "Wilt thou go with this man?" "I will go", Rebekah says, and so in our psalm: "Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power".
"In the beauties of holiness" that is the next thing. Not mere natural effort or feeling, but in the beauty of holiness -- or "in holy splendour". And then, "From the womb of the morning shall come to thee the dew of thy youth". It is the young believer coming out, you see, from the death of Christ, for what can be "the womb of the morning" save that? What morning can there be without it? All must sink into oblivion for ever, beloved friends, without the death of Christ: all man's race and its affairs. What in coming could there be without the death and resurrection of Christ? And so "from the womb of the morning shall come to thee the dew of thy youth" -- alluding, as understood by the best authorities, to young people; -- to young men. "Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children", (@Psalm 45:16). That is to say, it is what Christ secures in resurrection, what He has as the result of His death. No longer the fathers, but the children whom He makes "princes in all the earth". You see what He will do for us. Young life, spiritually, is most delightful; how delightful it is to Christ as the first fruits of His death. As He moved about on the morning of His resurrection, what a prospect of youthful life was in view! How early they were at the tomb! How vigorous they were! How full of affection was Mary Magdalene! And all that was delightful to Christ as the first fruits of youthful life from the womb of the morning: never to pass away, never to grow old, never to decay, all to be like and for Himself. "In the beauties of holiness, from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth", it says. "The dew of *thy youth*" -- that is the idea. There is never to be any oldness or staleness in this. The heavenly city is as fresh a thousand years after as it was at the beginning. There is no decay. That is
{221}
what Christ has, and that begins now. It is marked now by willingness to do His pleasure.
I have been speaking to young people, but I want to show how this principle of willingness enters into the building up of the church; for that is how God would have things in this dispensation. Rebekah is the great type of the church in this respect -- in the sense of willingness, or readiness -- so that God is not, as it were, forcing things out of us. He will take what He can get in His grace. That is a very touching thing, too. Whatever good thing there is. God will take it out and use it as available. But how far short that is of (@Romans 12), where the believer begins by presenting his body, "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God", which is his intelligent service, and where he proves "what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God". That is what God looks for: a people starting in freshness and vigour in the energy of life, presenting their bodies. Well, that is what Exodus is; and what is really in evidence is the day of Christ's power in Moses, for Moses, in many respects, is Christ typically in Exodus. He has come into power: he had come into the camp and faced all in the camp single handed, and they went down before him, for who could stand before him? He was the king against whom there was no rising up. (@Proverbs 30:31). That is what Moses was there for. And then we have all the subsequent judicial and gracious dealings until he goes up to the mount the second time, and comes down with his face shining. It is the new covenant in principle, in type: Christ shines. It is not that He has to put a veil on His face, as we read: "We all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord", (@2 Corinthians 3:18). It is the day of His power, but power exercised in grace. That is, there was an incentive in His face for the people to do the will of God, to be
{222}
ready, to be available; thus we are accepted according to what we have, not according to what we have not. Moses here speaks to the people as to their willingness of heart. "This is the thing which the Lord commanded, saying, Take ye from among you an offering unto the Lord; whosoever is of a willing heart". That is the position now. It is a question now of material, dear brethren, for the house, and it is not as if God were extorting it from us. He is not like the tax gatherer. God is not on that principle. That would not fit in with the dispensation; for the dispensation is marked by willingness, by readiness. God would encourage us on the principle of equality and on the principle of a willing heart, as seeing what is needed. In this chapter in the following verses we see the requirements specified carefully; but the materials have come through willing hearts, hearts prompted by the Spirit.
Now, dear brethren, this is a very practical matter, for the requirements are great, and the maintenance of the dispensation in character, depends really on the church, and on the church taking form. It is well for us to have the idea of the light of the assembly, and to move in it, but I feel that what the Lord is specially occupied with for the moment is *formation*; that it might come under His eye in some little way in form -- that He might see *it*. The Lord is looking for that; He is looking for the outline of the thing in some way, in some little formation; and for formation, according to this type, we must have material. The material is the outcome of willing hearts, of hearts prompted from within. It is not extorted from us, as I said, but we are touched by the grace that shone in Moses¬ face -- that is, in Christ's face -- as "looking on the glory of the Lord".
As I said, this is a most practical thing, dear brethren, and I believe the Lord would make an appeal. We have much light -- thank God! -- but the point is, willing hearts spontaneously coming forward: that is what the
{223}
Lord would bring us to. We find in the later verses of (@Exodus 35) that they come, every one whose heart stirred him up and whose spirit made him willing. I need not proceed further. What is stated is so plain that there are none, I am sure, who cannot see the force of it -- "every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing"; they came, and it was 'after they had departed from Moses' -- that is, they were not under his eye. We do many things in the meetings, under the eyes of the brethren, but the point is, when we depart, what do we do then? "They came", it says. That is a movement the Lord loves, to see us coming in spontaneity of affection, hearts prompted, whose spirits are made willing, with all that is needed in the way of material for the building up of the house of God, for the formation of the assembly. May God bless these thoughts to us!
{224}
"AMONG HIS PRIESTS"
@Psalm 99:6 - 8; @Numbers 16:41 - 45, @1 Samuel 7:8 - 12
J.T. I was thinking of priesthood and what it is to be regarded as among the priests, what the gain is in the divine answer to our prayers, especially in crises. I thought these passages furnished examples, first of what the priesthood is in this respect, and then of what it effects. I thought we might first consider Moses and Aaron, especially as Moses is included among the priests.
Priesthood is indicated in (@Psalm 99). The Spirit of God has a way of honouring the saints in the Psalms, so that the exigencies of the testimony bring out distinctions in those who are engaged in it; and this Psalm covers, we might say, the whole history of the testimony up to David Moses- ministry necessarily includes the whole history in the Pentateuch. What distinguishes him here, is that he was a priest.
P.L. Would his (@Psalm 90) -- the prayer of Moses the man of God -- suggest how priestly he was?
J.T. I think so; there is the expression of it there and in many other instances -- the great apprehension of God that he had, "Lord, *thou* hast been our dwelling place in all generations".
W.C. Does this psalm show that the triumphs of the testimony are through the priests?
J.T. I think that is the point; and incidentally the idea of priesthood in Moses is typical of Christ Himself, as without limitations. Aaron was object to limitations in entering into the presence of God; although the official priest, he was subject to limitations; whereas Moses apparently never was, and so his service in this way covers the whole period. He carried things down from the beginning from the very outset, "from all generations".
{225}
H.H. Do you mean Moses was *often* in the presence of God?
J.T. Yes; that is what I think; there were evidently no limitations placed in his way; as if in him there was provision typically, personally for maintaining the relations of the people of God, with God.
H.H. The priests would carry that thought as representing the people; it would be representative on behalf of the people.
J.T. Yes; in that way as one who cared for them; not as one who was officially appointed, but indicating his moral greatness as one who cared for the people; knowing that Jehovah loved them. His position, therefore, is outside of the realm of limitations, indicated in the type of priesthood in Aaron; he was personally above these limitations.
P.L. Would it prefigure the mediatorial service of Christ?
J.T. Well, it does; but I think it brings in His personal greatness as in the gospel of John, He is never limited by regulations; He is here in subjection but He moves from Himself, without waiting for John the baptist to be cast into prison. And He begins to serve us *before the Passover*, chapter 13. As a divine Person, He moves; He is in subjection to His Father, but not limited by regulations that would govern an ordinary servant.
A.D.T. Does the thought of priesthood as presented in Moses suggest the thought of spiritual rule?
J.T. What we have here is that they call upon His name; they called unto Jehovah and He answered, them. It would involve spiritual rule, that is, the influence which He exerted as loving the people.
H.H. It was very evident when he went up the mountain after the sin of the golden calf that Moses loved the people.
J.T. Exactly. Throughout his ministry we have
{226}
not only his authority over the people, but his solicitude for them and his access to God for them.
J.R.S. And also his solicitude for Jehovah's name.
J.T. Quite.
P.L. Would you say that in (@John 13 - 17) there is peculiarly set forth in the great crisis, the priestly solicitude of the Lord for His disciples in washing their feet; and then His access to the Father, lifting up His eyes to heaven? There is no limited entrance like Aaron's; there is perfect liberty.
J.T. That is the idea of it; so that we are reminded in this psalm of the Person of Christ, of whom Moses is a type, and of the liberty in which He moved in relation to God, as arising from His knowledge of God. Aaron had to wait the appointment, and as appointed he was under limitations; but in Moses we have one typical of Christ personally, and what is said reminds us of what priesthood is as in His Person, and the effect of it. Aaron is brought into it in the calling -- they "calling upon his name".
W.C. Would calling upon His name indicate what priesthood is? Is that priestly?
J.T. I think so; the recognition of the name, of what had come out on the part of God. "*He* answered them", it says.
W.C. It would be the divine interests and not just their personal interests that would be implied for them in the name; thus, calling on the name would be priestly.
J.T. That is the idea. The name implies all that has come out, and the testimony is involved in the calling upon it. The Lord says, "if ye shall ask anything in my name, I will do it". The testimony would be in view in their petitions.
E.R. Does it not give us a better conception of what the need is, if we think of His name, because we measure it according to this?
{227}
J.T. Especially as the name was disclosed to Moses. In Genesis you find men began to call on the name of Jehovah, and it was so with Abraham. To Moses the name was disclosed. God made known His name, and that necessarily governed the priests in their petitions. Here the psalm contemplates Jehovah reigning -- "Let the peoples tremble ... They shall praise thy great and terrible name -- it is holy!" That is the setting in connection with the reference to Moses and Aaron prophetically, in view of the restoration of Israel. God will be known as having resumed His place as of old between the cherubim; that is. He has got His place back, that is the great point of recovery, that God has secured *His* place. He reigns and He sits between the cherubim; and it is in that connection we get these men. Such ministries secure the divine position.
H.H. Do you think the thought of resurrection morally runs through this? Viewing it prophetically, it would show you how God comes in in a definite crisis.
J.T. I suppose, prophetically, this psalm contemplates the resumption of God's relations with His people on earth, but it is on the principle of recovery. Jehovah reigneth, but He sits between the cherubim; that is. He has resumed His place, for that is, His place. If He reigns in our hearts it is in that setting; it is between the cherubim. The cherubim denote His authority, but resting on the mercy seat. The reign now is the reign of grace.
J.R.S. Then, are you connecting recovery with the priesthood?
J.T. Well the point is, that these ministries went on, and the Holy Spirit refers back to them as to what they were; and how the testimony was maintained through them; so that in crises amongst us the point is to be among God's priests, that is a distinction. The victory in the maintenance of what God is in that connection. How is one distinguished? Take Moses, how much
{228}
could be said of him otherwise, but what is said of him here is that he was "among his priests"; and I suppose you could hardly distinguish him more than in that way, that he carried things in his heart, and called upon the name of Jehovah.
P.L. So that Deuteronomy particularly shews how priestly he was.
J.T. I think it does; and so the Levites are regarded as priests in that book, but he is among the priests in distinctive way; that is the position he occupies in the mind of the Spirit retrospectively. In the beginning of his history he sat by the well, which would mean that he had learned that he could not effect anything in his own strength. Earlier he slew the Egyptian and hid him in the sand, as if that were the way; but that was not calling upon the name of Jehovah. After that event he sat by the well, and the sequel was that God honoured him in that position. At the end of 40 years He appeared to him at mount Horeb; he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to Horeb, the mount of God. Then God disclosed His name to him, as if He honoured the attitude he had taken up. It was not by might, nor by power, but by God's Spirit, and I, believe that is the secret, of this ever afterwards he called upon the name of Jehovah. In the crises of his history you find him generally calling on the name of Jehovah, that is, bringing God in, instead of his own energy or wisdom.
W.C. Is that why he could wait, in the incident we have read in Numbers? It says. On the morrow God will shew. He did not attempt to deal with the situation himself.
J.T. That is what I thought. Numbers brings it out particularly; although God honoured him earlier, as was remarked. After the incident of the golden calf he took the tabernacle and pitched it outside the camp, and as Moses entered into the tabernacle the cloudy
{229}
pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and God spoke to Moses, (@Exodus 33). All this showed the relation and great power he had acquired with God; He spoke with him as a man speaks to his friend. In (@Numbers 7) we find that he goes into the holiest to speak to God; he had liberty to do that. It says, "He heard the voice of one speaking unto him from off the mercy seat ... from between the two cherubim: and he spake unto him".
J.R.S. Are you connecting that with his knowledge of the beginning? You spoke of the beginning earlier.
J.T. Yes, I am connecting it with his sitting by the well first; then there is the revelation and disclosure made to him that was in his soul, so that he had acquired a definite place with God. God had said to him: "Moses, Moses ... put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground". He had acquired a place with God thus, and used the liberty, that he had. I refer to it, not to dwell upon Moses at length, but to show how things stand in this fourth book of Psalms. It is a question of the kingdom or the reigning; Jehovah reigning and the position He takes up, and the holiness of it; the holiness of God and the praise due to Him in it. It is a restored position and a retrospective view showing how this position is maintained; that is to say, if God has brought us back to the position, and has His rights, and resumes His place among His people, how are things to be maintained? Thus it is not Moses- authority here, but his priesthood; that is the thing.
H.H. It holds good until the coming of the Lord; this moral outline covers the present moment.
J.T. It does. It is a question of recovery and of God being accorded His place, and how the position is to be maintained now.
H.H. That is the fourth book of Psalms; the coming in of Christ to Israel, the coming of the Lord,
{230}
the appearing and the kingdom in that way; and these principles having application now and being maintained until the end.
J.T. And this psalm also helps us as to what God values, especially in crises. What God really takes notice of is those who are among His priests.
P.L. So Paul seeks to help Timothy in all that is priestly in his second epistle to him, in order to qualify him for the great crises in the church. "Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus".
J.T. Quite. How great a thing it is to be reckoned as among God's priests! You could hardly desire a greater distinction.
H.H. It is very important in the present day, but very testing to see how far we are among the priests.
J.T. That is. God classifies His people. He writes up His people. The Psalms have a way of distinguishing the people of God. The way they are used in the New Testament indicates that they are the product of the saints; they are accredited to the saints; they come out through the exercises of the saints; and these men that are mentioned in this psalm tower up like mountain tops. What am I aiming at in my service? What God specially values is this, and it is what is most effectual.
M.P. What is the force of the word *among*.
J.T. That they are distinguished in this connection. They tower up like mountain tops. God thinks of His priests; these are specially distinguished. They were not the only ones, but they were marked off, and these passages in Numbers and 1 Samuel illustrate how effective their service was.
M.P. Are these the men who keep open the channels of communication between God and His people?
J.T. Exactly; and they secure His intervention against the enemy.
L.E. God having enjoined Moses to take the rod of
{231}
priestly grace, would indicate the way in which things would be maintained.
J.T. That is right. You are referring to (@Numbers 20). That was how the water was to come in, by the rod of Aaron. "Take the rod" -- that was Aaron's rod, the rod of priesthood.
Some of us were noticing this morning an incident in the book of Jeremiah illustrative of what we are saying. Jeremiah was put in a dungeon and he sank in the mire. The vessel of the testimony was let down, down into the mire. It looked as if what was of God was to be blotted *out*. But there was a coloured man there, an Ethiopian. He was in the king's house, and had influence there, and he went off to the king. The princes were the instruments of the enemy. The king was more or less amenably to right influences; thus we are to have our eye on the position and not disparage anything that is inclined for the testimony, or disposed to be of service. Ebed-melech told the king with great emphasis that Jeremiah had been put down into the dungeon and would, die. He was, we may say, a priest, being seriously concerned about the testimony. He knew the king is sufficiently to take that liberty with him, "and the king *commanded*" -- that is the idea -- the power of one man to bring deliverance, (@Jeremiah 38: 10). The king commanded that Ebed-melech should take thirty men with him, and lift Jeremiah up from the dungeon. Now he had I authority he had a command from the king and thirty men with him. Then he began to consider for the *vessel of* the testimony. So they went into the house of the king and took from under the treasury old shreds and worn-out clothes. The Ethiopian evidently knew they were there. He let them down to Jeremiah and told him to put them under his armpits showing tender sympathy for the vessel of the testimony, Jeremiah is raised up with the aid of these old rags. No one would have thought anything of them, but they
{232}
were most valuable for that particular service. I think that illustrates what a priest is in a practical way. He knows where needed things are, and what to do, so that the vessel of the Testimony is preserved. And now Jeremiah speaks to the king, that is, the testimony has resumed its place; it goes on. Jeremiah remains in the court until the *end of that period*. That shows, I think, how things are maintained and how effective the priest is. It is a question of priestly discernment and power with Ebed-melech. He discerned what could be used, so that the testimony could be kept going. You must not suffer it to die out. Use what is available, even worn out things.
W.C. As he moved he found divine support, and a way was made for the desired end.
J.T. Quite. You do not cast off what is old You may say certain ones are old and worn out, but they may be found useful.
H.H. And we are very thankful for the coloured ones in the West Indies. Ebed-melech was an Ethiopian.
Ques. Do you suggest that the priest brings into the testimony the power suited to God's house?
J.T. I think so. He calls on the name and that brings in an answer. The answer is according to the name. The name implies what the dispensation is; and that is another great feature in crises -- not to act in any way out of keeping with the dispensation, but to maintain it. Act so as not to discredit the dispensation. God is thinking of what He has set up in Christ, and His name implies that.
L.M. Does (@Hebrews 5) suggest how these things came out in the Lord? Speaking of Him as Priest it is said, that He offered up supplications, and was heard because of His piety.
J.T. That is so. "Having been heard because of His piety". You see it particularly in these two instances in 1 Samuel and Numbers. In (@Numbers 16) we are told
{233}
that Moses and Aaron fell on their faces in a crisis, and how they were answered; the cloud coming down and the glory of Jehovah appearing. God met that uprising in answer to His servants calling upon His name, as among His priests.
A.D.T. The passage shows the seriousness of murmuring against the priests.
Ques. Is what you are speaking of open to each of us or only to certain individuals, such as Moses and Aaron?
J.T. It is a question of being among God's priests. Of course, believers are all priests from the divine side, as having the Spirit; but when God looks upon His people He takes account of them according to their stature, too; that is the point of view here. There were many priests, but these three persons are mentioned as towering above the others, Moses, Aaron and Samuel.
Question. Is your thought, then, to encourage each of us on these lines?
J.T. Yes, that is the thing; that is essential if the testimony of God is to go on, to be among His priests.
M.P. In Malachi it speaks of those "that thought upon his name". Would that be an example in extreme weakness, and is it open to all who think upon His name?
J.T. I think Malachi brings out the thought of the priests in a beautiful way. It says in chapter 2: "And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you", that was the official, priests, but those "who thought upon his name" were the real priests, whether sons of Levi or otherwise, "They feared the Lord and spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard". They were the priests.
Ques. Do you mean that being among the priests is necessary for the continuation of the testimony?
J.T. The end of Malachi shows the kind of thing that God values. He spares them as a man spares his son. They were among the priests, and Luke takes up
{234}
the thread and shows who are among the priests, when the Lord came, so that the question now is, who is among God's priests? I think it is one of the greatest things to aspire to, to be among those who call upon His name; that is, in speaking to God, you speak in relation to the whole position, the whole position is implied in the name; and there will be an answer in power to correspond.
W.C. I suppose we see the possibilities in the reference to these three; they called and they were answered.
J.T. You could hardly conceive of greater crises than those referred to in (@Numbers 16) and in (@1 Samuel 7), but in both cases you see how God answered them; and the testimony was preserved and the people preserved with it.
Ques. Does Moses himself suggest, at the end of Deuteronomy, the way to be maintained among the people of God? "The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms".
J.T. Quite. That is in keeping with what has been remarked about (@Psalm 90).
W.C. Some of us were looking at 2 Timothy the other day and this passage in Numbers was referred to in connection with the words, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". Do you think that refers back to this chapter in Numbers?
J.T. I think so; that is the link with Numbers.
W.C. Then, secondly, it speaks of persons becoming "serviceable to the Master". That is the priestly condition, is it not? In withdrawing and separating himself from the vessels to dishonour, he is one whom the Master can use. That would show how we are brought into priestly conditions.
J.T. The next thing is, "Follow righteousness, faith, love, peace with those who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". Those are the priests. It is not simply naming the name of the Lord, that is the ground of our
{235}
confession; but calling upon the name of the Lord is priestly. Certain ones are calling upon the Lord out of a pure heart, and He answers them. They are not looking elsewhere for help or protection.
H.H. Do you think it is something like the sucking lamb that we read of? It is something small, but I wondered if it was the thought of faith and confidence in God in a crisis, something which God could answer.
J.T. Exactly; so that in 2 Timothy we are brought on to (@Numbers 17). In chapter 16 we get the solution of the rebellion; that is. God answered them by acting against the rebels, so that they were able to go on; but they go on under priestly conditions. Aaron comes in between the dead and the living and the plague is stayed. The point is to establish the priestly authority and influence. Then the rods are taken and the rod of Aaron buds, blossoms and yields almonds. That is the position that is secured after the rebellion we go on under priestly conditions. Hence, as our brother remarked, in (@Numbers 20) the point is to take the rod of Aaron, that is the rod now, not Moses¬ rod, but Aaron's -- the one that budded; that is the effective rod now; so that in recovery we are set up again under priestly conditions and they remain to the end. According to 2 Timothy we name the name of the Lord; that involves His power, and we cannot go on with evil because of that. And then we are vessels sanctified and fit for the Master's use, and we follow righteousness, faith, love, peace with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart; that is as priests moving on under the protection of Him on whom we call out of a pure heart. No other power avails.
H.H. So that there is something gained in God's mercy through these crises that all can benefit by. You touched on that in prayer.
J.T. Quite. Then in the passage we read in 1 Samuel as to the sucking lamb, we are brought down to something small but intrinsically precious. It is not
{236}
a yearling; that is the passover age, but in Samuel we are brought down to a sucking lamb; that is to say, Christ in His intrinsic worth, but dependent -- the sucking lamb is dependent on another. But it is a whole burnt offering; it is a *whole* idea. You start with what is intrinsically precious but entirely dependent; it is really John's gospel as I understand it, only (@1 Samuel 7) has the state of the people in view.
A.J.G. I was just wondering whether that idea of dependence was involved in calling on His name. Does not calling on His name involve that there is no other resource than that?
J.T. Exactly.
L.E. Do you meet the Philistine with that?
J.T. The Philistine is a big man, and you meet him with something very small -- intrinsically precious, but dependent. What power has a sucking lamb outwardly? You begin with that, that is the key to Samuel's ministry, he began with it. If you begin in that way you could never think of anything big outwardly. But God answers in an overwhelming way; you could not get anything more overwhelming than God's thunder (@Job 37:4,5)(@Revelation 10).
P.L. Would you say that David had an apprehension of the thought of Christ as the sucking lamb? "Thou didst make me hope when I was upon my mother's breasts. I was cast upon thee from the womb". He was the one who overthrew the Philistine.
J.T. Well, quite. It was Christ Himself; that is the idea. We begin with nothing outwardly big, but we call upon the Lord. Samuel was among those who called on the name of the Lord and He answered him in a most remarkable manner. It says: "And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines advanced to battle against Israel. And Jehovah thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines". It is very affecting.
{237}
J.R.S. Samuel brought in that from which Jehovah could not restrain Himself. It was such a presentation that it called forth His activities against the Philistines.
C.G. So that recovery follows not on the line of what is outwardly great or official, but on what was morally excellent. However small it may be, it is there.
J.T. And dependent -- a *sucking lamb*.
H.T. You would desire to see that condition of things among the saints -- something corresponding to the appreciation of Christ in this way?
J.T. That is what I had in mind in this proposal this afternoon. That we might see that Moses- distinction is that he was among God's priests -- not a great deliverer, but among the priests; that was what underlay his delivering power.
W.C. What do you think about the stone? Is that a kind of landmark for the saints?
J.T. "Eben-ezer", quite. "Hitherto hath the Lord helped us". That covers all that went before. The priest brings what went before into the present time.
E.R. That keeps you ever in dependence.
L.E. I would like to ask whether the apprehension of the Lord as presented in John would be entirely outside all mere mentality and be what is spiritual?
J.T. Quite.
W.C. That is the ark in the temple of Dagon. The ark brings down all the culture of man. The head and the hands of Dagon were cut off in the presence of the ark.
{238}
THE ASSEMBLY APPREHENDED AS THE BELIEVER LEAVES THE WORLD
@Exodus 12:1 - 8, 21 - 28
J.T. We see here the progress that has been made in people during the period recorded earlier in this book, and how the idea of the *assembly* had been reached. We have two words used, as those of us who have the New Translation will observe: one is 'assembly' in verse 3, then we have the words 'congregation' and 'assembly' in verse 6. The word 'assembly' (as the footnote indicates) suggests corporate responsibility, referred to in detail in verse 21, where Moses addresses the elders of Israel as representing the corporate whole; the word 'congregation' implies every person or head of a house in Israel. These two features then had been reached, and are developed in detail later in the book.
It is important to see that, in leaving Egypt, they had been reached, as meant in the antitype, that the constructive work of God is seen even before, the believer is formally out of the world; and then, further, that in the presence of the power of the world God constructs what is to supersede the world. In spite of the power of the world, typified in Pharaoh and the Egyptians, God had reached His thought in His people, so that they went out of Egypt in harness and with a high hand; not in a clandestine way, but "in the sight of all the Egyptians". Today there is opened up a path and power to support us in it. Although a remnant as accepting our corporate obligation, to maintain divine order, however severe the opposition, we shall be supported. Whilst plagues were occurring in Egypt, weakening it, bringing down its power, the constructive work of God was going on in the people, building them up in His principles, so that it is said: "Speak unto all the *assembly* of Israel", and then "the whole *congregation* of the *assembly* of Israel shall kill it between the two evenings",
{239}
verse 6. Already God had brought about in the very midst of Egypt that which should supersede Egypt; that is to say, the assembly in principle supersedes the world. This comes out in chapters 12,13, and 14: the effect of the work of God in His people during the process of the judgments on Egypt. There was there not only the power of God against the Egyptians, but His gracious work in His people seen in the order in which they left the house of bondage. They were being formed and detached morally from the system, and built up in power, so that they went out in military order; the testimony is they "went out with a high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians", (@Numbers 33:3). They went out also "with great substance". As converted to God and in the grace that comes to us in the power of the Spirit, we do not go out of the world in feebleness, but with strength and with substance. They passed through the Red Sea by faith, (@Hebrews 11:29).
H.H. It is very necessary for us to appreciate that side of things. We value the sheltering blood, but what we are as the work of God is likely to be overlooked. Is it in that way material is secured for church purposes?
J.T. That is the idea. All is ready, at least potentially -- it is all there. The latter part of the book shows, as I hope we may see later, how this wealth is classified as brought to Moses for the construction of the tabernacle; but it is all there potentially; that is to say, the young believer has in measure what is requisite for the house, however unintelligent he may be as to what has taken place in his soul. What underlies all this is the household; so that in the very opening of this book we have indicated what God has in His mind: "These are the names of the sons of Israel who had come into Egypt; with Jacob had they come, each with his household", chapter 1. They are thus regarded as "the sons of Israel", it is what is in the mind of God for them, the spiritual side, and it says they came out. Jacob was the
{240}
vessel of light and promise; everything centred in him, he could bless Pharaoh; and they all came with him as showing the principle of moving with the vessel in which the light is. Then, as coming with Jacob into Egypt, each had his own household; that is ever kept in view in all these chapters and is emphasised in the passover; it is a lamb for a house; that is to say, the house now is to have a constitution built up on the lamb, on Christ going into death. Every house in Israel had the same food, so that there is the unifying of the nation, the principle of unity built up on *food* which implied the judgment of God. That is what this chapter brings out.
H.H. I suppose you would say that, just as in (@Genesis 46), you have the names of those who went into Egypt, so the Lord would take account of His saints by name now, each one is an object of particular interest to Him. Is that your thought?
J.T. Quite so, that is in Egypt: Exodus takes account of them as sons of Israel, that indicates the dignity that they had in the mind of God; they had come in on that line -- "with Jacob had they come"; they came in in relation to him, but each as a son of Israel.
F.W.J. Is that the link between the two books?
J.T. I thought so. In the beginning of this book the Holy Spirit uses the expression "sons of Israel", it was a spiritual reference really, for Israel was the name he acquired; but they came in in relation to Jacob, Jacob being the responsible name, involving humiliation; but the light was there. What is suggested is that they came in relation to Jacob in his history of responsibility: whatever shame and humiliation there may have been in it, they came in with him.
F.W.J. Is the light of the testimony connected with Jacob?
J.T. That is exactly what I was thinking. He came in from Beer sheba, where God said to him: "I am
{241}
God, the God of thy father"; typically he comes into Egypt in the light of Christ risen, and he was not to be afraid to go down to Egypt. So he carries down all that light, and it is to be developed in "the sons of Israel"; so they came with Jacob, but each in relation to his house -- he had his own direct responsibility in his house.
Ques. How do you apply that today?
J.T. I think that the principle of the household necessarily underlies the truth of the house of God.
F.I. Do you mean that the truth of the household must be taken up before you can touch corporate responsibility?
J.T. Quite -- in those who have houses; even young people who are members of households should be right in their parents¬ houses before coming into fellowship.
F.I. So that the light you spoke of was to work out through the household.
J.T. That is right. So you find that Pharaoh attacked that principle at once in destroying the male children. The midwives saved the males: we have their names given, snowing how distinguished they were. God "made them houses". There you have clear indication of what God thinks of the preservation of the line: it is in a household connection and He gives them houses. Now, in the presence of that, we get Moses- parents: we do not get their names in chapter 2, but simply that they were his parents, they were Levites. "A man of the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi". God intends now to bring out the family in which the testimony is to be: it is to be in family, in Levi, and chapter 2 gives us the history of Moses; God intends to set out His thoughts in him He is forty years in the house of Pharaoh, but when he became great he declined to be regarded as the son of Pharaoh's daughter. So that he goes into Midian and sits by *the* well, as if he saw that God was not going to deliver His people by human efforts, evidenced in his slaying an
{242}
Egyptian. He slew one Egyptian and hid him in the sand. It would have taken him a long time to kill them all and hide them -- perhaps longer to hide them than to kill them. He had to learn that there was divine power here, a thing that worked by itself, and he sat by *it* that is how God was going to work; "not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit", (@Zechariah 4:6). That is what is to be displayed.
Then the daughters of Reuel come to water their father's flock and "the shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses rose and helped them". He helped these women, he did not slay any of the shepherds, he gave up that line; it is a question *of helping* people. And then it says he "consented to remain with the man", with Reuel; that is to say, he is resigned to the circumstances into which the government of God had brought him. He consented to dwell with the man. It was a very great change in his circumstances, from Egypt's palace to be a shepherd in Midian: but he "consented to remain with the man; and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter". Nevertheless he maintained the idea of a stranger, for when his son was born he gave him a name which indicated the idea of a sojourner. And after forty years he led the flock to Horeb, the mount of God -- and whose flock was it? Not his own. He is a type of the man God will use. He is unselfish, for he is occupied with his father in law's flock, without having anything for himself. It is a question of wages with Jacob, what he should acquire; whereas Moses evidently had no thought of that: he was looking after the flock of his father-in-law unselfishly. If I can do that, I can look after the flock of God unselfishly. "He led *the* flock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb": he could not have done better for it; and then God appeared to him in the bush, as if to say, 'I approved of all your course'. Moses turned aside to see, and God spoke to him out of
{243}
the bush. There you have the kind of man whom God uses. Then the brother, in Aaron, comes to meet him at the mount of God, and afterwards they together communicated the mind of God to His people, and the people worshipped. Then in chapter 6 you have the genealogy of Jacob's family till you come to Levi, then it stops. It is a question of the spiritual thought that is to underlie the house. You have Levi's posterity down to Eleazar and the birth of Phinehas in whom the priesthood is continued, for in (@Numbers 25: 13), after certain ones are slain by him in zeal for God, it says: "I give unto him ... the covenant of an everlasting priesthood". Now, all that is to be applied in principle to all Israel, that is, to all the saints.
Ques. What have you in your mind in referring to Levi?
J.T. That is the family in which the service of God is set out and in which the house, of God is ordered and maintained.
F.I. Do you mean to convey by that that the households and the families would be governed from the spiritual setting?
J.T. That is it: it should not be from the natural. If God takes up a family sovereignly, it is to convey a spiritual thought, and each Israelite was to understand that.
H.H. Then you have a lamb for a house, and it says: "The whole congregation of the assembly of Israel shall kill *it*".
J.T. So that it is one idea occupying all Israel. Thus all would be developed on the same food. They all ate the same food and drank the same drink.
Ques. Would you say a word on the passover in connection with what you are bringing before us?
J.T. The passover itself is the objective, side of the feast -- "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us"; it is a question of occupation objectively with Christ, that He
{244}
was slain; it is a whole Christ -- "a bone of him shall not be broken", (@John 19:36). The lamb was to be a yearling; it is not exactly the idea of a little lamb, it is a *yearling* lamb: the thought conveyed is full growth, only youthfulness and freshness. As in the house four days it would become very attractive, so that, as slain, it would draw out the tenderest feelings of the people. That is what the death of Christ is intended to effect in our hearts, it makes us tender and feeling.
H.H. Would you say that as the spiritual features are apprehended in the previous part of Exodus we should gain a spiritual apprehension of Christ in the passover?
J.T. That is what is intended. What had gone on up to this point was to make them very impressionable. If God is to have us for Himself we must be impressionable, and what could impress me more than Christ as typified in this lamb? What should appeal more affectingly to the heart than that a lamb kept in this way four days in the house should be killed and roast with fire? It should certainly draw out the tenderest features. It was the direct application of the fire. "Ye shall eat none of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roast with fire", verse 9. It is not only the slaying, but the *direct* action of the fire, the judgment of God, and they were to appropriate that. The corresponding figure is unleavened bread and bitter herbs, that is the subjective side of the feast, which would include self judgment; my acceptance of the fact that the judgment belonged to me and not to Him, for the death of the lamb was substitutional to save the first born in the house.
All this would underlie the assembly and the congregation: they would go out of Egypt leaving the flesh behind, as it were. God intended in the type the setting aside of the flesh, and all these precautions were to prevent it going over, so that the Red Sea would be the limit of all flesh's energy in the people; in the wilderness they should be wholly for God -- "I have
{245}
brought you to myself". He proposes wonderful things to them at mount Horeb! All these instructions are that the young believer should see that the flesh is not to be carried over: power is given to check it. Alas, it does go over, and all the discipline of the wilderness is needed to break its power in us.
F.I. Then the passover itself is an objective thought, but the unleavened bread and bitter herbs is subjective -- the appreciation of the objective?
J.T. That is it, so that there is no measure given for unleavened bread; it is for you to see to it that there enough. It is not likely there would be too much! But the lamb was to be in accord with their eating capacity.
E.R. That would be in the love of Christ going under the judgment of God for us.
J.T. That is it. I have a whole Christ before me; not simply an idea. Christianity is not inaugurated as a matter of light or doctrine simply: you have substance, you have a whole Person. John says: "That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled", (@1 John 1:1) a whole Person regarded in that way, and God would have us brought into accord with Him hence the kind of food provided.
Rem. In (@Isaiah 4) it says: "Seven women snail take hold of one man" -- that gives the idea.
J.T. Paul says: "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ", (@2 Corinthians 11:2). From the very initial presentation of the gospel to the believer, that is the thought; it is the presentation of a Person. Christianity is not merely a system of doctrine; it centres in a Person; you have from the very outset a Person -- "not a bone of him shall be broken". It is not simply one phase of Christ, you want the whole Person; that is what God impresses you with from the very outset.
{246}
H.H. "Why hast thou forsaken *me*?" -- "Why persecutest thou me" -- the whole of Christ is suggested. It so emphasises the death of Christ and the claim God has put forward for us in righteousness and love. If God has paid such a price we surely are to be for Him.
J.T. That is the thing. And He says to the thief: "Today shalt thou be with *me* in paradise" -- you have a Person. So it is "the gospel of God ... concerning his son", @Romans 1.
F.W.J. When this great foundation is laid in the passover, is not the other side the end of the great world power?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The pouring out of the judgment in the ten plagues was intended to bring down, to weaken, Egypt; but in the process there was light for Israel, they were being formed at the same time. In the first-born of Egypt being slain the whole principle of Egypt is ended. Then at the Red Sea they are all destroyed -- the whole world power. But the most important thing in these chapters is to see what is to replace Egypt. Well, the lamb is the idea; I am built up in that. What is to take the place of the world is the assembly, the members of which are after Christ, they are like Christ. A world composed of persons who are like Christ is what God has in His mind, and it is worked out here in the most skilful manner. They go out eating the lamb and the unleavened bread, and they go out with great substance, which for us would be spiritual substance, and they go out in military array, with a high hand, and in the sight of all Egypt. That is to say, it is the power of God openly setting inside the world, and setting up something that will be for the pleasure of God to take its place. Hence the assembly today is in principle the world to come. The present world is to be superseded by what is for the pleasure of God. We know, alas! how we carry the flesh over, but these chapters indicate what is in the mind of God for
{247}
us: and so in Corinthians, which epistle deals with the order of God in the assembly, we are enjoined, in chapter 10, not to lust or to tempt the Lord as Israel did. All the ends of the dispensations have come to us, the apostle says, and these things are written for our examples, that we should not be strewed in the wilderness. What a solemn thing that the carcases of these people, who started so well, should fall in the wilderness.
Ques. Was that through not keeping this feast?
J.T. Exactly. If it had been kept in the true sense they would have gone into Canaan whole. What you see here is God graciously helping His people. It was not accidental that they had to go out in haste, it was God helping them, so that they could not put the leaven into their dough. God helps us that we should not have the leaven with us -- He helps us circumstantially. And so later the bitter waters were intended to help them.
Ques. Does 1 Peter correspond -- The precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb: then the abiding word of God: and then the laying aside in view of the spiritual house?
J.T. Yes, you get the same line of things in Peter, so that the believer, as a new born babe, is to "desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word", that by it he may grow up to salvation as having tasted that the Lord is gracious. "To whom coming, a living stone ... yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up", (@1 Peter 2:1,2) -- it is the same thing.
Now you see in this second section we read how beautifully Moses delivers his message. The first twenty verses are God's instructions to Moses, then we have the manner of Moses- delivery of his message. "Moses called all the elders of Israel, and said to them, Seize and take yourselves lambs for your families, and kill the passover". Then: "It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah", verse 27. The manner of his delivery of the message is specially noticeable -- it is a word for all
{248}
who serve, the mind of God is conveyed to His people -- the effect being that *they worshipped*.
Ques. According to verse 3 all the congregation of Israel were spoken to, but when Moses delivers his message, it appears to have been to the elders: is there any thought in that?
J.T. The word in verse 3 is 'assembly' (New Translation). Then Moses called the elders; they would be responsible, they were those who were summoned by Moses as representative of the corporate whole. It seems to me a fine tribute to the work of God already in Israel that the word 'assembly' is used at this particular juncture. There was already there the recognition of eldership and subjection.
H.H. It shows what a place Moses had with them. I suppose the place the Lord has with us would come in there, would it not?
J.T. I thought that. What a work had gone on in the people! So that now you expect from the young convert that he has in principle all the elements, so far as his measure goes, needed for the assembly.
Rem. In chapter 11 it says: "The man Moses was very great". In the antitype the world has been brought down and Christ has become great.
J.T. Quite. So it says at the end of verse 31 of chapter 14 that "the people feared Jehovah, and believed in Jehovah, and in Moses his bondman". It is true a believer has to be taught as he comes into the assembly, and regulated, but he should at least have these elements if he is truly converted to God, if he has received the gospel aright: there is the recognition of eldership, the recognition of authority and of responsibility -- that he has responsibility as a member of the congregation. As we have seen, the two words are used in verse 6. The word 'assembly' involves a corporate whole with moral responsibility: the young believer recognises such a thing as that. And that he is a member of the congregation,
{249}
so to speak; that is, he is one amongst many, but he has his own responsibility.
Ques. Is that idea conveyed to us in the beginning of the Acts: the thought of the assembly and the households, and then the thought of the elders?
J.T. Well, I suppose so. You see in (@Acts 2:41), how the converts were added -- there were three thousand added. It does not say who added them or to whom they were added, but they were added; and then their subsequent conduct showed they were qualified -- "they continued steadfastly in the apostles- doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers". Then it is said, they were constantly in the temple, breaking bread in the house. They also thought of one another's need; love was prevalent, unselfish consideration for others. The Lord, as it were, comes in now and says: 'I am not ashamed to add to you'. That is how it worked out. There is great weakness today because young people in coming in have not got the understanding of the assembly as a moral whole; however few may be in the thing the principle is there, for the word 'assembly' here is not necessarily *every* Israelite, but a representative idea of the whole: and if one does not come into fellowship in the recognition of that he is sure to be an element of weakness. Then, secondly, he is a member of the congregation; he is one of the whole and he has his own responsibility. He was to have the lamb in his house. It would be inconceivable that any Israelite on that night should be without the lamb; but it should be equally inconceivable now that any true believer should be without Christ apprehended in this way in his soul in relation to others.
Ques. What would you say as to sharing the lamb between two houses?
J.T. Well, I think the neighbourly thought is very much emphasised. You will observe it is not simply 'the neighbour', but the "neighbour *next*, unto his
{250}
house": there are graded neighbourhoods, some more distant than others. The neighbour next to you presents the thing in its strongest features, and I think this is to promote love. Whatever feelings might have existed between the two neighbours must necessarily be surrendered in the presence of this. They were not to divide it: "a bone of him shall not be broken" -- it is one Christ. "Is Christ divided?" says the apostle. All the divisions in Christendom are a denial of this thought.
H.H. This would be very testing if he was not getting on very well with his neighbour, and that is the moral test for us now.
J.T. If honest, he would see how sad it was that there should be any feeling between himself and his neighbour, for they had to share the passover.
Ques. Does the idea of the hyssop come from Moses himself?
J.T. Apparently. I think it would be a tribute to the sense he had of his own littleness; although the greatest man in Israel, he had a very small sense of himself. Do you not think to propose a thing like that, which had not been mentioned before, would be a tribute to a man's spirituality? "By faith he kept the passover" -- it is not said that anyone else had faith. *They* passed the Red Sea by faith; but *he* kept the passover by faith, as though he was in keeping with it.
Rem. In passing it on to the elders, I thought he might suggest such a thought to those who were capable of understanding it.
J.T. Quite. I believe the divine intention is that those through whom the light comes should themselves exemplify what they present. If they do not, though they may speak right words, they cannot convey the idea. The Lord said: 'I am altogether that which I say'. Before Solomon's temple there were two pillars, Jachin and Boaz; every one could see them as he approached the temple. In one book their height is given severally,
{251}
and in the other the total height of the two: showing that you can take account of them severally or in entirety; but whether it is one or the other, it is what God has in His mind to bring us into. So in Christ Himself or (in measure) in the apostles, what they spoke of they were themselves, so that the believer can receive the idea concretely in order that he should answer to it. Alongside these pillars there were the means by which God could bring people into accord with them -- the altar, sea, and so on….. that God employs to bring the believer into accord with Christ. So I think Moses, in the beautiful manner in which he delivers his message, conveys to the elders the truth of it, and they bow and worship. There must have been real power in his words to convict them, so that they worshipped God. I do not know any better tribute to ministry than that it produces in the saints a spirit of worship; not causing fleshly excitement, but bowing the believer in the presence of God.
{252}
MATERIAL FOR THE ASSEMBLY
@Exodus 35:20 - 35
J.T. We have dealt with chapter 12 particularly as presenting the use of the word 'assembly', thus indicating that the Israelites, in the presence of the judgments of God, as depicted in the plagues, had been formed by what transpired before them; so that the idea of the assembly had been reached even before they had left Egypt. In leaving Egypt they went out in order, and, typically at least, in accord with the mind of God, having partaken of the passover and the feast of unleavened bread. They went out in rank, as it is said, with a high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians, (@Numbers 33:3), and moreover, they went out with substance. God had earlier said to Abraham that they should be afflicted in a foreign land four hundred years, and that then He would bring them out with great substance, (@Genesis 15:13 - 14). So that they went out furnished with what was needed for the house of God and they went out in a dignified way. They were superior to the world in dignity and power. They were intended to supersede Egypt: indeed, it is said that Egypt was destroyed in its first born, but Israel was preserved under shelter of the blood of Christ, typically, and in the eating of the lamb.
The remaining chapters in Exodus, after chapter 15, work out all these things, and I thought we might see in this chapter the response to God, not only in regard to what He had done for them in Egypt and in taking them out of it, but in what He was in the covenant. Chapter 34 gives the renewal of the covenant. "... The two tables of testimony were in Moses¬ hand, when he came down from the mountain ... . Moses knew not that the skin of his face shone through his talking with him", verse 29. There was *shining* there, indicating what God is in His covenant, in His love to us, which is expressed in
{253}
the new covenant. Then in this chapter we read, verse 1: "Moses collected all the assembly of the children of Israel, and said to them. These are the things which Jehovah has commanded, to do them ... . Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your dwellings upon the sabbath day". We have the assembly again addressed here, but addressed now in the light of the shining in Moses- face.
Ques. In Ezekiel it says: He passed by and it was the time of love, chapter 16 verse 8. Is that the thought here?
J.T. That is Jerusalem, but this corresponds. It was the time in which love in God came out, and I think this chapter shows that love was active in Israel, for it was a question of their *hearts*, verse 21. I think we may see here that there is ample response. The people had passed through much, and their break down only served as an occasion for God to shine out in His love, through the mediator, because Moses acts typically as the mediator of the new covenant: his face shone, he was affected himself by what he saw on the mount. In Christ it was altogether that, it was Himself -- "the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord", and the glory of God shines in His face and we behold it without a veil. It is in the light of that, that the heart is prompted. But it is well to notice that the first great feature in the chapter is the sabbath.
H.H. What is your thought as to that?
J.T. I think there is a great deal of activity in service and professed response to God which ignores the sabbath; ignores the necessity for that restfulness first in the apprehension of what God has found in Christ. The shining of Moses- face was what *God is* in Christ, the glory of God shining there; but the sabbath is rather what God *has* in Christ. We have the distinction between what God *is* in Christ and what He *has* in Christ. In apprehending what He has in Christ we rest; we need to understand how to sit down and rest, not even to kindle a fire. You see how things are
{254}
done. Moses sat by the well earlier, but in resting in the presence of the shining, that is to say, what God is in Christ and then what God has in Christ, there is a peculiar change, there is transformation, and there is no effort in that.
H.H. Would that fit in with (@2 Corinthians 3): "We all ... beholding ... are changed"?
J.T. Exactly, "... into the same image"; then you become like Christ and like one another. You must have a different people from those that danced round the golden calf, and that comes out, I think, after chapter 33. The Levites took sides with Moses in executing God's judgment, then Moses going up, all the goodness of God passes before him -- it is only a foreshadowing really of what is in Christ -- so that he comes down shining. That is what God is in Moses, so to speak, what He *is* in Christ. Then the sabbath is what God has in Christ. We are brought into accord with what was His in Christ: that is, we come in for God's pleasure.
H.H. In (@Matthew 11) the point is rest: the Lord Jesus is it.
J.T. Yes; and then in the beginning of (@Matthew 12) the Lord goes through the cornfields and the disciples learn from Him, and thus the legal sabbath is superseded there. He goes through the cornfields, and the disciples not only went through, but they plucked the ears of corn; they took up the liberty that He brought them into. His movement was liberating, and that is pleasing to God -- the liberty wherewith Christ has set us free. You begin to see what kind of Man is before God, and you become like Him. He is not a legal man. He is a Man of liberty. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty"; I am brought into that.
Ques. Do we get that in a special way as the result of the Supper; what God is as seen in the cup, and the rest following on that?
J.T. What God has in Christ is in the loaf -- He did
{255}
the will of God; and what God is in Christ is in the cup. As soon as you see what God has in Christ, you say, 'I can rest there'.
Ques. What is suggested in kindling no fire in their dwellings?
J.T. I think it is to emphasise that there is nothing of that kind needed, all is there; and that brings in a certain restfulness in me, and my existence does not depend on movement and activity. I am afraid that many of us live in activity. Activity often arises from need; but in Christ as the sabbath I have reached everything. I can "sit down". The people were to keep their sabbaths, and the land was also to keep its sabbaths. Spiritually the latter depends on the former. The idea is that I am free from labour; God rested on the sabbath and was refreshed. You sit down to rest in Christ, then you will find refreshment: God Himself found it there.
F.W.J. (@Matthew 11) would give God and man the sabbath.
J.T. I thought so. Man, according to God, is there seen -- "I thank thee, O Father". It is Man in the presence of the Father, a Man speaking to His Father 'at that time' -- when things were all against Him; when, if things depended on effort, it was the time to make effort, but He did not make any effort. Things had gone against Him outwardly, but He said: "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth ... Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy sight". Then "All things are delivered unto me of my Father ..." There is a Man there in the presence of the Father, perfectly restful, and God is restful in Him. Hence He says: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me"; it is from a Model. See how He is in the presence of God -- "For I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light". Then He walks through the cornfields on the
{256}
sabbath, meaning that the literal legal sabbath was abrogated on account of their state. *He* was replacing it; the pleasure of God was there. He was moving through the cornfields and that was pleasing to God; it was very displeasing to the Pharisees; but the disciples entered into that liberty and they plucked the ears of corn and ate them, and the Lord vindicated it. I mention that because of the place it has here -- the sabbath of rest to Jehovah. There is to be no sense of need or of energy or pressure; it is a wonderful point to reach spiritually.
H.H. Christ must be the key to everything in the way of service.
J.T. And Moses spoke to all the assembly of the children of Israel, and said to them. These are the things which Jehovah has commanded, to do them. Then it says: "And all the assembly of the children of Israel departed from before Moses. And they came, every one whose heart moved him, and every one whose spirit prompted him ..." verse 20. I thought we might see in that the principle of trustworthiness; that their hearts came under the influence of the love of God and the sabbath. They acted apart from Moses, having departed from Moses -- they acted with integrity.
Ques. That would suggest they had been in the shining of God in Moses. Does that refer to the shining of God in Christ?
J.T. Yes; and, instead of making the golden calf, they now act in accord with the prompting of their hearts in the light of the covenant.
Ques. Do you mean the material they brought out of Egypt is now to be used?
J.T. Yes; they were prompted inwardly, pointing to the love of God in our hearts. Moses had indicated the mind of God. They had come out with substance, and now they depart from Moses, and their hearts are not deceptive, they are not acting as a deceitful bow.
{257}
Before, the absence of Moses had led to idolatry; now it says: "They came, every one whose heart moved him, and every one whose spirit prompted him; they brought Jehovah's heave offering for the work of the tent of meeting, and for all its service, and for the holy garments" verse 21. You can see how they were governed now by right motives. The question arises as to how trustworthy we are -- and what we do as departing from before Moses.
Ques. Does trustworthiness depend on the movement of the heart and the spirit being in accord?
J.T. It does. The spirit is that part of us which refers more directly to God, it is that which we are all said to have received from God. The heart is more the seat of intelligence, hence Ephesians speaks of "the eyes of your heart". In my spirit I am directly in touch with God. Both the heart and spirit are affected here. I think we can see that the spirit is wholly secured now for God. The apostle says: "Your whole spirit, soul *and body*" (@1 Thessalonians 5:23).
Ques. Would the giving in 2 Corinthians be on this line? You referred to chapter 3 of that epistle. In chapter 8 giving.
J.T. Yes, I was thinking of the order in 2 Corinthians. We come under the ministry of the new covenant, which is the love of God, in chapter 3, what Godwin Christ in the ministry of the new covenant; then what God has in Christ and in all those who are reconciled, which would imply the sabbath (chapters 4 and 5). Then you have the giving developed in chapters 8 and 9.
H.H. I suppose it is a very important day for the saint when he realises that he can make a living contribution?
J.T. Well, it is. I was thinking, in connection with what we had this morning, that a young believer has these things in principle; indeed, it should be a challenge as to fellowship whether the believer, as coming out of
{258}
the world, has acquired wealth, for it is a divine principle that you come out with wealth; you do not expect to get it all in that to which you come. Israel came out with wealth, as we have seen.
Ques. What does that refer to?
J.T. I think it refers to what came out from the time of the gathering of the people together in chapter 4; Moses and Aaron delivering their message to them from Jehovah, it says: "then they bowed their heads and worshipped". They accepted the message in that way, chapter 4: 29 - 31. That is when they began to take things to heart and appreciate them. Then, in chapter 12: 27, it says after Moses delivered the message: "The people bowed their heads and worshipped. And the children of Israel went away, and did as Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron; so did they". Now they are acting in obedience. I think that between those two periods they had acquired wealth. As you receive the gospel, the divine message, feelingly -- and we have many illustrations in the New Testament of it -- you begin to acquire spiritual wealth. You might not be able to classify it, but we have the classification here.
F.W.J. Moses is now mediator, is he not?
J.T. Yes; he is definitely the mediator now, chapter 34. The difference in him in this second coming down from the first is noticeable. His face is now shining; he has seen much more than he did on his first ascent.
Ques. Does the introduction of the ark make any difference?
J.T. I think so. There was a guarantee, that the law would be kept now. There is no need to break the tables now, for the will of God is secured in Christ.
F.W.J. Would not the carrying out of all this suppose the indwelling of the Spirit?
J.T. It does, answering to (@Romans 5), and (@2 Corinthians 3 - 9), as we have seen.
{259}
Rem. Is some kind of energy supposed here? I was thinking of the words 'heave offering' used several times.
J.T. Yes, there is energy now. It is the heaving up of the affections as in this wonderful setting, the shining of Moses- face and the sabbath. How much enters into that to affect our hearts! We have the light of what God can be in a breakdown, how He has met the breakdown. There had not as yet been a breakdown in Israel, as they ate the passover. The passover lamb was intended to affect them, as it did, doubtless; it was intended to effect unity, as appealing to their hearts. It is most touching! But what intervenes before the event we are considering now, is the breakdown of Israel in chapter 32 and how God met that. In the second giving of the law God made His goodness to pass before Moses. He also says: "I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy". Moses¬ face shines. Typically, we are there in @2 Corinthians 3 and 4 -- the shining of the glory in the face of Christ.
H.H. Do you think that in the breakdown the people learnt how much Moses loved them? Moses goes up the mountain with the thought of making some kind of atonement or reconciliation; it showed the love he had in his heart for the people, he was ready to be blotted out on their account. I wondered whether in a crisis we do not get the opportunity of learning the love of Christ in a way we have not known it before.
J.T. That is very interesting. Moses rises in moral greatness in the way he met this crisis. He told God he would be blotted out from His book rather than that God's people should be destroyed. As coming down to the camp he stood for God. He took the tabernacle and pitched it outside the camp, and Jehovah came down and spoke with him face to face as a man speaks with his friend. So he is honoured, and he would become more
{260}
to the people than he had ever been before. But then God became more to the people in that He could come in thus and shine through the mediator upon them. They were not able to bear the shining, but the shining was there.
F.W.J. Is all this introduced in view of eternal conditions?
J.T. Well, it should be material for the tabernacle, and the tabernacle really is a suggestion of eternal relationships: "The tabernacle of God is with men" -- it was a figure, a representation of things in the heavens. So that, if the believer rightly apprehended the gospel, he would be wealthy; he has got something to present. (@Romans 12) shows that you begin with your body; but there is also what we are spiritually.
Ques. Do you mean that the light of God shining out becomes material in our souls?
J.T. Yes, exactly. It is very remarkable that it was announced to Abraham that they should come out with great substance; and in Exodus the first mention of that is that "every woman shall ask of her neighbour, and of her that is the inmate of her house, utensils of silver, and utensils of gold, and clothing; and ye shall put them on your sons and on your daughters, and shall spoil the Egyptians", chapter 3: 22. The sons and daughters of Israel therefore were to carry this out. Then in chapter 12: 37 there is nothing said about women, only the men and the children are mentioned: but the women are the first to be mentioned as supplying the wealth.
Ques. Is the thought of wealth here the same as in (@Romans 15: 14): "I am persuaded, my brethren ... that yourselves also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another"?
J.T. Quite. Whatever a believer has acquired of the j knowledge of God in Christ through his exercises in self-! judgment is wealth.
Ques. Is not that alluded to in (@Psalm 105: 37), "He
{261}
brought them forth with silver and gold ..." in all the value of redemption and clothed with divine righteousness?
J.T. Quite. All these things are very practical. One would hope that younger believers would take hold of them. We are taken account of as one assembly, that is to say, a moral, corporate, responsible thing; and then, each is a member of the congregation, that is, one of the persons involved, and so he has responsibilities. That is what God would impress upon us, that we are under obligation severally and collectively.
Ques. Would that fit in with (@2 Corinthians 6): "We then, as workers together ..."?
J.T. Exactly. In that chapter the apostle mentioned about thirty-seven things that marked himself as a minister of Christ, and then says: "Our mouth is opened to you, Corinthians, our heart is expanded. Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your affections". That is, they were not contributing much. They had been endowed from the divine side in a most marked measure, for God would never set up the assembly without endowing it from His side with all that was necessary; but they had not taken things up, and they were shut up in their affections, they were worldly; so that he appeals to them to be enlarged, and not to be unequally yoked with unbelievers; for you can get nothing from such a yoke as that no material for the tabernacle.
I think that the women originally acquiring the wealth refers to what goes on subjectively. There is a sort of indefinable exercise with the believer normally, by which he takes on wealth. It is a figure, of course; you cannot make it fit in every detail, but there is the general thought of taking wealth out of Egypt, and spoiling the Egyptians, of whatever the world may lean upon to support itself. The world does take on things that are of God; but you take them from it. You may
{262}
take them up in such a way that they become real, and your reality exposes what the world is -- a mere hollow profession -- and they lose them in that sense.
You can bring the thought of being sons and daughters of Jehovah Almighty into every relationship of life. The saints have their reading of the Scripture and prayers in the morning -- all is sanctified by the word of God and by freely addressing Him, (@1 Timothy 4:5). We give thanks to God for everything. They belong to us only by right as we accept them from God, and give thanks for them. There are things the world takes on which do not belong to them.
H.H. In the world to come everything will be publicly His. "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof", (@Psalm 24:1).
J.T. We belong really to those who give thanks, though the Lord makes His sun to rise on evil and good, and the rain to come down on all. There are also things which take on spiritual names, and customs that belong only to the people of God, which the world has assumed in the way of profession. If I take up any of those things and exemplify them in the power of the Spirit of God, I rob the world of them really. If we take the things up in reality ourselves in the power of the Spirit of God, we obviously expose the sham; for there is nothing that answers to God save by the Spirit of God.
Rem. "The meek shall inherit the earth", (@Psalm 37:11).
J.T. Yes. I do not think the world should be allowed to keep anything that belongs to God. Of course. God has His sovereign right to send rain on the just and on the unjust; but then there are things that do not belong to the world and which they only have by favour of the Christians. As Christians take these things up, the world's possession of them is obviously a sham: they cannot exemplify them at all. So in Revelation, the break up of Babylon and the exposure of the world system, proves that they do not belong to God at all. If
{263}
I am in any system, the only thing I can do is to take out of it all that I possibly can.
Ques. What are we to understand by this cutting of the stones, verse 33?
J.T. We have first the things in verse 22, both men and women brought them -- "nose rings, and ear rings, and rings, and bracelets, all kinds of utensils of gold". There, I think, the people had the things, and a man is accepted according to what he has. Then "all they that offered a heave offering of silver and copper brought Jehovah's heave offering. And every one with whom was found acacia wood for all manner of work of the service, brought it. And every woman that was wise-hearted spun with her hands". Now you have another thing there, you have wisdom added -- "Every woman that was wise hearted spun with her hands, and brought what she had spun", verse 25. I think you have what God would provide anticipated. You see the fulness of this in the man that God called by name, "Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah", verse 30. The thing was there in the wise hearted, that is, the principle with God is, that the thing is there before you get the name; so that it says of him that "Jehovah has called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, and he has filled him with the spirit of God". The thing was there, but now God would take that up from His own side to provide a means and an assurance to His people, that what they had brought would be carefully taken care of. This is from the divine side. But before you get that, you get the wise hearted women.
Ques. We have to distinguish between bringing the material and what is wrought out when it is brought?
J.T. Yes; I think what Bezaleel means is that God assures His people, it is a sort of honour given to them, that He is now seeing to it that their offerings are cared for properly and will shine according to their value. So
{264}
it says: "See, Jehovah has called by name Bezaleel" -- Jehovah has done it; but the thing was already there -- in the wise hearted women.
Rem. The blue and the purple is brought by the men, but the spinning is done by the women.
J.T. Well, I suppose we have to learn what the references are spiritually. "Every man with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and byssus, and goats- hair, and rams- skins dyed red ..." and then "spice, and the oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the incense of fragrant drugs". I suppose that the allusion is to certain spiritual status. The thought of the man has its own significance spiritually, and so has the thought of the woman; and then "the principal men" are persons of spiritual development; they bring the most precious things, the precious stones. You can see how wonderfully graded the thing is and in what detail, and how God takes account of all that is brought and assures us that the very best care will be taken of it. He has called by name this remarkable man and then another man to help him. So that every believer may be assured that, however little or much he brings, it is in excellent hands; God will make the most of it.
Ques. Does the thought of the households underlie this?
J.T. I think it does. It begins in (@Genesis 15) where God says they shall "come out with great substance"; then with the women in chapter 1; then in chapter 11 you have a further reference to it: God gave them favour so that they demanded of the Egyptians and they gave them things.
Ques. Would it suggest that every believer has something to bring?
J.T. Well, if he is truly a believer.
Rem. The wealth of God returns to Him in a new, very acceptable way.
{265}
J.T. I think it is very fine to see that, as coming into fellowship, whatever little I have. God will assure me that the very best care will be taken of it. "See", Moses says, "Jehovah has called by name Bezaleel, the son of Uri" -- Jehovah has done that.
Ques. Do you see the sovereignty of God in choosing these two men, one of the tribe of Judah and the other of the tribe of Dan?
J.T. Yes. We might introduce the book of Proverbs now. In those two men operating you will see foreshadowed "the all various wisdom of God"; as of old, wisdom operated in the forming of the universe -- "I was there", she says. You begin to contemplate the thing. As we bring all this into the New Testament, angels, heavenly principalities and powers see in the assembly "the all-various wisdom of God", (@Ephesians 3:10). It is well worth my while to bring my little quota, for this is what is being done with it. If someone were to tell me I had put a little bit into Venus or Jupiter or the moon, I should be very interested -- but it is a far greater thing that I have put a little bit into the assembly, and that God in His all various wisdom has put that where it shines best. Moses tells the children of Israel that God had called by name Bezaleel and He had endowed him with wisdom and that, therefore, he will do everything properly. In the next chapter we read: "Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every man that was wise-hearted, in whom Jehovah had put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work of the service of the sanctuary -- according to all that Jehovah had commanded". So that in the end of chapter 39 all this is brought to Moses and "he saw all the work, and behold, they had done it as Jehovah had commanded -- so had they done; and Moses blessed them", verse 43. The thing is done.
Rem. And it is all in view of God dwelling amongst them.
{266}
J.T. Quite. So it is really a greater thing than the physical universe. In (@Proverbs 8) you have this spoken of by Wisdom, but in chapter 9 "Wisdom hath builded *her house*".
Ques. Would that encourage our hearts to obedience and restfulness so that the service might be carried on?
J.T. I think, as the heave offering is brought, the *heart* being in action, that wisdom will come in. 1 Corinthians is to bring in that element at Corinth; it was wanting there; they were relying on human wisdom and the apostle sought to bring in the wisdom of God.
H.H. In (@Proverbs 8) you see the wisdom with which the earth itself was formed, the things that were put into it in divine wisdom; so God has put things in the church, and each suitable contribution is a pleasure to Him. God has put things in the material universe, and also in that which is to occupy the greatest place in relation to it in time to come. We need to appreciate this.
J.T. It is wonderful how God has foreseen the need of man in the earth; everything he requires is set there. The more you look at them the more you are impressed with the wisdom of God in everything. The church is to be the home of divine wisdom, in it are to be found all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And to think that I, tiny speck as I am, should be able to contribute to that And that God assures me that what little I contribute He will put in the position where it will shine best!
H.H. Even the *desire* to do anything must come from God.
J.T. Quite so; but what He loves is not so much the getting of it into you, but your response, if your heart and your spirit prompts you -- it is spontaneity in the believer; and then the skill that operates in the spinning the blue, purple, scarlet and byssus; these the *men* had, The skill is not seen in them, the skill is in the women -- the subjective idea.
{267}
S.P.P. Does the first suggest raw material and the other working things out?
J.T. That is very good: the raw material in the man and the spinning in the woman.
S.P.P. There are two references made to the heave offering and then there is a reference to the wave offering, and that refers to the gold.
J.T. I think the heave offering speaks of spontaneity in the believer, that is to say, the result of love by the Spirit; there can be no spontaneity apart from the Spirit. The key to that is Moses sitting by the well. There is that which operates of itself. A well springs up, it conveys the idea of life -- living waters, and Moses sat by it. That underlies the idea of the heave offering, that the heart heaves up to God. The wave offering is, I think, that the thing is presented steadily before the eye of God; He is delighted to see it.
Rem. The Spirit of Christ in the believer is the Spirit of wisdom.
J.T. Quite. In the early part of 1 Corinthians you have stress laid on the need for this sort of thing, what is seen in the women: "hidden wisdom", we should have that. But in chapter 12 we see how all come under the one God and one Spirit and one Lord -- the administration of divine Persons; so we may say that whatever there is in the assembly, comes under Their hands and is utilised. It says: "God has set certain in the assembly" -- He set the gifts there.
Ques. Are the features of these two men, Bezaleel and Aholiab, seen in Paul? He says: "As a wise master builder, I have laid the foundation", and he wanted the Corinthians to be moved by that same wisdom.
J.T. Precisely. (@1 Corinthians 12) is very instructive in that way, for it brings in the body as the vessel for the expression of Christ: and then it brings in the gifts. The word is changed from the 'body' to the 'assembly', for the gifts set in the assembly bring out the wisdom of God,
{268}
how wisely they have been placed; He has "set certain" -- set them there.
Ques. What is the thought in verse 34, in Bezaleel teaching?
J.T. Well, I suppose we can see how that principle goes on: we recognise the Spirit in those whom He uses. So that in the next chapter you have, not only these two men, but "every man that was wise-hearted, in whose heart God had put wisdom". It is available, therefore, for everybody, the principle of spiritual teaching is there.
Ques. Do you think that those who do every kind of work stand in contrast to those who do artistic work?
J.T. The latter is very fine -- "Devise artistic work", verse 32 -- perhaps not much known among us -- these fine touches, this fine art work. We have in (@Psalm 45) "wrought needlework". Needlework is particularly interesting.
M.D'C. So the treasures of Egypt have to give place to the treasures of the church. We come to it that there is nothing in Egypt, but everything in Christ.
J.T. I think it is well to see that when the church is taken out of the world literally, there is nothing left but an empty shell. Babylon appears to be clothed with certain things, but they are all tinsel. {269}
DIVINE LEADING
@Acts 12: 6 -12; @Luke 24: 50,51; @Romans 8:14
I am thinking of *divine leading*, wishing to group the subject under three heads, indicated in these scriptures: angelic leading; the leading of the Lord; and the leading of the Spirit. Leading has ever marked God's dealings with His people, particularly as taking them out of the world, out of Egypt. It was not only that He led them out of the land of Egypt, that was the delivering side of His service. He intended to lead them through the wilderness; He would show how He would lead them through not withstanding all the vicissitudes and variety of wilderness conditions. And then He would lead them into the land: there was the leading out, when He "took them by the hand", (@Jeremiah 31:32), and then there was the leading in, which was by attraction -- by the ark. Between these two there was the leading connected with the tabernacle. God would show in that what He was to the people in those extraordinary circumstances; the book of Numbers impresses us with the fact that they were guided by the cloud on the tabernacle; whether it abode for a day or a month or a year, they remained until it moved. But then, God says later that He sent before them Moses and Aaron and Miriam, (@Micah 6:4); that brings the idea down to persons, each of whom had a history, and each of whom was known to Israel; they were not strangers. They were sent before the people, which is the true idea of leading. A leader goes before, hence He sent *before* them Moses and Aaron and Miriam; there was in that leadership thus divine authority in Moses, purity and priestly feeling in Aaron, and a prophetic influence, and withal musical, in Miriam. So that there was a combination in the three calculated to induce following, they were worthy leaders. But they were but types of what *we* have; we have all these features, only in a greatly accentuated way, in Christ who
{270}
is marked by them in the fullest possible manner; especially in the feelings of affection and in musical attractiveness, music being intended to draw out our best feelings so that we are drawn along. The idea, therefore, was that He sent these three before, they were *before*, they could be seen. There was divine leading in known persons.
Now I wish to gather up what I have to say, first under the head of angelic service; and I have taken Peter in these circumstances in (@Acts 12) as illustrative of the *limiting of divine ministry* in the history of the church. What has marked the history of the church in that way is the limiting or hindering of spiritual ministry. This incident occurred during "the days of unleavened bread", showing that the very worst action against God and against His ministers may take place at the time of legal religious observances. How far away Herod and the leaders in Jerusalem were from the true idea of the feast of unleavened bread! It was at that time that Herod laid hands on James, the brother of John, and slew him, and seeing that it pleased the Jews, that is to say, the murder of God's servant pleased them, he proceeded further to take Peter also. All this is a striking illustration of the conditions that prevail today, dear brethren -- the outward observance of things with divine names without the least correspondence to them in those who observe them. And then he proceeded to take Peter, and imprisoned him, hoping to bring him forth. Peter was asleep "between two soldiers, bound with two chains". I refer to him, as I said, as illustrative of the restriction of the ministry, and how God worked angelically to release it, so that we have free ministry now -- thank God! One of the greatest things that God has recovered for us is the free ministry of the Spirit. Peter was asleep in the prison. I do not refer to him in any disparaging way at all; I am simply using the circumstance to illustrate what came about in the history of the assembly. Ministry had
{271}
to come through certain channels and this virtually implied the complete quenching of true spiritual ministry. So that God resorted to angelic service to release the ministry. One wrote -- as many of you know -- a remarkable paper entitled, "The Notion of a Clergyman, Dispensationally the sin against the Holy Ghost". Not that any *individual* was guilty of that sin, that was not the point, but that there was such a thing, a definite prolonged action against the Spirit, finally limiting the ministry; and God began to intervene angelically, that is to say, by providential happenings. I am speaking of what is known to many of us, not to be historical, but just to name certain facts from which we are all benefiting now. God intervened through providential means which would take a long time to record, but in one way and another, during the period of more than a century, certain happenings broke down the carriers that were raised up against the ministry of the Spirit of God, and men began to speak freely. Many of them were imprisoned, others suffered death, but by one means or another God brought about the releasing of the ministry. And so here, "Lo, an angel of the Lord came there, and a light shone in the prison", verse 7. Now, these prisons in which the ministry had been kept could not be entirely shut against God. "The word of God", as the apostle says, "is not bound", (@2 Timothy 2:9). God will always find a way of getting in; it may be through the most humble persons, or by placing such in a position where they can speak a word where it tells. Thus the angel of the Lord came to Peter; he reached Peter in spite of the guards, soldiers, or chains, or the iron door; the angel got in, and a light -- the light of heaven -- shone there. None of us would have got out of the prisons in which we were held were it not that light shone into them. The angel takes account of what was in the prison, that a real servant of God was there asleep. It says "first, Simon who is called Peter", (@Matthew 10:2); that is, he had the leading place among the
{272}
servants of God, but he was asleep. And the angel of the Lord smote him "on the side", a well known thought to all those who love Jesus. However affected by human limitations, that thought of the side of Jesus is not lost on those who know Him. It is the testimony of the love of Christ in His death brought to bear forcibly -- not yet in the Lord's supper, it was a question of an effective reminder by an angel of the love of Christ in His death; and the angel said: "Rise up quickly ... and follow me". "Cast thine upper garment about thee", verse 8. I have no doubt the garments have a spiritual meaning; and the sandals were to be bound on, for it was a matter of a journey; it was a long distance *morally* between that prison and the objective that the angel had in mind: the objective that corresponds with the side of Christ -- a sphere where the love of Christ is, where love is amongst the saints -- there was a long journey morally between these two points. Thousands have taken that journey, God having come in, in His own providential way, in their circumstances, smiting them on the side, as it were, so that they move and take their garments and bind on their sandals, and follow the angel. It is a question of angelic leading. But such leading is for a man who is still asleep; anyway, he was not awake to what was going on. There are thousands like that today, real people of God, but you talk to them and they seem to be in their sleep; they are not sure of what is going on. But there is something going on, and they do things in a sort of instinctive way. Peter does everything he is told to do; that is an important matter. We must not ignore any circumstance that God brings about. What I may do myself is another matter, but there is what God brings about, and He is ever active in relation to His people, and what He does is done with purpose. God would not lift His finger without a purpose. So they pass on through a first and second guard. One might speak about these guards, what they were *ecclesiastically* in the history of
{273}
the dispensation, but time would not suffice. The angel passes them and Peter passes them. What barriers have to be passed for the releasement of the ministry; what suffering has had to be endured! We little think of what it has cost others that we should have what we have today. What lives! What suffering! -- that these guards should be passed. Then they come to the outer gate, which was of iron, the greatest barrier of all, apparently, but it led straight into the city. That would be the last stronghold of the enemy, if by any means he could keep the ministry at least within bounds, the first and second guards passed. It may set forth the great hierarchical influence variously exercised; for when things got loose and independent systems were formed, the enemy would be satisfied to keep the ministry even in those independent systems; and even to allow liberty to go into the open air provided there is no entrance into the city, that is to say, into the divine thought in Christ and the church. God has His thought, and this iron gate led right in there. But the gate was shut, and what happens is that it opens of itself, a marvellous evidence of that unseen hand which we can always reckon upon -- the unseen hand of almighty power -- to open every gate and every door; as the Lord says: "I have set before *thee* an *opened* door", (@Revelation 3:8). It was opened, it was the hand of God that opened it, and no one can shut it. He says: I have set it before thee. It was here before Peter, and yet he was going out in a state of semi consciousness, he did not know quite what was happening, but he was moving; and so the instincts of the believer lead him to move as directed. "They went down *one* street"; now they are on known ground. A street is a marked thing, it has a name, numbers, and so on, there is definite guidance there; it is spoken of as "one street"; it is well to keep there. And now the angel left him; that is to say, angelic service leads to that point, it leads you where there is definite guidance for *spiritual*
{274}
*intelligence*. Then Peter comes to *himself*. It is a fine experience when you wake out of slumber, and in the midst of providential dealings, angelic services, in which you are not quite sure what is happening, to find yourself on known spiritual territory. It says "when Peter was come to himself". Now what did he do? He came to the house of Mary, the mother of Mark, and there was prayer going on there. It did not prove just the great objective the angel had in mind in smiting the side of Peter, for prayer in *unbelief* is not the prayer that corresponds with that; the death of Christ was a reality, and here they were praying for Peter's release and they did not believe it when it happened. So that, dear brethren, we have not yet reached, in the recovery, in the release of the ministry, the great divine objective; it requires the Lord, the definite leading, of the Lord, to take us there. It is a question now as to whether there is subjection to the Lord. Many might be satisfied with such a prayer meeting, such a place where people are praying without apparent limitations, but it does not quite correspond, many are detained and misled by finding such places. I am speaking, you see, beloved, not exactly in any disparaging way of these circumstances, but rather using them in regard of what has happened, or is happening, so that we might have what we have -- a free ministry of the Spirit. You must not be detained by appearances, they may have their prayer meetings and Bible readings and preachings; in fact, they may be very energetic in their service; but is there faith behind all these things? Are they marked by faith and sincerity? I examine this prayer meeting. I am just released by angelic ministry, and I knock at the door, and they will not let me in. You see, I must enquire as to all these things, it is a question of leading, I must reach the great divine objective, I must not be deterred. Peter did not go in to stay; the only one who would have let him in primarily was a girl, Rhoda. As a matter of fact, she was a sufferer -- a
{275}
remnant, we may say. She came under reproach because she steadfastly affirmed that it was Peter's *voice*. Well, that is not the place for me; if Rhoda is persecuted there, I must go somewhere else. Peter went somewhere else. I do not speak of what was there historically, but I am speaking of it illustratively, as I am entitled to do, because of the presence of these features. Peter's continued knocking typifies the insistent assertion of divine authority, which marks the present moment.
Now we come to the leading of *the Lord*, The providential dealings of God are to the end that I should come directly under the leading of the Lord. I have not reached it yet; it may be I have not been accustomed to enquire as to the Lord and where He is, or whether He has anything to say as to my circumstances; perhaps I have not been concerned about that. So I go to Luke; Luke is concerned very largely in his ministry, with public order and the leading of the Lord, corresponding with what we get in 1 Corinthians -- "If anyone thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14:37). Now, you see, I have to do, not with Paul, but with the Lord. And Luke would confirm this, that it is a question of the Lord and how He leads; and so it says that He led them out as far as to Bethany (@Luke 24:50). It is a calculated action; a leading from one point, from the upper room in Jerusalem, where they were, as far as to Bethany; He led them *that far*. Now, what I am speaking of, dear brethren, is of the utmost importance if I want to understand leading, that the Lord leads me to anoint; He does so in His own perfect wisdom and His own perfect knowledge of what I need. He will not lead me beyond that. If I am in a bad state and going beyond, going far away to a place like Emmaus, well. He will go there. He will go any distance to get me. He made as if He would go even further,
{276}
because He would get them. That was love going to any length to restore souls. But these loved ones here are not astray, they are under the Lord, and He would lead them to a point. Applying this to what I have been saying, it is the further thing, coming nearer to our own times, when the servants of God have been released by the providential dealings of God. They began to come under the Lord, they began to enquire as to whether the Lord had a mind about things, and they found that He had, they loved the Lord. He had said: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", (@John 14:21), and they were among those who loved Him, and they thought about His commandments, they thought about His will; there was the leading of the Lord. What I am saying may have a direct application to some here; the Lord would lead you. You have been trusting to other things, but now He would take you in hand, so it says: "He led *them out*". Providential dealings scarcely lead me clear; He led them out, they are definitely under His leadership, and He led them to a point. You say. What is that point? What is Bethany? Well, Bethany is where love is. The Lord, you see, is concerned about you. You have been in providential circumstances, but He has got better things than that for us, beloved, and He leads us to the place where love is. Could you wish for anything better at such a juncture? It is the gateway of heaven: you will see Him go up from that point. You could scarcely see Him going up from a prayer meeting where faith did not exist. You see, the Lord comes in and out where faith is. And so in (@Acts 1) they came back into the city to the upper room, and then we have something about the Lord Jesus coming in and going out amongst them, that was where love was; He came in amongst His own from the time that John baptised until He was received up. (@Acts 1:22). You will not get this in a prayer meeting where there is no faith. At Bethany you see where loved ones were, where
{277}
reciprocal affections were, and there they saw Him go up. I It says: "He lifted up his hands, and blessed them", (@Luke 24:50,51). Think of being in a sphere, led by Him into it, where He blesses, for the conditions were suitable. What I am speaking of I know; I have experienced these things for years -- that there is a sphere I where love is, and where Christ is free to bless, and He *does* bless. He lifts up His hands -- one might say that is what He is doing with His hands now; the hands that made the heaven and the earth are employed in the blessing of His people. "He lifted up his hands, and blessed them". What an incentive to come under the leadership of the Lord, to surrender our wills! We shall, never come to this point unless there be the surrender of the will. Saul said, "What shall I do?" And the Lord said, "Go into the city ..." -- that is the same idea -- "and it shall be told thee"; and sure enough it was. What did he find in Damascus? He found the love circle. The sure leading and directing of the Lord placed him there, where he got forgiveness and the Spirit, the outcome being that he preached that Jesus was the Son of God. The Lord will ever direct us thus. It says, as He blessed them He was parted from them. It was not His own act -- it is not so put -- it was the act of heaven, that is to say, heaven is delighted with the scene. The Lord has finished His service on earth. He has led them to a point where love is. He placed it there Himself. How did love get to Bethany? Jesus brought it there. He went into Martha's house; there was not much in Martha, she complained against the Lord; there was little love there. But there was something in Mary: she was like Rhoda; she was the overcomer in that house, and ultimately love is found in both Mary and Martha and Lazarus: He taught them how to love. We should never know how without Him. He taught them how to love by loving them, by laying down His life for them; and so love was there. When He came to them
{278}
six days before the passover it was there, and the action of each indicated that it was there. They made Him a supper. Lazarus sat at the table, Martha served, and Mary took the pound of ointment -- I need not go over the incident, it is so well known, but the point is that love was there because He had brought it there; and He came because it was there, and what leading could be better for the disciples at that time than that they should be brought there? And heaven was delighted with the scene! As He lifted up His hands and blessed them He was parted from them and carried up into heaven. It is as if Bethany is honoured as the point of exit. His exit from the world is at Jerusalem; it could not be that a prophet should suffer outside -- it was the place of suffering. But Bethany was not that. His exit out of the world was at Jerusalem; but His entrance into heaven is from Bethany. There is a link between Bethany and heaven. The Lord leads us to Bethany: He does not take us up yet. What comes in between His return for us to take us up, is the leading of the Spirit. If I come into the circle of love, the Lord leads me there, and He would lead every one of us there; if I surrender my will and place myself in the hand of the Lord, He will lead me to that spot, where intelligent affection for Christ is; and where there is a direct link with heaven. You know the way to go. They had there before their eyes, as I might say, the way to go to heaven, for the Lord Jesus was carried up there, and we shall be carried up, caught up! The way is known, the divine way becomes known, so that we may be familiarised with it in the spot where affection for Christ is; and He would lead all His people there.
Well now, the leading of the Spirit, as I may say, begins there. The Lord is parted from them, that is a feature in Luke; they are left here without Him, but left in the place of love; that which never fails -- "love never fails", (@1 Corinthians 13:8). And the Holy Spirit comes in; that
{279}
is to say, the Lord leaves, but the Holy Spirit comes. Pentecost means another divine Person here on earth, taking up the position that had been occupied by Christ; He is "another Comforter", and now takes the lead. I do not mean to say for a moment that the Lord's leadership ceases, because it is one feature of the position, angelic leadership is another, the leading of the Spirit is another; but what comes to light is that "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", (@Romans 8:14). You see thus how we are advancing. Room has been made for the Spirit; referring to occurrences leading up to our own times, room has been made for the Spirit of God. Not only that there is a free ministry of the Spirit, but it came to light that the saints are sons; that the Lord Jesus accomplished redemption that we might receive sonship, and "because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father", (@Galatians 4:6). "So thou art no longer bondman, but son". And now, how am I to prove this? You say, 'I believe that; I accept the statement of Scripture'. But you want more than the statement of Scripture for this. It is not merely a matter of light, but how are people marked off as sons of God? There are those in this world actually who are marked off as the sons of God. How? They are led by the Spirit of God: "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God". In Galatians it is a matter light first; we are sons of God by faith, it says, so that it belongs to every believer. But how am I marked off as a son of God? "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God". What do I know about that? As in the place of love and coming under the leadership of the Spirit of God, I am to be marked off as a son as -- one of the sons of God. Now, the Lord has brought this about for us; He has helped us greatly, dear brethren, in regard of sonship, and what it is, how it fits in, not simply with the ways of God -- it does fit in
{280}
with the ways of God in Israel -- but it belongs to eternal counsels "He has chosen us in him", Scripture says, "before the world's foundation, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love", (@Ephesians 1:4), having marked us out beforehand for adoption sonship. It is for God. So that I take Bethany as a starting point; the Holy Spirit coming in there, taking up such as a Mary, such as a Lazarus, or even such as a Martha. The Holy Spirit came in, not simply in the form of cloven tongues as of fire, but as the Spirit of adoption, as if God were to say, 'You are My sons, and I want you to be My sons in affection and intelligence; I want you to be completely free from all legality and all fleshly energy. I want you to be holy and without blame before Me in love'. And so the Holy Spirit takes possession, and He acts on us, on our affections, our intelligences, our spirits, so that we might be led in relation to eternal counsels. What I am dealing with now is worked out from (@Numbers 21), where the Holy Spirit comes in typically. "That is the well of which Jehovah spoke to Moses, Assemble the people, and I will give them water", verse 16. What kind of water? It is the water that springs up, not simply that satisfies thirst -- there is that in it, too, as the Lord said to the woman, (@John 4) but it would spring up, it would act of itself; that is the point in (@Numbers 21) -- it acts of itself. "The princes digged the well ... by the direction of the lawgiver", and then they sang, "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it"; and from that point there is definite leading and movement to the land of promise. That is the point; the Holy Spirit will lead to the land that is the end, the great objective, of all His leadings -- to lead us beloved, what an objective to have before the heart! Some of us lately were speaking about the feast of Pentecost; it has time limits, but is as if God were to say to His people, 'You can remain here with Me as long as you wish. I do not impose any limit on you at all'.
{281}
He loves to have us before Him as His sons. It is a question of whether you and I are able to go in and stay; it is a question of spiritual formation, spiritual power and liberty with God. The Holy Spirit leads to that objective, that we might be before God the Father "holy and without blame ... in love".
{282}
GRACE APPROPRIATED, MARKING THE BELIEVER
@Genesis 21:14 - 34
J.T. I was thinking of the great place the Holy Spirit has in type in these early books, taking this chapter as illustrative of the subject in the idea of a well or a spring. We find the idea of a well or spring running through Genesis, Exodus and Numbers, and later, too; and I thought it would be helpful to look at it as typical not only of the Spirit, but of the system of grace in which the Spirit of God is dominant. It may be observed that the idea is connected with Hagar for the first time in Scripture, so that fact emphasises the thought of grace, in its being connected with such a person, in chapter 16 and in this. But although emphasised in her history, she fails of the true gain of it, and in that there is a warning. Then in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph and Moses we have faith availing itself of the divine provision; so that we should not lack of the grace of God, nor put the, flesh in the place of the Spirit in our service and testimony, and our general experience. I thought this passage would help us on that line, for Abraham takes up the thread in his communications with Abimelech, and shows how he valued the well.
Ques. Would you mind opening up a little more your thought in relation to this being first introduced in connection with Hagar?
J.T. Well, it was typical of God's overtures to the Jew. In Luke, the Lord makes a point of the disciples not leaving Jerusalem until they received the Spirit; it was the Spirit of grace. The Jews did despite to the Spirit of grace in result, but God took the greatest pains to present that testimony to them. Hagar was, like many young persons, in self will when the angel found her; it says he found her by a spring on the way to Shur. That is what comes out, as she is in self-will fleeing from her mistress, he found her there.
{283}
Ques. Do you think there is anything for us in the distinction between the bottle of water which she took and which ran out, and the well which was discovered to her?
J.T. Evidently there is a very great difference between a bottle of water, which is very limited, and a well; we can scarcely limit the well in a spiritual sense.
Ques. Is your thought that everything that God has available for His creatures here upon earth lies in the Spirit?
J.T. That is what I thought we might see, and that God emphasises His grace in connecting it with such a person as Hagar. It is not going to *stop* with her, but God emphasises His grace in beginning there.
Ques. With a person in bondage, would you say, but having in view her liberation?
J.T. The test was obedience. She was fleeing from her mistress, that was what marked her; but it says an angel found her by the spring; he found her by it. Where did the spring come from? Who provided it? That is the next question. Spiritually, it cost much that there should be such a thing as that. But there it was, and the angel found her by it, but before there could be any profit from the spring there must be subjection; so that he challenges her as to her position and why she was there. He says: "Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence earnest thou? and whither wilt thou go?" (@Genesis 16:8). That is the challenge. He was really raising the moral question with her, as the Lord did with the Samaritan woman. The well was there, but the moral question had to be raised and settled.
Rem. It says that God opened her eyes to see it, (@Genesis 21:19).
J.T. I think that the thing has to be shown. God has to call attention to it, but it was there, and there for such an one as she. But the moral question had to be solved, and he raises that with her -- why was she there, and where she was going?
{284}
Ques. Is your thought that, as with the woman in (@John 4), the Lord raises the moral question here?
J.T. That is what specially corresponds. With the woman in (@John 4) it was a question of her past history; the Lord says: "Go, call thy husband, and come here"; but with Hagar it is: "Whence comest thou? and whither art thou going?" But he recognises her as the handmaid of Sarai -- she is known to him, but she has to tell -- these questions have to be answered.
Rem. Where there is a wrong moral principle actuating the soul, the resources of the Spirit are not available.
J.T. Quite, and that is what the angel would bring up -- whence one has come, and whither one is going? These are very plain questions.
It would appear that she happened to be near the well, chapter 16, but it was very carefully arranged that the angel found her there. He could well have found her before, because she had been fleeing, but he waited till she arrived at that spot.
Rem. Like the woman in John, she did not know the Lord was there, but God ordered that she should meet Him.
J.T. Quite, so that what comes out in chapter 16 is the name of the well, that is, we have reached spiritually an historic position in the name of the well. It is more the objective side in the system of grace; it is a question of the revelation of God which Isaac afterwards recognises. It did not come in in his history, it came in in Hagar's history, but he valued it. He came from Beer-lahai-roi as Rebekah approached, showing that it is spiritually a point reached that stands, and the church (Rebekah) approaches in that relation.
Ques. Do you think Hagar got to that position because she did not make excuses? She confessed herself as an insubject person and so got a revelation.
J.T. Quite. Is it not wonderful grace that, though
{285}
she is in that position, yet the revelation is made to her? She is in an insubordinate position, but God would magnify His grace. I think that is how it stands in Scripture, how grace has been magnified in God's overtures to the Jew.
Ques. Would you say as to everyone of us who have come into blessing that that is the way we have come?
J.T. I think so; it is a question of coming into the light of God, that God sees you; as it reads, "She called the name of Jehovah who spoke to her. Thou art the God who reveals himself, for she said. Also here have I seen after he has revealed himself. Therefore the well was named Beer-lahai-roi", (@Genesis 16:13,14). And then we are told where it is, its geographical position, so that we have reached a definite point here. If she ultimately does not get the good of it, others will, but the magnitude of grace shines in that it is with such an one as this, that the idea is first connected.
Ques. Is that why the apostle in Galatians makes so much of the thought of grace?
J.T. Yes, I thought that. "He therefore who ministers to you the Spirit", (@Galatians 3:5), he says. That was the thing, it was the ministration of the Spirit. They were turning away from it. In this chapter Hagar is fleeing, but in chapter 21 she is an outcast, which makes it more emphatic that it is the magnitude of grace that God would bring before us. She first fled from the house of faith, and now she is an outcast from it with her son, and yet God is there by her.
Ques. Did Hagar name the well?
J.T. No, I do not think so. I think it is just that the well was named. It was by someone else I judge, who valued it more than she. But she conveyed that, you see, in what she said: she got some gain. You might call it superficial, but she got some gain.
Rem. She got the impression of having seen the living One who had revealed Himself to her there. {286}
J.T. Quite. So that chapter 16 is more what we call objective. In chapter 21 she is an outcast from the house of faith, and yet God is there. It is said, "What aileth thee?" It is a voice from *heaven* now: "God heard the voice of the lad", and then it says: "God hath heard the voice of the lad *where, he is*", verse 17, but she is to *take him into her hand and hold him there*, that is, accept definitely, responsibility for him.
Ques. Would Isaac be presented to us as one who got more of the benefit of the position?
J.T. I think Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph and Moses are all witnesses to faith's appropriation of the system of grace. Each is found identified with the well. And so Abraham here is introduced at once in this connection. Hagar takes a flask and she fills it and gives drink to her son, but she goes into Egypt and takes a wife for him; that is to say, she negatives the whole thing, as many Christians do, they avail themselves of grace, but they go to the world and that is what God abhors. A flask filled once is a very *limited* use of a well. Rebekah supplied water to Abraham's servant and his camels until all had enough.
Rem. I wondered whether there was instinct with Hagar. She went into the wilderness, but she did not maintain the appreciation of the God that made Himself known to her in the wilderness?
J.T. No, I think she and her son -- particularly her son would be typical of the Jew in the last days, for it says, "I will make him a great nation" and "God was with the lad". But for the moment she took him a wife out of Egypt, and he dwells in the wilderness and becomes an archer. You would not expect much of him. Anyone who gets the good of the Spirit and goes into the world for a wife, will not be much in the testimony. The archer in Genesis attacks Joseph. I do not say that he did, but the archer in Genesis attacks Joseph. "The archers ... shot at him", (@Genesis 49:23). I think there is a great warning
{287}
therefore in the appropriation of grace with no corresponding effect, but a going into the world.
Ques. Does this show that the whole system of grace and all connected with it is in relation to the Spirit?
J.T. That is the idea. The spirit dominates it, so that in contrast to Hagar, in the New Testament you have the woman of Sychar. She had the idea of grace; she got the Lord's thought in that she left her waterpot and went into the city, but she goes to the men and *calls them out of it*. "Come, see a man". 'Come': that is the opposite effect. She did not go back into the world.
Rem. Then, if we fail in spiritual development, it is because we are not availing ourselves of what God has provided?
J.T. That is the thing. The means of development and growth are there. In fact it says here, the lad grew and God was with him. But the mother came in; she took him a wife out of Egypt, and that is the end of the thing.
Ques. Would that suggest natural relationships?
J.T. I think so, that one is capable of being so affected. Why should *he* not select his wife? Of course, we have the idea of a parent taking part in the procuring of a wife in Abraham and in Isaac. Isaac advised Jacob as to his wife, but Jacob went to get her. But there is nothing said about that here; it was the mother, that is, the Egyptian element was unjudged there in her, and he had never found his own footing. He had never been weaned, as it were; that is quite obvious. A man who allows his mother to get his wife has never been weaned. The mother would control the position, and that is not of God.
Ques. Would this go to show that the primary movement of the system of grace, according to this chapter, is the revelation of God; and what you referred to in (@John 4), the bringing in of the Father so that worshippers are secured?
{288}
J.T. Exactly; so that in the case of the woman of Samaria, through her the Lord finds a place and abode there two days. That is the result of her testimony. It is something called out of the world that is the result of her testimony. Popular evangelisation never does that. I have no doubt that Hagar could tell a good deal to an Egyptian about Abraham, and the wonderful relations he had with God, but she could not say to the Egyptian, 'Come'. She was not judging Egypt at all; she had taken an Egyptian for her son.
Rem. So that the testimony of grace goes out in the power of the Spirit, as seen in the end of Luke. They were to tarry in Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high.
J.T. That is the important thing. They were to tarry in Jerusalem, and repentance and remission of sins were to be preached to all nations, beginning *there*. They were to begin there as clothed with heavenly power, that *was* the kind of thing. It was the magnitude of grace beginning there, and beginning in such a way -- in the power of the Spirit. But this action of Hagar, I believe, has a very powerful voice, for many take up grace and benefit by it up to a point, but here the time goes on and the lad grows and God is even with him, but then the things stops for Egypt is brought in, and that is the end of the matter for that person. But it is not the end of the matter for God, because Abraham is immediately brought in in regard of a well; and then Isaac and then Jacob, and finally Joseph is a fruitful bow by a well. That is how the thing stands in Genesis. There is, I think, a very powerful voice in Hagar's action here.
Rem. Abraham has exactly the opposite exercises in regard to a wife for Isaac, and Sarai had died before that.
J.T. He made the servant swear in regard of family relations -- that the wife must be of the same family, and then Isaac charged Jacob on the same point.
Ques. You were speaking of such great men as
{289}
Abraham and Isaac -- one a man of faith and the other a man of resurrection -- choosing wives for their sons. There is much in that, is there not?
J.T. There is a great deal in it. As we have remarked, Hagar had no thought of a spiritual link between her son and his wife. But one great idea in marriage is that the thought of the sister must come first. "Have we not a right to take round a *sister* as wife" (@1 Corinthians 9:5). That is, the family link is there first, the spiritual link, and that is what Abraham and Isaac had in their minds; but Hagar did not have anything like that.
Rem. The issue of Hagar's act was that there was a generation that dwelt "opposite to Egypt, as one goes towards Assyria", (@Genesis 25:18).
J.T. Yes, and really he was "a wild ass of a man", (@Genesis 16:12).
Rem. That is where the posterity of that man was found, but the posterity that came from the other marriages inhabited the mount of the Lord.
Ques. Is our danger leaving these thoughts to unconverted people and not getting the exercise of them in our own lives? We are a little apt to think of Ishmael as being entirely on the lines of a man after the flesh.
J.T. I suppose he would represent the flesh in any of us.
Rem. Galatians says: "He that sows to his own flesh, shall reap corruption from the flesh", (@Galatians 6:8).
J.T. Quite. It was a company of Ishmaelites apparently in conjunction with the Midianites, who purchased Joseph as a slave. There was evidently no spiritual compassion whatever with them. We read of "the anguish of his soul", his tender feelings, of which any compassionate person would take notice, but the slave monger took no account of that. That is the sort of thing that you get from an alliance like this -- persons appropriating grace and allying themselves with the world.
{290}
Rem. It brings in the commercial spirit, which is destructive of the unity of the brethren.
J.T. Exactly; and I have no doubt that with the archer the link is there. "The archers ... shot at him", and this is what Ishmael became.
Rem. And he mocked also in @Genesis 21.
J.T. You would have thought, if he represented what is of God, that all this grace shown him -- for he was a lad of fourteen years old -- would have affected him. His relationship to Abraham ought to have deterred him from any hardness towards the seed of Abraham; but you very often find that worldly Christians become the bitterest enemies of those who are in the testimony.
Ques. Is there anything in the fact that Hagar, after she had had this revelation, goes back to Abraham the man of faith?
J.T. Though, as a matter of fact, she does go back, it does not definitely say so.
Remark I was wondering whether the faith and the spirit go together.
J.T. It does not seem as if the Holy Spirit brings out anything to indicate faith in this woman at all; yet it is with her that all this is connected.
Rem. Speaking of Ishmael becoming an archer, it says in his early days that "God was with the lad", (@Genesis 21:20).
J.T. That is from the divine side, it is what God is towards, us; what He was towards the Jew. See what He was presenting in the early part of Acts -- but in result what came out is that they were perverse; the apostle speaks of that -- their hand was against every man, (@Genesis 16:12).
Rem. They were more bitter than the purely worldly element.
J.T. They were, indeed. Well now, I think we may see in Abraham's interview with Abimelech here, how beautifully grace had affected his heart; looking at him as
{291}
a typical believer, for that is what he is. God was blessing him to such an extent that the Philistine took notice of him and came to him with Phichol, the captain of his army, and Abraham gives him sheep and oxen. That is, Abraham is the greater of the two; he is like. God, he is representative of God. God has made him great and he is great, so that he is the giver. He selects seven ewe lambs and sets them by themselves; they are *special*.
There is the general effect of the blessing of God on the believer through the system of grace, but there is the special effect. You may not find it with all, but it was certainly there with Abraham; and these seven ewe lambs are set by themselves, and the king enquires as to what they mean. Well, they meant something very different from what was in *his* mind. He was thinking of power and of his army, because the captain, the military representative, was there, not the secretary of war, but the captain, the general -- doubtless a man of prowess. That was the Philistine idea -- something to show, bigness, external power. It is what the Corinthians were working at; they would be equal with Paul; they would not be behind, as it were. But the apostle brings in this very point; he says his ministry among them was "in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom", (@1 Corinthians 2:4,5).
Ques. Do you think all this is an indication of Abraham's appreciation of what lay in the Spirit?
J.T. That is what I thought. The seven ewe lambs are by themselves; they stand out separately, and that is what Paul emphasises throughout 1 Corinthians. It is that kind of thing. It is not what the local leaders had -- their learning, their means, their natural ability and all that. He says, I have definitely avoided anything of that kind among you -- "my word and my preaching ... in demonstration of the Spirit and of power". I
{292}
think that is the seven ewe lambs; it is the perfection of the subjective result.
Ques. Would he refer to that when he speaks of beseeching them by the meekness and gentleness of Christ? (@2 Corinthians 10:1).
J.T. I think that is very good; it is just the idea.
Rem. Yes. He speaks of his warfare in that chapter, that the weapons of his warfare were not carnal. Is not that in contrast to the thought of the Philistine?
J.T. Exactly. His weapons were carnal. I have no doubt he would have told Abraham the strength of his army, as men do now -- or if they do not say so, they make a show, and if you go to their houses you find it is all there -- what they are living on. That is what was going on at Corinth.
Rem. A man that is living on the well is not overwhelmed by a show of earthly power.
J.T. No. I have often thought and spoken of Moses- position. Genesis gives the thing -- the system of grace as in the mind of God. Exodus is the administration of that. It says Moses sits *by* the well, as if he had learnt when he reached Midian that *that* was the power, not the power that he employed to kill the Egyptian. It was a question of the power of God springing up, and he sat *by* it; and all through his ministry you have that principle. It is the administration of that -- wells of water, and the well springing up under "the direction of the law giver".
Ques. What is the significance of Abraham saying, "I have dug this well" (@Genesis 21:30)?
J.T. Well, Abimelech says. What about those seven ewe lamb? He never had such a conception before. The natural man has no such idea; he cannot understand the Spirit of God. Abraham says. These are to be a testimony to you that I have digged this well. That is to say, this well is the secret of what they represent;
{293}
you cannot have that spirit without the springing well. It is the fruit of the Spirit. That is what the apostle emphasises in Galatians -- nine different fruits of the Spirit, beginning with "love, joy, peace", and so on, @Galatians 5:22.
Rem. You cannot have what is external without having what is internal.
J.T. Exactly; that is the idea of a well -- what is internal. Abraham would make it clear that that was the secret of his power over against the Philistines- army. Why did he come to Abraham? Not because the latter had 318 trained servants; we do not know whether he had them now. Why had he come? It was the power of God in the man; Abimelech had observed this.
Rem. It says that God was with the lad and he became an archer. That is in contrast to Abraham; *he* did not become an archer.
J.T. God did not make Ishmael an archer, it was what *he became*, as you say. But Abraham was relying on this kind of power, as it says in Romans: "If therefore thine enemy should hunger, feed him; if he should thirst, give him drink; for, so doing, thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head", (@Romans 12:20). It is that kind of thing.
Ques. Is it the feature that came out so distinctly in Moses? He is spoken of as the meekest man in all the earth.
J.T. Yes, it was fully expressed in him.
Ques. Would you say a word on what follows after Abraham says that they are for a witness? It says that he called the place Beer sheba, because there they sware, both of them. Then he made a covenant and, in the third place, he planted a grove. Would the three features be the outcome of this subjective thought in regard of the Spirit?
J.T. Well, the first great point is the well -- he dug the well; then there is the covenant; he could well afford to enter into a covenant with this man because it was not
{294}
yet the time of ejecting the inhabitants of the land was a question of living peaceably with all men, with one's neighbours. Abimelech's thoughts were for himself, his son, and his grandson; that is, he was making provision a long way ahead. Abraham could well afford to enter into covenant with him. Seven ewe lambs would never hurt anybody. That was the spirit of Abraham. You do not want to hurt anybody; it is the period of grace, not a time of executing judgment, but of blessing. So that one can very well enter into covenant on these lines, living in peace with all.
Rem. In the last verse it says: "Abraham sojourned in the Philistines¬ land many days", verse 34.
J.T. It is wisdom to live peaceably with all men, inasmuch as in us lies. Then he plants a grove and calls the name *of the place* Beer-sheba, verse 31; it is not yet the *city*. The idea is faithfulness -- the place of the oath. He calls the place Beer-sheba, and then he calls on the name of the eternal God; that is to say, he can go far ahead of Abimelech; Abimelech was thinking of himself -- of his three generations; but with Abraham it is a question of the eternal God, and from that point of view you can make a covenant for good, for a much longer time. He will be with you; He will enable you to carry it out. It is the power of the Spirit of God in us.
Rem. It would be good to have a greater sense of that, to be delivered from all fear of men. I was wondering whether Abraham would be a good example of one who is walking in the principles of the kingdom -- accepted of God and approved of men?
J.T. That is it; that is the antitype of all this. We were referring to the place here in chapter 21. In chapter 26 God appears to Isaac and the Philistine comes up again. He recognises Isaac. God had blessed Isaac; he had sowed the land and got richer and richer, and the Philistines hated him and sent him away. Then there was conflict about the wells, and God appears
{295}
to him as he moves to Beer-sheba. Then the Philistine brought a third person with him, "his friend". It is a *social* thing, as if the heavenly man -- Isaac -- needed more to influence him than the military power. But it did not. Isaac stood his ground; he sent them away with the same kind of a covenant, but he sent them away, verse 31. It says: "Isaac sent them away ... and it came to pass the same day that Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well that they had dug, and said to him. We have found water", verses 31, 32. Now he is supported by this well and he calls it *a city*. You have reached a point now where there is definite order and government; you have overcome the Philistine morally, and have reached a point now where there is definite order and government; you have overcome the Philistine morally, and have reached a place where your influence becomes more extended -- the city.
Rem. *So* that there is a system of things now, in which Philistine principles are refused and the principles of the Spirit prevail.
J.T. That is right. The city marks the progress made; it stands over against the social element -- we have got a city.
Ques. Have we, in that way, a sort of allusion to the assembly?
J.T. I think so; we have to deal with the antitype. It is a question of the state of your soul. The world comes to a young Christian with its power, and especially on its social side. Well, if faith is in activity he will say: 'See what I have got among the brethren. I have more than you can give me!' That is how it works.
Rem. Abraham had grown a great deal since he said: "O that Ishmael might live before thee!" (@Genesis 17:18).
Rem. And he and Isaac were very jealous as to the preservation of the well.
Ques. Would there be a difference in the type, that they digged the well, Abraham and Isaac?
{296}
J.T. I think there is. What comes out in connection with Hagar is, I think, the system of grace from the divine side. We have to ponder what it cost God to provide it; but that is not in evidence, it is a question of grace. But when you come to faith using the well, then the digging is necessary. I suppose it is the disallowance of the flesh; that is how you get the good of the Spirit; and you go on digging till you have a well of your own.
Rem. You have a man full of the Spirit. Digging did not put the water there, but it made the water that was there available.
{297}
DIVINE TEACHING
@Titus 2:11,12; @Acts 13:12; @Acts 19:9,10;@1 John 2:27
I am thinking, dear brethren, in reading these scriptures, of the important subject of *teaching*; first the teaching of grace, then the teaching of the Lord, and, finally, the teaching of the Holy Spirit. Under these heads the idea of divine teaching is presented. You will all remember the Lord's remark, citing Isaiah, that His people should be all *taught* of God. As it says in the passage alluded to "All thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children" (@Isaiah 54:13) -- that is, Jerusalem's children. Now, a divinely taught person is not simply one who knows things; he does know, of course, but teaching, learning from God, is more, than the mere acquisition of knowledge. The pupil or disciple is brought under discipline, so that his mind is not only stored with knowledge, but *he* is affected himself; the person is affected correspondingly by what is forced into his mind, for this is really the idea. If one is in school, learning, strictly speaking, is not optional: it is a question of what is to be taught, and one must go through the course; and this, of course, is obvious in the things of God. Anyone who assumes that learning the things of God, learning from God, is an optional matter will never, to say the least, arrive at the church. One might say that there is an element of lawlessness in any pupil assuming that lessons in the school are optional.
I want to speak of the teaching of grace as bearing on what has been before us and upon the dispensation. It is an immense thing, dear brethren, to maintain the dispensation; whatever else happens, or whatever the loss, or whatever the suffering, it must be maintained, at least in principle. Making full allowance for the day of small things such as this is in which we are, the principle of the dispensation must never be denied or falsified, it
{298}
must ever be in view. You will all remember that as Rebekah approached Isaac he was coming from Beer-lahai-roi; he was, as it may read, 'returning from coming to it', that is, the well was in his mind, as a leading idea. As the church comes into view, Christ is concerned that all the truth is in evidence. Whilst His affections are supremely engaged with the church. He never lets slip anything; all the features of the truth are carefully watched over; He is concerned that the dispensation in its full character might be always in evidence. The church, of course, is the full product of it; but the means by which the church is brought about must never be out of view. The more we understand the system of grace, as applicable to us severally, the more we shall treasure it in its universal bearing; and in no way can we be fitted for this more than by its teaching the teaching of grace. The apostle Paul here is writing to Titus, who evidently had to do with people who were of low morals, for it says: "The Cretans are always liars". I was a field of labour in which the public morals were grossly low, and perhaps in no age was this thought more applicable than it is today; The morals of christendom are abominable; indeed, one is at times encouraged to ask God to modify the public conditions, and I believe He is doing if. The trend is directly of the enemy; and we should all be alive to this, because as we see the enemy's way, we are concerned bow to meet it. We cannot stem the current, but we can at least be concerned as to how to keep out of it. As we see the trend, we are concerned about how to meet it for ourselves, how to meet it for our children, how to meet it generally; and one begins, with oneself. That is the divine way of meeting things. God would impress on us the principle of obligation; accepted obligation is that by which God works in us and by us. Obligation was accepted supremely in the Lord Jesus, He avoided nothing that fell to man -- a most
{299}
stupendous thing. The will of God involved a tremendous obligation, and the Lord Jesus accepted it. And so, as we are brought into the current of faith, each in his measure accepts obligation, and the more we are with God, the more extended will that be, until you begin to accept obligation, not only for yourself, but for your household, your business, for the local company, and for the whole church of God on earth, and for the government of God on earth -- for all these come within the range of Christian obligation. The principle is: "Take the *lad, and hold him in thy hand"* (@Genesis 21:18). Now, that lad, Ishmael, was fourteen years of age; it was no light matter to hold a lad of that age, the weight *was felt*, and that is what God values. God will surely help us as we accept responsibility, feeling its weight. And so in our day of low public morality, the believer accepts obligation peculiarly; he is not going to be a legalist, we can do nothing on that line. The law, as we are told, makes nothing perfect, @Hebrews 7: 19, it never did make anything perfect, so that to go back to that is to surrender the position; the position is grace, but grace that has teaching.
Here the apostle presents it in its broadest aspect: he says it "carries with it salvation for all men". You say, 'The morals are dreadful'; so they are, but the grace of God is infinitely above, that. It does not ignore what exists, but one idea of grace is that it is greater than the sin it deals with: it is infinitely above the sin; and so great the greatest sinner. That is the idea in @Titus 2 -- that the earful condition of the world does not in itself preclude the action of grace. Grace, it says, "carries with it salvation for all men", that is the extent of it, and it "has appeared". The faithful believer would say: 'It must not disappear as far as I am concerned'. Christendom has put it out of view, it has gone back to the law and to paganism; but the grace of God *has* appeared, and, as far
{300}
as the believer is concerned, it must remain in evidence. But how? It takes on learners. If it affects my heart, it intends that I should be taught by it, and taught not only generally, but specifically; so "that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly, in this present world". "Denying ungodliness" -- the air is impregnated with it where we work, where we move about in this world, but the denial of the thing is by the maintenance of the truth of the dispensation, and by living soberly and righteously and godly in this present course of things.
Now, dear brethren, that is the first great lesson in divine teaching. I am not denying that there may be other things, but I am speaking of the public position of the saints, the continuance of the dispensation and that this teaching of grace is imperative. Much more is added in the passage which is strengthening to the heart. "Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ". That is to say, another world is in view, I am denying this one and I am hailing another one; I am looking for it -- "Awaiting the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ" -- for it is the same Person.
Now, this fits in in the type, dear brethren, with the position in Exodus up to chapter 18. God never complains, He never resents the murmurings of His people, grace is greater than their murmurings; but when the law is given, when God asserts His rights formally (I am speaking of the law now typically, not literally), then the school becomes more rigorous, more exacting: not that there is any less love, nor any less grace, but it would be monstrous to assume that there is not such a thing as law in christianity. You may call it the 'perfect law of liberty' -- and so it is; it is the 'royal law', too: but if we are to have to do with God, there must be requirements, and so this brings in another thing, that is, *the teaching of*
{301}
*the* Lord. That is what is emphasised in Corinthians. "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?" (@1 Corinthians 10:22). "For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep". Why? Because of the school.
So I have read in @Acts 13, because this appears almost immediately as the two great evangelists, Barnabas and Paul, are sent forth by the Spirit. They are going to announce grace, but there was the teaching of the Lord, and an intelligent man recognises it. The deputy was "an intelligent man", we are told, verse 7; he had understood teaching, and Roman teaching would certainly imply something of authority. Certain things happened before the eyes of Sergius Paulus in relation to Bar-Jesus who sought to "turn away the deputy from the faith"; he was a "child of the devil, enemy of all righteousness". These were the circumstances, and it required the authority of the Lord to deal with such circumstances. It is another feature of the present opposition, that there are children of the devil, enemies of righteousness, seeking to turn away believers from the faith -- that is going on; but it brings in the Lord, and brings Him in in the moral authority that marked the teaching. The deputy recognised it, he was amazed at it and he believed -- a very fine example for young believers. This teaching involved doctrine, but it was teaching -- and so I have ventured to bring forward the occurrence at @Ephesians 19. The church in its full bearing appears there, and if the dispensation is to stand, the church must stand. The dispensation hinges on the presence of the Holy Spirit, but not only on that, but on the church; that is to say, the Holy Spirit operates through the church, and these chapters 19 and 20 bring in the church in its full position here in relation to the testimony. The Holy Spirit had made the elders of Ephesus overseers of it there. In the types, we have in Abigail one who would preserve the position. David
{302}
had girded himself with his sword and was about to take life, but Abigail prevented this through her grace and wisdom. It is the church. The dispensation must be preserved; and so she immediately acts as she hears of the impending danger, and furnishes herself with all the evidences of grace, bread and wine and figs and sheep -- abundance of food and of the very best kind -- and she meets David. She goes down, and he goes down, and the hand of the avenger is stayed. It was not that the vengeance was not merited, but the time for it had not come. So it is said: "Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves ... Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord" The Lord will see to that; it is not our business. Abigail understood; and so David Says: "Blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou", (@1 Samuel 25:33); she stayed his hand from shedding blood, she maintained the position.
Now, the church underlies all that, as I said. We have not got it publicly I know, but it exists; and what leads to its practical realisation today is this principle of teaching, and the question is whether we are teachable? One of the things we have to be on our guard against is latitudinarianism, it is a dangerous thing, and most subtle -- that I can say things without scriptural support -- and they are allowed to drift; that is not of God. Teaching implies that we must have the truth. For this we need the teaching of grace, the teaching of the Lord and the teaching of the Spirit. And so, as Paul secures those twelve men at Ephesus, they all receive the Holy Spirit at one time, a remarkable *fact*. But then he would go into the synagogue, he would maintain the principle still in force -- "to the Jew first". But when some hardened themselves and disputed, he "*separated* the disciples" -- that is the position now. The church era, in its full status on earth, is based on separation, not only from a lewd world, but from a religious world. What comes out in Matthew is that the Lord left the
{303}
Pharisees and Sadducees "and went away"; also He "went forth and went away from the temple"; so here the apostle separated the disciples from the synagogue, but where does he separate them to? He separates them from the Jews, from the religious place, and takes up his position in a *school*. You say, 'That is a mere incident'. Not at all, beloved friends: let us never assume that a word used by the Holy Spirit is incidental or accidental: everything is with a purpose. And whose school was it? The school of Tyrannus. It says, "one Tyrannus" in the Authorised Version, but I do not think the word 'one' is there. Doubtless it was a known school in Ephesus; those who attended it would tell you what kind of a man Tyrannus was; his name indicates authority: not that it was tyranny, but rather one who dominated, according to what is proper in school; 'anything' will not do for this man! You say: 'It is not Tyrannus¬ teaching'. No -- but the school was his; and Paul was not behind with the idea: "If anyone thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual", he says, "let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14:37). There is nothing optional there. "Are we stronger than he?" It is a question of the Lord; and Paul represented that. There is much lightness among the people of God, but the position is too serious, beloved, for us to be light and trifling. The school in which the teaching of the Lord is, exists, and it is for *us* to be there.
Paul taught there daily; it was every day for two years. And it was not merely a question of reciting things: Bible readings are very enjoyable, but there should always be in them the principle of spiritual domination; that the thing asserted is so; it is not that I think it so, but *it is so*. Of course there are no apostles or inspired persons, but the Holy Spirit is here and we have the Scriptures, and so we should be assured of what we say. I am speaking of what is normal, beloved friends, that is,
{304}
of what is communicated as in the temple, and as under the authority of the Lord. So that what you find is not merely the rehearsal of things, or the reading of papers on this subject and that subject, as with scientific men, but what went on daily as far as the word here shows, for two years, was a spiritual 'reasoning'. Now, the idea of reasoning in teaching, as I understand it, is that what is taught is forced into the mind by the power of the teacher and the moral value, of what is taught. It *must* be accepted, for it is shown to be the truth. There is no option, on my part at all. The Lord makes it so plain that it is so. John accredits the little children with knowing the truth, @1 John 2:21. What is there left but latitudinarianism if there is not certainty? I do not know of any other alternative. I am not ignoring that there is much which the most instructed have not attained to and that as at Ephesus there is weakness and ignorance and so need for forbearance, I am speaking of the general position as to teaching. It was the teaching of the Lord by the apostle for two years; and it had the greatest result, for all in Asia heard the word of the Lord -- not the word of God here, for it is a question of the establishment in the teaching of the authority and power of the Lord. The church was thus set up on a sure foundation as to the truth. The apostle said to the Corinthians: "I speak as to intelligent persons" -- the saints are thus regarded as able to take in the truth, being able to discern it.
Now, that is the thought in regard of the church, that there should be definite understanding of the teaching of the Lord; and that it has to be bowed to. For two years there was a separated people, under reproach, doubtless, for they had left the synagogue, in which many had turned hostile; the Jews would persecute them. But they were a separated people and a people in the school, so that they come out properly instructed, and that underlies the great development at
{305}
Ephesus. The church at Ephesus stands for the whole idea; it is not a question of what is local there, it is a question of the assembly as a whole.. Even in the day of their decline the effect of this teaching is felt -- "Thou hast tried", the Lord says, "them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars", (@Revelation 2:2). Alas, "first love" had gone, but the effect of the teaching continued, and it is most important.
To pass on to the final teaching: we get it in John. John has a most interesting way of presenting this subject. In his gospel he records that the first two disciples that Jesus had, *called* Him 'Rabbi'. This emphasises what I am saying, that love will have teaching. The Holy Spirit is careful to tell us what that means, so that we should know the thought that was in their minds -- the idea of teaching. Up to that time they had had the most remarkable teacher, but now they have come to? Better Then in chapter 20 we have as no one else, certainly among women, loved Him -- Mary Magdalene. She calls Him 'Rabboni' ('my teacher'), and that was as risen from the dead; she understood that the teaching was necessary and that she needed it. I do not say that it will be needed in heaven, I do not think so; indeed, the Lord says in Luke: "Every one that is perfect shall be as his master", chapter 6: 40. That is a very precious anticipation. The epistle to the Ephesians had "the perfecting of the saints" in view. The gifts in Ephesians are to that end. We are to arrive at the full-grown man *now*. As I see this I am industrious as a Christian; I miss nothing of the instruction the Lord gives. I shall not think it is optional to come to the meetings; the matter is too serious to treat it so lightly. If I am exercised about the meeting, is not the Lord also? He certainly is concerned about it. If I remain away carelessly He will note this. He will be there. It is a question of the school. As in the school,
{306}
we are, so to speak, to abide by the rules. I am not wishing to make you legal, for love is behind it. Love will do its best for us; thus it will have us 'perfect'. We do not want to be remiss in heaven, and the 'perfecting' is what is going on.
John beautifully presents the subject in writing to these little ones, for they are the third grade in the school from the highest, he presents the latter first. Scripture grades the saints in that way; we have the first, grade and the second grade in this very chapter; and the final grade, which is the little ones, begins at verse 18 and goes on to verse 27. Now you see he is dealing with young believers, and he has more to say to them than to the others, and I am obliged to add -- that they much outnumber the other classes. I am afraid there are not many in the upper grades (if you will allow the figure). The order given is: "I write to you, fathers", "I write to you, young men": "I have written to you, fathers", "I have written to you, young men", "I write unto you little children".
He has much to say to this last class, and it has reference to the awful apostasy that is abroad. I have been speaking of the morality of the world, but now I want to refer to the infidelity, the apostasy. Of course, morality enters into that, too, but it is the other side. Men may be outwardly moral, and yet be the wickedest of all, for they may be blasphemers. Young believers have little idea of the awful current of apostasy that has set in during the past two or three decades. Within the lives of many of us here it has acquired a tremendous impetus, and how are we to stand? That is what the apostle is dealing with. He refers to men whom he calls antichrists; there are many of them, he says. The Antichrist has not yet come, but he is coming; and in the meantime his way is being prepared by these antichrists: but verse 27 brings in what I may call deliverance. 'Deliverance' has a wide bearing in Scripture; I use it here in connection with the
{307}
anointing: the anointing implies deliverance from man's *mind*, from false doctrine, from man's teaching. There is deliverance from the world in other aspects, but young believers are peculiarly exposed to men of ability, men of mind, men of reputation in the world of learning. Those who go to school and are thus under school-teachers, especially those of the higher grades, are fearfully exposed to these persons. And so the apostle comes down to this -- I can only call attention to this one verse, verse 27, "and yourselves, the unction which ye have received from him abides in you"; it should read 'yourselves'. The Holy Spirit fixes our minds on *ourselves* in the light in which He is going to speak about us. He wants to speak about the anointing. He says 'yourselves' -- that is to say, there is a class in His mind standing out amid the general trend of apostasy; standing out in the recognition of the Spirit of God. If you stop to think of that, young believer, you will say, 'I belong to this'. They are only young believers, but look at what they have got, look at their dignity, for they have the anointing. This enters into all our convocations. As the transfiguration was over, it is said that "having looked around, they no longer saw anyone", according to Mark, but "Jesus alone with themselves"; here it speaks of yourselves and the anointing. See how much enters into that! Now, he says. In view of that, you shut the door on every man that comes to you with his own doctrine; you do not need him. It is not simply that he is what he is, that he is an antichrist, but you may be courteous to him, and say, 'We do not need that'. And this enters into the books believers may have to read, and it may be to teach, too, in schools. We must be courageous; the time calls for it, the very continuance of the testimony calls for it -- courteous but courageous, for you do not need "that anyone should teach you". Why not? What he presents is spurious, it is wicked, it is a lie. Reasonableness will admit the righteousness of
{308}
that position. "The anointing", he says, "which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him", (@1 John 2:27) -- you are in a fixed position. The psalmist speaks about his heart being fixed, but John in his epistle has a way of using the word 'abide' which refers to fixedness; As is sometimes said the earth is in the sun; that is the idea: there is a fixedness about the Christian who is taught by the Spirit; he knows the evil and he refuses it by the anointing. He needs not that any man teach him and, as the anointing teaches, he abides in Him; he is in a fixed position as taught, he abides in Christ. And that is the end; the perfecting of the saints is that one is fixed as to teaching, one abides in Christ. Later on you get the Holy Spirit twice mentioned in regard to this position. "Hereby we know that we abide in him and he in us, that he has given to us of his Spirit", chapter 4:13. A most blessed thing that we are fixed in Him, and He is in a fixed position, so to speak, in me. As in that position I am in complete deliverance from the range of the wicked principles in the world.
May the Lord help us, dear brethren. It is a critical time, it calls for attention as to what is being taught; and we must see to it that we are receiving nothing but what the Holy Spirit teaches.
{309}
MORAL ELEVATION
@Acts 1:9 - 14; @Acts 10:9 - 13; @Acts 19:1
I am thinking, dear brethren, of how the element of *moral elevation* is interwoven in this book of the Acts, indeed, it runs through Luke's service and ministry; which ministry, as most of us know, is intended to support and amplify and make acceptable the ministry of Paul. There is a continual rise, as I may say, from chapter 1 to chapter 19, where he presents Paul as arriving at Ephesus through the upper districts. Those of us who travel have some idea of a physical rise in the earth's formation until a certain altitude is reached, and so in this book the moral altitude reached on the side of experience, in chapter 19 is that Paul arrived at Ephesus. In the gospel, Luke brings heaven *down*; for the divine way is to afford incentive to us in our souls¬ history, and the gospel of Luke furnishes, among many other things, an incentive to moral elevation in the soul, so that there is a steady rise instead of a steady decline. The decline of the church began in Ephesus; it began at the summit, and it comes down and down, so that the government of God intervenes as the decline reaches a point, and makes recovery impossible -- that is *general* recovery. Today the decline has been enormously accelerated, but that is in the government of God. It corresponds with the demons who, when cast out of the demoniac by the Lord in @Matthew 8, request to be allowed to enter into the swine, and entering in, we are told the swine "rushed down the steep slope into the sea", and "died in the waters", verse 32.
It was the government of God, there was no hope; It is a most solemn thing that as decline reaches a point God intervenes, and it becomes more rapid; it has thus become more rapid in our own times. The rush down is violent, and so there is all the more need to understand the principle of incline or elevation, which, happily, is
{310}
available to each individual, but he has got to face the rush and stand against it.
And so the gospel of Luke affords incentive; that is to say, heaven is brought down. The evangelist, in writing to a man, evidently of dignity in this world, one who deserved consideration, addresses him as "Most excellent Theophilus"; such persons deserve consideration where it is due. Persons of distinction in this world are at a disadvantage, whether their dignity is acquired or conferred or inherited, but God does not leave them out because of this; He works in their souls and shows that His work goes on in spite of the disadvantage. Nevertheless, the disadvantage is there and must not be ignored. So Luke, whilst recognising the excellency according to man's estimate of Theophilus, introduces heavenly dignitaries. If one could see Gabriel or Michael -- not to speak of the Lord of glory, for His is supreme dignity! But even in one of the subordinates of the Lord of glory, what dignity one would see! Were Theophilus to stand up beside Gabriel, he would readily listen to Luke, and he did listen to him, for this second treatise shows that he gained in his soul by the first; but considering Gabriel, he would the more readily see what human dignity, what dignity in this world is, that it is but as a flower of the grass. "*All* flesh". Scripture says, that is, dignified flesh as well as other flesh, "is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away", (@1 Peter 1:24). It would surely wither up in our souls in the light of a heavenly dignitary such as Gabriel, the glory of man would fail. So Luke introduces Gabriel to us, or to Theophilus, as "standing on the right of the altar of incense"; that is to say, he stood in the place of power, but power in relation to the greatest excellency, for the incense is, typically, the intrinsic excellency of Christ. That is the divine thought as to the altar of incense. Well, that is not the kind of thing
{311}
that is expressed in the word 'excellency' as applied to a governor or a president in this world. God would bring in, you see, intrinsic excellency, and that is not acquired in this world according to man, it is a divine quality; it has come to light in Christ as Man. All excellency according to God has come to light in Christ becoming Man here and moving about this world. Think of the intrinsic excellency, beloved, that was there in that outward form of humility! And there was excellency with Gabriel, at the right hand of the altar of incense. Then again, in speaking to Mary about the Lord, the angel speaks of the "holy thing", not simply the holy Person -- but the holy thing, as referring to what Christ was as intrinsically *holy*. Not in the sense in which a priest is sanctified by the Spirit, but intrinsically holy. That could be said of none other, and Luke would bring that near to us in the Person of Jesus.
Then in the second chapter of Luke, heaven comes down; not now in specially dignified angels, but in "a multitude". First, there is one speaking with the shepherds, but the glory that shines round about the shepherds, is the glory of the Lord, not of the angel. In relation to this one evangelical angel, we have the glory of the Lord shining round about the shepherds, so that we have an incentive to moral elevation introduced at once; and then, with that angel, a multitude of the heavenly host appears. So that heaven is brought down in volume, and they were saying, "Glory to God in the *highest*" There is nothing higher than that, there is no greater moral elevation than that. That is, of course, literal, but it is also moral. When it is a question of what God is as compared with men here. He is called the Highest; but this is the position, it is "in the highest", glory is there, and "on earth peace, good pleasure in men". Thus throughout Luke we have the same thread, so that as the Lord enters Jerusalem for the last time, the multitude are saying: "Peace in heaven, and
{312}
glory in the highest", (@Luke 19:38). That is the whole thought now; it is not peace on earth, but it is transferred to heaven. Earth is omitted, for in the rejection of Christ by the Jews it is the heavenly side that God has in His mind as to be seen.
That is the viewpoint in the book of Acts from the very outset, and it is to appear in the assembly. We see in these verses in chapter 1 the way the Lord went up, and not simply that He went up, but the manner of His going up. We read of the ascent by which Solomon went up to the house of the Lord; that affected the queen of Sheba profoundly; but then compare that with this! This is not simply going up to the house of the Lord, but the Lord of glory returning to His own place, to heaven. We have to think of what underlies the movement, the Person who was there, the home above so well known, and all the reception that was about to be accorded to Him. The passage says that having said certain things to them, "*He was taken up*", but it adds "*they beholding him*" (@Acts 1:9). That is an element that remains. However many there were present the thing was seen by them as far exceeding what the queen of Sheba saw. "They beholding him", their hearts were in it, beloved brethren. He has been communing with them and now the opportune moment arrives and He is taken up, they beholding Him. The golden thread of moral elevation is there; what they saw, the kind of movement that they beheld, was not to be effaced. The Lord had said earlier that certain should not see death until they saw the Son of man coming in His kingdom. That is another view. One is moved in thinking of the many views of Christ's movements that were to be beheld. In @Psalm 22 He is seen as "the hind of the morning". That alludes to His resurrection. We often hear of heavenly spectacles that are to be seen, once, it may be, in a hundred years, eclipses and the like -- well, now, this is a marvellous thing, "the hind of the morning".
{313}
And those who were up early saw it. I refer to the peculiar privilege of seeing the Lord immediately as He arose from the dead. We read in @John 20 of Mary Magdalene coming in early morning, while it was still dark. If I value the agility of Christ, "the hind of the morning", the grace of His movements, I must be moving early in the morning. It is the best time to get divine impressions; we find in the Old Testament, continually, how things were done early. So there was to be seen on that morning without an equal, the movements of Christ, His graces and affection. With what agility the Lord moved from one to another of those whom He loved! Then, as I said, there is that other view -- the Son of man coming in His kingdom. And John the baptist was affected as he saw Him *walking*; there was grace in that movement also. The Son of man coming in His kingdom is the idea of *majesty*. All these things are intended to deliver us from the tinsel of human glory. Majesty, according to man, is much spoken of; and dignity in various grades, but Luke would deliver us in a gradual, steady, but certain way, from all vain show. We are not despising majesty as applied to men in this world under the government of God, He recognises it in its place; but in the most effective manner Luke introduces the thread of moral elevation, so that the thing gradually slips away and becomes nothing. What would all the glory of the Caesars or of the kings of this period, be, compared with the Son of man coming in His glory!
Well, all that is an element here: "they beholding him"; they saw Him go up, "and a cloud received him out of their sight", that was not till they saw Him, till they saw *that* movement. The faith era begins as He passes out of view. The disciples have thus got in their souls the impression of what God intends to remain in the church, because what we have recorded in words, is just enough to keep us within the banks of the river, so to speak, but what lies within, is *the impression* that the
{314}
Holy Spirit reserves and conserves and works into our souls. Therefore, as you progress you will find that gradually the things of this world and the glory of them lose their hold on you; you are advancing, you are ascending morally. You get the impression of the Lord Jesus going up in all the holy affection and the holy intelligence that He had of what He was going into -- it was His right to go into heaven. He is received "out of their sight". It is not just into heaven, but out of their sight, but the impression that they got remains; the faith era begins, and that impression enters into the assembly. Some day we shall understand that movement, for we shall go up, too; it is not a wholly new thing. It is true that Paul says: "Behold, I tell you a mystery", (@1 Corinthians 15:51), and he goes on to say that "we shall all be changed"; and to the Thessalonians he says we shall be "caught up". The *going up* of Jesus as seen prepared them for this. The impression of it belongs to us, it is part of our heritage. Why, then, go down in a worldly sense? It is a contrary movement. And so in chapter 10 one is reminded of Jonah; it is the same town of Joppa; it is said he went *down* to Joppa, and being in Joppa he went *down* to the ship, and being in the ship he went *down* to the sides of it. That is the opposite movement, a man fleeing from the presence of the Lord; but happily he was restored. Restoration from such a course is possible even in these apostate days. But you see with Peter how this element of moral elevation appears; he had been going through all quarters in his ministry, according to @Acts 9. There is a new chapter being opened up in the service of God, and Peter was in accord with it so far, for he was going to all quarters instead of staying in Jerusalem; not yet the gentile quarters, but he was on the way to it, as it were, instinctively. He was ready for it; at least, he was ready for the lesson God was about to teach him. It is a great thing to be ready for divine instruction: there is a kind
{315}
of undercurrent in our souls, indefinable it may be, and when God acts we are ready.
So Peter comes to Joppa, as you will observe at the end of chapter 9. They had sent for him, and as he arrives Dorcas had died, and she was laid out in the *upper* room. I only refer to that. They also were in the spiritual intelligence in keeping with the moment. There is always a current as God is working, and we come into it as we are rightly exercised. Of course, if will is active and the world is in our hearts, we do not come into it, but if there be desire in a general way to be with God, we come into the current, and I would urge upon you that there is a current now. There was a naughty current at this juncture, and it was about to move towards the western world, and Peter was not left out. What he found at Joppa helped him -- that is, the woman was washed and laid out in the upper room and he went up there. Tabitha was raised up there, and delivered back alive. Then Peter is in the house of one Simon by the sea; which is another thing, for the very environment in which God sets us will help us if we are in the way, as the servant of Abraham says, "I being in the way", for God is in everything; God is moving in everything. That house of Simon was "by the sea" not accidentally, but in the ordering of God. God looks a long way ahead, and it was important that Peter was in this house of Simon. His name was Simon too, but his surname was Peter, we are told. There is not much made of him beyond that; as the heavenly announcement is made to Cornelius not much is made of the person. It was not the great apostle Peter; that is not the point here, it is a question of what Peter really is, and whether he is amenable to the governing principle of the moment, and he was. His name was Simon, but his surname was *Peter*, there was *spiritual* material there; and if there be not spiritual material you will not come into the current, nor will you respond to the governing principle of the
{316}
moment. His surname was Peter; and he is in this house and they are preparing the meal, and now you see he is not idly waiting and resting, as you might wait in an ante room, but he goes up to the housetop -- that is the thing. Why could he not pray where he was? He went *up* These remarks are not accidental, they are to show that Peter was in the current of the moment. I would not be out of a divine current for worlds! Nor would I be in that of the world, for there are the two currents running. And so Peter goes up to pray, and he comes under the influence of heaven in a most remarkable way, for he is in an ecstasy. How many of us know anything about that, beloved brethren? He becomes in an ecstasy. Paul says: To God "we are beside ourselves", (@2 Corinthians 5:13). God takes that way with us to lift us out of ordinary reckonings; thus we have to be prepared for eternity. There are no time limits there, no weights or measures; God is preparing His people for heaven, and we have to get some little education as to what it is to be outside of the reckonings of time and natural limitations. Paul said: "Whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell", but he knew he was in the third heaven, he knew he was in paradise; it was as a *man* in Christ. Think of that experience! and it is available. I do not say to the same extent, but there is the principle of being "in the Spirit", as John says, of being outside time reckonings and becoming accustomed to what we are going into for ever.
Heaven greets Peter. He is on the right line now, and he sees in a spiritual way; he is taken out of time, as it were, and he sees heaven opening. It is not yet that he should go in, but the point is to bring out what the mind of heaven is at the time, for heaven has its mind. Now you come, not to instinct, but to intelligence; so this "great sheet", knit at the four comers, is let down, and "it came even to me", he says. Think of heaven occupied with that man as he was there in an ecstasy on
{317}
the housetop! He says: "It came even to me". And "this took place thrice", as if heaven would impress its mind upon him, and what the elevation involved. It is to take us out of nationalism; that is one feature of it. It was "a great sheet knit at the four comers ... Wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air", (@Acts 10:11,12). They are all there; these creatures do not know any nation; what, for instance, does a beast know about England or Germany? God intends to impress us with the universality of the mind of heaven, and that is moral elevation; it is smallness to be national now. I do not deny that God took up a nation -- of course He did; and He will yet have a nation which other nations will be bound to respect. So the magi in the east saw the star of "the king of the Jews", and they came to find Him; they were delivered from their own national feeling, they were ready to worship the King of the *Jews*. Now, the sheet is intended to lift us out of the littleness of patriotism, of national feeling, of family feeling; indeed, out of all feelings that are not in accord with heaven, that we might be like heaven, and reflect the mind of heaven here. That is moral elevation, which is what we are taught here. These messengers of Cornelius were drawing near to Joppa when this happened, everything synchronised to carry out the purpose of God; thus everything happens exactly on time. This man must get the light, and he must get it from a man divinely prepared: one morally great, who has just been in touch with heaven, who has had heaven's mind brought to him. Thus Peter says: "Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptised, which have received the Holy Spirit as well as we?" verse 47. The Holy Spirit fell on the hearers of his word while they were listening. It was a wonderful day at Caesarea when Peter was called into service after all this education; he is in keeping with the moment; he is
{318}
preaching, and he is full of this moral elevation, of this heavenly view. He said to Cornelius, when he fell down to worship him: "I myself also am a man", and they went into the house, Peter "talking with him" -- two *men*, not a Jew and a gentile. That is the idea that God had in His mind to bring about.
Now, the scripture in chapter 19, is the summit, chapter 10 is on the way to it. You have emphasised in this book the thought of heaven: the *sound* from heaven, in chapter 2, and the Holy Spirit coming from heaven; in chapter 9 the *light* from heaven, and the voice of Jesus speaking to Saul, and in chapter 10 the *sheet* from heaven. Heaven has asserted itself in a peculiar way in the sheet. The full result of all this is seen in Paul: he is the acme of moral elevation from the positive side; and God, as it were, accelerated the idea in him early in his life, fourteen years before, by taking him up. "I know a man in Christ", he said -- it was fresh in his mind -- "such a one caught up to the third heaven ... he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter", (@2 Corinthians 12:2 - 4). You get two things: "the third heaven" and "paradise", the third heaven is the *elevation*, and paradise is the *blessedness* of the place -- these two things go together. So that the apostle was fitted by this experience in a peculiar way to bring out the position of the church, the heavenly vessel, in which the glory of God is to shine throughout "all generations of the age of ages", it is a wonderful vessel! He arrives, we are told, while Apollos was at Corinth. Apollos, as we may say, was holding the ground in relation to public order. Corinth, in the light of the epistles to the church there, stands for public order in the house of God; but Ephesus stands for the heavenly side: the two things run together. Now, Apollos was at Corinth; that position was held. He had refused to go there at one time, because Paul could not go on account of their state, but
{319}
he was there now, and it is well that the Corinthian ground should be held. We should not confuse the two sides; that is, all that refers to the heavenly side is Ephesian; and all in the way of announcement or information belongs to the public or Corinthian side. Apollos was at Corinth, a faithful man, a man to be noted. Although not converted through Paul, he was a man for whom Paul had the greatest respect, and he had the greatest respect for Paul; so great was his respect for him that if Paul could not go to Corinth, he would not go; a man mighty in the Scriptures and yet amenable to the instruction of a humble man and his wife -- Aquila and Priscilla. That is the kind of man Apollos was. It is of special importance that he was at Corinth at this time. But Ephesians is the heavenly side, and so you find the apostle Paul mentioned here as arriving at Ephesus through "the upper districts" -- that is, the summit, as it were; he arrived there on that line; and in Ephesus, in this chapter and the next, we have developed the most wonderful results for God -- that is, the assembly. The assembly in its heavenly character, that which as complete, comes down from God out of heaven; and it is in Ephesians, as I have said already, that we are told that there is glory to God "in the assembly in Christ Jesus" -- that is the position of it: it is raised up together and seated in the heavenlies "*in Christ Jesus*"; that is the status it has. It is not simply raised up and set down in heaven, but "in Christ Jesus"; that is the status of the assembly. "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", (@Ephesians 3:21). A marvellous thing, beloved! God would impress upon us the principle of moral ascent instead of descent, that we might be prepared for what we speak of as 'the rapture' -- the rapture of the church. Philip could tell you something about that: for in the Acts you have threads introduced that give clues and which develop so that we are prepared for
{320}
things as they happen. Philip was used in the blessing of the eunuch, and no doubt the eunuch would love to have him go along with him in the chariot -- what delightful company he would have been! But we must not make too much of individual company. If we make too much of a individual God will, may be, come in and take him away. So the angel directed Philip first, and then the Holy Spirit directed him, to take his place in the chariot. His service pleased heaven -- it pleased the Holy Spirit, too. Jesus was beautifully presented in Philip's gospel, we may be sure. The Spirit caught him away. Philip was thus raptured. So that the catching up of the saints will not be anything new to him. In keeping with this we see the manner of the Lord's going up in chapter 1. The angel said to the disciples: "This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven". So that the thing is carried right through in Luke's mind. Then, as if to show that they took in the thought of elevation, they returned to Jerusalem, it says, and the distance is given, and they went to the upper room. This would mean also the avoidance of religious show.
All that corresponds with Ephesians, because chapter 20 of this book records the upper room again. It is the position of the church in the absence of Christ; it stands, I believe, for moral elevation pending the time of actual elevation, so that that elevation will not be new to us. We shall not look back, beloved, as we are taken up, with any longing desire for this poor world -- even though we may have occupied a castle in it, we shall go up with delight to our own place, our own home!
{321}
THE ASSEMBLY AS IN 1 CORINTHIANS AND EPHESIANS
@1 Corinthians 1:1 - 3; @Ephesians 3:20, 21
J.T. I have been thinking that we might consider a little the church, as it is presented in 1 Corinthians and in Ephesians. Corinthians gives the assembly in its local setting, and I thought we might compare this with the aspect of the assembly which is set forth in Ephesians and which deals with it in its universal and eternal relations, Corinthians describes the order governing us as coming together in assembly, which involves all the local circumstances. Ephesians is the goal; it is not local nor does it provide for the public aspect of the church: it sets forth the spiritual side or feature, into which we may or may not enter now; entering into it requires spiritual power in our souls. Of course, it affords instructions and exhortations corresponding with the exalted position m which the saints are viewed, but not of the church as formally set here as "the church of God".
F.S.M. Are you suggesting the two lines of thought together, in order that there may be balance with us as viewing the church locally and yet with universal affections and interest?
J.T. Quite.
J.O.S. The Corinthian assembly involves the thought of men and women, but your thought is the possibility of reaching what is entirely spiritual?
J.T. That is so. In Corinthians we come together as calling "on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ", which is connected with the public position. I think we shall see how the assembly is independent of human arrangement, wisdom, protection or help of any kind. What was missed at the Reformation was this feature of calling on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Old Testament indicates how men of faith first began to
{322}
call on the name of the Lord, and how He answered them -- as it says: "Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name, they called upon the Lord, and he answered them", (@Psalm 99:6). The wilderness position would have been impossible apart from the calling on the name.
F.S.M. What is involved in calling on the name?
J.T. All that is set out in the name. You invoke His help in that connection. The value of the person is in the name. It began when Enosh was born (@Genesis 4:26). Seth apprehended in him a weak, mortal man, in whom there could be nothing for God without divine help. We find it continued in Abraham, who built an altar and called on the name of the Lord. The Lord will support us in everything to which His name can be attached if we call upon Him.
F.S.M. It would be far more than a cry of distress? Even in the darkest days the characteristic is maintained of calling on the name of the Lord.
J.T. In 2 Timothy you "follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart": that is, you are among the priests, @Psalm 99:6. All matters relative to the public testimony are in evidence in our coming together in assembly, and we are there as those who "call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ". That is the attitude we take up. We invoke that name, and we may reckon on the, fullest support, so that whatever is desired to be undertaken is stated. All that enters into the public position can be met there.
F.W.J. Does calling on the name of the Lord suppose His absence?
J.T. Yes, His name takes His place. Even salvation is in it!
W.J.C. Does it suppose that we understand by the Spirit what is involved in that name?
J.T. Quite. Corinthians contemplates that the
{323}
truth of the gospel is known: Romans unfolds to us what is involved in the name.
J.R.T. Why does the thought of being "sanctified in Christ Jesus" precede the thought of calling on the name?
J.T. I suppose 1 Corinthians answers to Leviticus. The tabernacle is set up in Exodus, and in Leviticus God calls out of it. The idea of sanctification is in the call. God cannot have us in nearness to Him save as sanctified. I suppose it alludes to the reception of the glad tidings. The Lord had much people in Corinth, and the gospel of Paul 'called', them out. They are addressed here as "called saints". Sanctification could only become a fact by the reception of the Spirit. We cannot expect help apart from sanctification.
J.R.T. I wondered whether it indicated a condition on the part of those who call on the name of the Lord?
J.T. I think it does; corresponding somewhat with Peter's remark: "If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear": "Be ye holy, for I am holy".
F.S.M. In 2 Timothy, departing from iniquity is connected with naming the name of the Lord.
J.T. Naming the name is profession, but I prove the genuineness of it by departing from iniquity.
J.J. It says, too: "He shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified and meet for the Master's use".
J.T. Withdrawing in 2 Timothy, as those who name the name of the Lord, issues in sanctification.
J.O.S. What is the thought of God in having local assemblies?
J.T. That is the economy of the assembly. It was never the divine thought that the assembly should rule and minister here in a collective way *universally*. The historic idea of general assemblies is contrary to the constitution of the church. I think that God intended the
{324}
the saints to be known as a "little flock"; the Lord says: "Fear not, little flock". He intended us to be in obscurity in this world. It is in this way that family affections and co-operation would be developed. It is said in @Zephaniah 3:9: "Then will I turn to the peoples a pure language, that they may *all* call upon the name of Jehovah, to serve him with one consent". You can hardly get that in a large gathering, for however large the gathering, the tendency is for things to come into the hands of two or three. The thought is that there should be small, companies, each individual being known by name and taking his own obligation. This preserves the warmth of family relationship.
J.H.T. Is that why, in Numbers, each man was to encamp in his own tent and by his own standard?
J.T. Quite so.
J.J. There seems to be a provincial idea in Galatians.
J.T. Yes, but the assemblies are regarded separately. An epidemic had spread there, and the apostle dealt with it in a general way. The whole province was affected.
J.O.S. It does not say 'the *assembly* in Galatia'.
J.T. No. It is "the *assemblies* of Galatia". It is not the Corinthian point of view Peter wrote to the sojourners of the dispersion in several provinces, although not addressing them as assemblies. In neither case is provincial or general assembly function implied.
F.S.M. In calling on the name of the Lord, is there ample resource in each locality?
J.T. I think that is what comes about. In 1 Chronicles we learn that there were more "principal men" in some families than in others. However large gatherings are, things tend to be in the hands of a Jew; thus the mass of those in them settle down as members of a congregation. Small local gatherings lead to the development of spiritual stature, so that you have a wider distribution of responsibility, hence greater development in personality and general ability.
{325}
F.S.M. Would you not agree that there is a great need today for an increased number of spiritual men?
J.T. That is what I am thinking of. They hold things for the Lord. Increase in the number of spiritual men -- or principal men, as they are called -- is a great point. Smaller meetings promote their development.
Ques. Saul of Tarsus had 'authority to bind all them that call on His name'. Would they be known locally?
J.T. I think they would. He went into houses, to drag the occupants to prison, but he did not know what he was up against. Was he stronger than the Lord? That is the idea. Calling on the Lord's name ensures protection; and the result of it was that all the assemblies had rest and were edified. Calling on His name implies all that is set out in it, which He is bound to defend. If we take up that attitude locally we may be sure we shall not lack. We shall learn what He is to the church, and this works out locally. Those who were attacked by Saul called upon the Lord's name, and the Lord dealt with Saul. The Lord will help us, as doing the same.
J.O.S. It calls for the spirit of subjection among the saints.
J.T. It does. What a thing it is for the saints to sit down and say: 'We are under His protection; we may be very small, but we call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and He will not fail us'!
P.L. Would it bring the renown in which He has been received into heaven into the local position?
J.T. It would. We gather, in His name, but we also call upon it, so that the power is there: "There am I in 'the' midst of them", He says. We ought to notice the pronouns in that particular passage -- "it shall be done for *them*"; "there am I in the midst of *them*". "No man shall set on thee to hurt thee" -- that gives great independence; not fleshly, but spiritual independence.
W.J.C. Is that the thought in Zephaniah -- "The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty"?
{326}
J.T. Quite so. You see in the Psalms how the Spirit of God looks back and refers to "Moses and Aaron among his priests", because they called upon His name. Moses asked how he could lead and nurse that people. What could he do? He called upon the name, and he was answered. The whole people rise up against him, but they cannot prevail. That should encourage us in our local setting, which is our wilderness setting. The calling and sanctification marking us, necessarily creates opposition, and hence the need of calling upon His name.
J.R.T. Do you get the principle set forth in the three Hebrew children? They invoked the name, and they came under His protection.
J.T. That is very good. In the account, @Daniel 3, of their deliverance out of the fire their names are mentioned thirteen times, showing what they were to God. But how have they been developed? It is by calling on the name of the Lord, and He is there to be called upon.
J.H.T. Is that why certain names are mentioned at the beginning of @Acts 13?
J.T. Exactly. The point is to bring out the highest features in the place, and so the names are mentioned.
J.J. What is to happen in a local company when the numbers get too large?
J.T. I think there is a great snare in large numbers. Of course, you rejoice to see a large number of saints together, but let there be such an ordering that calling on the name is necessary! A large number is apt to be Self-supporting. Little gatherings feel their dependence more: they need the Lord and are conscious of it.
J.J. What should be the guide in splitting up?
J.T. I think the cup, helps to determine the size. All should drink out of the one cup. The Lord fed the multitude, but they were set down in fifties. Obadiah hid a hundred prophets *by fifty* in a cave, @1 Kings 18:4.
J.O.S. Things have been hindered, perhaps, by the thought that there should be a principal man.
{327}
J.T. In @Matthew 18 we have "two of you" and two or three gathered together in the Lord's name.
F.S.M. It is not only calling on the Lord, but calling on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
J.T. It is the public collective position that is in view: He has put His name upon us. The development of the principal men is a very important matter, for it saves you from clericalism, and would develop personality.
J.O.S. It says of Onesimus that he was "a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you".
J.T. That is the idea.
J.H.T. Was not Paul's company made up of such men, principal men who had been developed locally?
J.T. That is so: there were those in Israel who were "expressed by name" -- principal men who could be called upon because they had proved themselves. I believe that works out in each locality as we call on the name of the Lord. The Lord looks over the field of influence and, as at Antioch, there is a development of personality with some. They are available for Him.
F.S.M. Are not the younger men more developed in the smaller companies?
J.T. I think they are. There are gradations, and the Lord intends it to be so. When a large company divides the younger men are moved up, so to speak, in a spiritual way. It was never intended that one brother should stand in the way of another's service or growth. The smaller gatherings would prevent this.
Ques. Is Sosthenes moved up in the first chapter of 1 Corinthians?
J.T. I think he is very much moved up. He is called "the brother": he had qualified in that relation. At Corinth they were cultivating their own names. If I rely on my personality as having given me distinction in the world, I am all wrong. Such distinction has no place in the assembly. Paul, Cephas, and so on, were used by local
{328}
leaders to make their *own* name. We do not want that. If I bring into the assembly anything that attached to me in the world I am on that line. Personality is to be acquired within, in relation to the name of the Lord. Personal love to Christ gives us a right spring. If I am to have a name it is to be on that line.
Ques. What is the thought, in @Numbers 1, that the men who were to stand with Moses and Aaron were expressly named?
J.T. Each man had his own distinction, being head of his father's house. He would be great enough to stand before Moses and have his part in general matters relating to public testimony. He would represent his own tribe, which conveys the local feature.
Ques. Is that what is meant by a principal man, that he is able to stand up in that way?
J.T. That is so. The principal men have graduated into a position of trust in the assembly.
J.H.T. Bethlehem-Ephratah speaks of obscurity, but seven shepherds and eight principal men are to be raised up, @Micah 5:5.
J.T. I thought that in sending Timotheus to Corinth the apostle would convey in him the idea of true greatness. He had no one like him. There were being developed in Corinth certain names on the principle of the world. They were local leaders, who got their names by worldly, influence of some kind -- but the names must be spiritually acquired.
E.C.T. Sosthenes comes to light first in connection with suffering. @Acts 18.
J.T. Quite so. It is helpful to see that all public-matters requiring the protection and support of Christ are connected with His name. We need His support and protection in the smallest matter: whether it be a burial or a marriage, we need to invoke the name, for they enter into the testimony locally. However formal a thing seems to be, there should never be the absence of
{329}
power, and that power lies in the name of the Lord. Things should be done in the heavenly manner, and not in the current way of the world. In @Matthew 18, after the Lord has referred to the assembly as such in verses 17 - 18 He says in verse 19: "Again I say unto you, that if *two of you* shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven". That is an immense thing; and it goes on: "For where *two or three* are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them". He is contemplating changed circumstances and what is in His mind is the persons as of the assembly. The personality of the assembly is already established in chapters 16 and 17. At the beginning of chapter 17 they saw Him transfigured before them; they should see majesty in the Lord's Person coming in His kingdom. "His countenance shone as the sun". Then there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, talking with Him, and heaven is opened to them and they hear the voice: "This is my beloved Son". They got a view of heaven! The remainder of the chapter is to bring out how that would apply to them -- "me and thee" -- they were to be sons, verses 24 to 27. Two or three are the assembly from the standpoint of personality, not from the standpoint of material. *Peter* is the material.
J.J. Calling on the name of the Lord would save us from any ecclesiastical pretension.
J.T. And from dependence on worldly support or help of any kind. The cathedral is pretentious, and it requires to be kept up. The world has to be relied on for that. But those who call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ do not have to rely on the world. If they have a funeral service they do not have to call in worldly things to make a show. The name of the Lord covers them. And so with a marriage. Everything public is taken out of the realm of what is current as accepted by the world; because we are calling on the name of the Lord.
{330}
J.O.S. In China or India or in Europe the assembly would be the same, would it not?
J.T. Yes, that is the universal aspect. To connect public matters with the close of the meeting is to connect them with Ephesians. They are not connected with the Ephesian position, they are connected with the Corinthian position. What happens in the light of Ephesians is not public: it is in relation to eternity, announcements do not refer to eternity. We want to go out on that note, from the Ephesian position, because it should give character and colour to all that happens afterwards: it is coming out from heaven in principle. That is the idea of coming out. In Ephesians it is glory to God "in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". It is the assembly as a whole -- we should seek to get a touch of heavenly things now, and come out on that high level. The divine intent is that the heavenly should give character to us.
J.O.S. Like the elders of @Exodus 24: they saw "the God of Israel", and then it says "they saw God".
J.T. The idea was that they should carry down into the camp of Israel an impression of heaven. There were seventy of them besides Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and they would spread abroad the impression they had received. The low level is where the Lord is called upon, it is the public position, where we face the world; but then there is the high level, and the Lord would have us arrive at the Ephesian level. The two things run together.
F.W.J. @Ephesians 1: 23 is the assembly in the light of the thousand years when all things are headed up in Christ; the last verse of chapter 3 is the assembly in its eternal character in relation to the eternal state: "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto ... the age of ages".
{331}
Ques. Does that involve the mediatorial position of Christ eternally -- "in Christ Jesus"?
J.T. I think it does. We never, get beyond that. It is to that we belong, and it is that sphere God is operating. It is an entire mistake to assume that we are lifted into Deity. What I think we have to come to is the mediatorial sphere or area: whether we look backward or forward there is that.
J.O.S. Today the local assembly is in a kind of mediatorial position, but in the coming day it will be the assembly in its completeness and glory.
J.T. Yes; it will have a mediatorial position then, too. So that the assembly comes down out of heaven as a benign influence, having the glory of God. We read of glory *to God* "in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages"; it is the vessel in which *He* gets glory eternally. It is an immense thought. I believe God is seeking to educate us by leading us on to the upper line, so that we shall not be strangers to heaven when we get there.
J.J. Do you look on Corinthians and Ephesians as the beginning and end respectively of Paul's ministry -- the foundation in Corinthians and the chief corner-stone in Ephesians?
J.T. Just so: Paul arrived at Ephesus, "having passed through the upper districts". Apollos held the ground at Corinth, @Acts 19: 1, we may say, as Paul arrived at Ephesus. Ephesus was the consummation.
W.J.C. What is the real force of glory to God "in the assembly"?
J.T. I think it is what God secures in it.
W.J.C. Outshining?
J.T. Yes, and more: it is what is towards Himself.
F.S.M. What would lead us into this heavenly region?
J.T. The apprehension and appropriation of Christ in heaven. The Holy Spirit is here to lead us to that
{332}
point, like the servant leading Rebekah to Isaac. What Abraham stresses is that Isaac is not to leave the land of God's purpose. It is Christ in heaven in the sense in which we apprehend Him there now, and may reach Him there now. The rapture is the Lord's action, but at the present time the power of reaching Christ is by the Spirit.
W.J.C. Is that @2 Corinthians 4:6 -- "the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ"?
J.T. That does not go quite so far, though the administration of the covenant would set you free in your affections. In Acts the Lord was received up, "they beholding him". That is the beginning of the idea. They saw Him go, and it was said to them that He would so come in like manner as they had seen Him "go into heaven". Then they went up to the upper room, as though it was an element which had entered into their souls. Peter went up, too, in @Acts 10 to the housetop and heaven greeted him. "It came even to me". The climax is that Paul arrived at Ephesus by way of the upper region, heaven meets us on the up-line. The lower line is seen at Corinth, in the public position, but in coming together in assembly there is the, upper ling before us, to which public things do not belong. Heaven does not need to hear announcements made they are for earth, so that you leave on the high level -- on the upper line, with the riband of blue -- you take on the heavenly colour, and go out into the world as heavenly. It is a great thing to be in a state capable of taking on the heavenly colour and going out into the world with it.
J.J. Moses- face shone when he came down from the mount.
J.T. Quite so -- and so did Stephen's. He took on the heavenly colour.
F.W.J. Does the assembly in Corinthians give you
{333}
the thought of responsibility; while in Ephesians it is looked at simply as the work of divine Persons?
J.T. I think so. Ephesians gives you the *whole assembly* in the light of eternity.
{334}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION
@Revelation 1:10,11; @Revelation 2:7 (first section); @Revelation 14:13; @Revelation 22:16,17 (first section)
I desire to speak about the Spirit of God. The subject is very extensive, for the Spirit of God is mentioned in the first chapter of the Bible, and in the last, and throughout all Scripture. It will be observed that He is alluded to in all the passages which I have read, and in at least six others in the Revelation: these six, however, are found in chapters 2 and 3, and are repetitions of verse 7 of chapter 2, and thus the four scriptures read convey the setting of the subject in this book.
The first scripture involves christianity. The book itself does not treat of Christianity characteristically, nor does it treat of the church characteristically, although both Christianity and the church are in view throughout. Nor does the book treat of the Holy Spirit in His normal functions: it treats of Him in relation to the book itself, which is a book of distance. It is sobering to accept the terms implying distance in this book, for they enable us, whatever our inward experiences and relations with God, to take our place in the public position becomingly. We have our part in it, and God values this, and the feelings that go with it. We are very barren in spiritual feelings, dear brethren, and God would lead to a deepening of these. I believe the acceptance of the public position, involving the judgment of God, and involving distance, would lead to deepened feelings. You find these exemplified in the writer of the book throughout; and I believe the intent is to bring us into becoming feelings, that we might sigh and cry,, as they did of old, for the abominations that are practised. If we are at all with God we shall not be indifferent to these abominations. We shall feel with God about them, and these feelings will lead to prayers, and prayers will lead
{335}
to divine intervention, so that in the midst of the conditions described there will be something for God in each locality -- for the idea of locality is another feature that the book would impress upon us. The book contains messages to the seven assemblies, and then the whole was sent to each; there would thus be universal intelligence, each assembly would know what were the conditions of all. Hence the book, whilst emphasising the locality, leads us out of undue occupation with that which is local into occupation with and concern for what is general. The book, therefore, has a very direct bearing upon us; but I want to speak about the Spirit, and perhaps the remarks I have made will help you to see more clearly what I have in mind.
The first mention of the Spirit in the Revelation indicates an outlet from all the harrowing conditions; and no one can really view them aright, or face them, unless as experiencing in some way this outlet. We may ignore the conditions; we may shut our eyes to them; but that is not an outlet from them: that is very objectionable and displeasing to God. On the other hand, we may become so taken up with them as to be damaged by them, affected and coloured by them. So the outlet is of immense importance. As availed of, it enables us to come into these conditions as from God, in a spiritual manner. We see all things clearly. It is an important matter, not only to see a thing, but to see it *clearly*. In the gospel of Mark we have the second touch of the Lord to the blind man, which enabled him to see "all things dearly". So that there is no despondency or discouragement, but deepened feelings and corresponding prayers. What our hands find to do we do with our might; we do not let our hands hang down; we see that there is possible result, that our labour is "not in vain in the Lord"; and so we move on with encouragement and with the approval of the Lord. The prophet John here speaks about the outlet: he says, "I was in the Spirit on
{336}
the Lord's day". He gives us also his geographical position, and why he was there: "for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ" he was in the isle that was called Patmos. But although isolated in that way, he had an outlet into what was of God -- into the spiritual realm.
There are two great realms. One is the mediatorial, realm, out of which, as I apprehend, we shall never go; being finite, we cannot get beyond that. Into it God has come, in all that He is, and in such wise as to be known in all the blessedness of His nature, but yet in the mediatorial area. Corresponding with that area is the area of the Spirit -- the spiritual realm. The Spirit is here mediatorially, as Christ was, and in Him there is an outlet, you see, not only from the physical limitations imposed upon us, as in John's case, but also from the limitations incurred by the failure of the assembly. It were utterly unintelligent to assume that there are no limitations accruing from the failure of the church. There are, but the Spirit is the outlet from all these things. This outlet is what the prophet calls here "in the Spirit" -- so that we may understand that that is available to us. It implies that there is at least a spiritual basis in us, but it is not within the range of the natural man: he understands not the things of the Spirit of God. By way of illustration I would allude to the Acts, in which we get precedents and examples of things -- not exactly doctrines, although they are there, but examples in the things themselves being presented. You find such a precedent in Philip; one who set out very simply to serve the Lord, without having ostensibly any commission, except that he was a deacon. But he moved out to serve the Lord and the Lord blessed him. He affords a good lead for those of us who desire to preach: we go and do it, and it soon becomes evident whether we are effective in it. In connection with Philip, he was directed by an *angel* to go into the desert, but, as in the desert, he
{337}
is directed by the Spirit. I speak of this so that we may see how we come into the outlet. The way in which he moved in obedience to the angel brought in the action of the Spirit. He is directed by the Spirit to join himself to the eunuch's chariot. One of the greatest things is an opportunity, and opportunities lost may never be regained: but an opportunity availed of may lead to others. It is a great thing to discern an opportunity, and to avail oneself of it. The opportunity was there in the eunuch in his chariot, reading the Scriptures. One of the functions of the Holy Spirit is to indicate to what we are to join ourselves. We should be very careful to what we join ourselves. I would not join myself to one reading a novel, one of the things this world produces as food for men; but a man reading the Scriptures is another thing. The Holy Spirit said "Join thyself to this chariot", and Philip was ready -- he ran and did it. And then he was equal to the service, going the whole way, down into the water with the eunuch, Philip and the eunuch together -- a fine spectacle for heaven! Afterwards the passage says: "The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip". I am showing you how the outlet is reached. One comes to a point where the Holy Spirit can take charge, so to speak, and not only take charge, but He caught him away. We have the two thoughts -- we have not yet been caught up: we are looking for it. Being caught away is very like being caught up. But the Acts, indeed, prepares us for the great events ahead of us, for it gives us the spectacle of a man going up! Hence the going up will not be new to those who saw Jesus go up. There is nothing for faith in that which man can do in the air at the present time -- much as it is. He will come and take us, and we shall go up; the experience of going up will be ours.
Then there is the idea of rapture, or catching away. The apostle in writing to the Thessalonians speaks about our being "caught up" -- the power is from above, it is
{338}
not something inherent. That is what we speak of as 'the rapture', but that will not be new to Philip, and it is recorded, not as a mere matter of history, but so that the possibility of it may be impressed upon us. It is mentioned not as something very extraordinary, but in the simplest way, the Spirit of the Lord caught him away. He was sent by an angel from a most successful work, and he obeyed; now he has again completed a most successful piece of work, and Philip has now commended himself, so that the Holy Spirit takes complete charge of him. The brethren may praise us in serving -- and they should, surely -- but it may go too far. It *does* go too far, and there is too much of comparison with one another. It is unprofitable, as we read those "comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise" (@2 Corinthians 10:12). We have to consider whether the Holy Spirit is pleased. We speak of the Lord being pleased, but the Holy Spirit is intimately acquainted with what is going on in our service. So here it was the action of God, but it was the Holy Spirit. He was so intimately acquainted with what was going on in Philip's soul in his work and manner of service, that He raptured him, "the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip". He came back again to his ordinary conditions and preached as far as to Caesarea. He evidently knew where to stop, for Peter was to come in at Caesarea and open the door of grace to the gentiles. If Philip had been at all on natural lines, or elated with his success in service, he would have conveyed a false impression to the eunuch, and maybe have suggested to him to take him in the chariot with him: he might have become a very distinguished man in the kingdom of Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians. But the very idea of the king having a chaplain, or a chapel is ruled out entirely in the Scriptures. The Holy Spirit says, as it were, '*I* want this man', and the eunuch goes on his way -- he "saw him no more".
Now we may see how these spiritual movements
{339}
provided the basis for the spread of the testimony at that time. Peter is at Joppa, in the house of one Simon, a tanner, by the sea. These details are not for nothing -- his occupation and the position of his house are mentioned, for heaven is moving. No one can read the Acts without being struck with the way in which heaven dominates the situation. The word to Cornelius is that he is to send to Joppa for one called Simon, whose surname is Peter; you have the person designated from heaven, with a sort of dual condition: he is Simon -- his responsible name -- but his "surname is Peter". It is a question of bringing into evidence and activity the spiritual side of the man, and ignoring the natural, for Simon would be occupied with the Jewish features and prejudices of the moment, as indeed he was, for he says: "I have never eaten anything common or unclean". He was a good Jew, but what about the other side? What about this other thing that is named -- this Peter? Without *Peter*, the spiritual element in us. God can do nothing with us in His testimony. As professing to be in the testimony, the point is Peter. Now will *Peter* show itself, or will *Simon* predominate?
Well, the first thing you get is that he goes up to the housetop to pray at the sixth hour. That is not Simon -- that is a fine movement! There was a current moving out towards the gentile world, and the great vessel had already been secured -- though as yet in obscurity -- but a vessel, Paul. The current was moving, and what will Peter do? Will he move with it? The divine current is always moving. Let us be on our guard against ignoring currents, for a current is always moving while the Holy Spirit remains here. There could be nothing finer than the movement of Peter here in going up to the housetop to pray. And while they made ready a meal, an ecstasy comes upon Peter. Now, you see, the Peter element comes into evidence. An ecstasy does not belong to the natural man: it is a spiritual man that becomes in
{340}
ecstasy. Peter is in touch with heaven, and heaven will instruct him. He has found the outlet -- outside of Judaism, outside of everything on earth. It is not now a multitude of the heavenly host saying certain things, but it is something in the great sheet that conveys the mind of heaven. I would urge the cultivation of spirituality, so that we do not miss the mind of heaven for the moment. Heaven comes down -- the mind of heaven, and the voice explaining what was in the sheet. While Peter is pondering on these things, three men knock at the door. We may find these three men knocking for us, and we may not be ready to go, we may not be moving with the current. But heaven prepared Peter, and he was ready to go. The Holy Spirit says to him: "Go with them, nothing doubting, because have sent them". Peter is now in such a state that the Holy Spirit can speak directly to him. His mind was set at rest, and he went with them, imbued with the mind of heaven. He had an outlet, in the power of the Spirit, into heavenly things, and instead of going by commandment as a prejudiced Jew, he goes happily under the influence of the Spirit.
Now you see all this enters into this first scripture. "I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day"; as though the state of John opened up to him all that the book contains. He heard a voice behind him saying: "I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last", (@Revelation 22:13). What an inspiration! That One is speaking to you who is "the first and the last". How stimulating! Then He says to him: "What thou seest, write in a book, and send to the seven assemblies".
The next references to the Spirit are the seven times He is mentioned in chapters 2 and 3, a word for every saint: "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches". The Holy Spirit is alluded to in these chapters as *speaking*, not as having spoken. The chapters tell us what the Lord says, but they do not tell us what the Holy Spirit says. The Holy Spirit being
{341}
here, a divine Person, is a great reservoir of things. We have little idea, I fear, of the magnitude of the thought of a divine Person here. The Father would send Him, in the Lord's name, and He would tell them all things, and bring to their remembrance all that the Lord had said to them. That plainly indicates that all the thoughts and words of Jesus, and all the doings of Jesus are carried through; nothing has fallen to the ground. If none of the words of Samuel fell to the ground, you may be sure that none of the words of Jesus will. It is not that all the words of Jesus are written m the gospels. One of the most beautiful touches is that saying which is not recorded in the gospels, but in @Acts 20: "It is more blessed to give than to receive". The Holy Spirit has got all these things treasured up, and brings them out from time to time. Nothing of the secret history of the Lord in His relations with His Father is lost: His words. His prayers, and then all His public ministry -- all is treasured up by the Spirit. How important, therefore, it is to listen to "what the Spirit says to the churches". And that implies the idea of localities. If I have got an ear I would seek to hear what the Spirit says to the churches. You may ask me how it is that the Holy Spirit speaks? It is a very simple matter. The Holy Spirit is not incarnate, as Christ was. He is here in the church, and He employs members of the church. He has His own way. He makes His own selection, and He makes sure that His voice is heard. He is saying something: let no one assume that He is quiescent, or silent. It is therefore incumbent upon everyone with an "ear to hear" to hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. If I hear this, it gives me an understanding of the universal work of God.
Passing on from that, I would refer to chapter 14 by way of encouragement. "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth". Dying in the Lord would link on with calling on the name of the Lord. Dying
{342}
in Christ is not quite the same. Every true believer dies in Christ, for "the dead in Christ" includes all believers. But dying in the Lord alludes to my position in relation to the Lord, to His will, and to His testimony here. So you see that, as it is still the period in which believers are falling asleep, the great point is to die in the Lord; for the word is: "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth". And then the Spirit adds: "Yea, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do follow them". How encouraging for those who are workers -- and we should all be workers, surely! The Holy Spirit has intimate knowledge of everything done -- first-hand knowledge. Is that not a great incentive to toil, to labour? "Yea", says the Spirit, as though He were affected; as if His feelings entered into it. There is the love of the Spirit, as well as the fellowship of the Spirit, and how He takes note of the emotions of the hearts of the saints -- "He that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God", (@Romans 8:27). He makes intercession for us "with groanings which cannot be uttered", and so you can understand how He takes account of the labours of the saints in the Lord; how His feelings are brought into it as they "die in the Lord". The saints die with the flags flying, with no lowering of the standard, for the principle is that you serve by the standard of your father's house; that is the local idea, that is never to be lowered; and you die in the Lord. It is the testimony, and the Holy Spirit is keenly in that: "Yea, says the Spirit, ... and their works do follow them", in rejoinder to the voice from heaven. Not one of these works will be missed out: they follow on.
The final reference is in the last chapter. We began with the outlet -- being "in the Spirit on the Lord's day". The church is moving on with the Spirit. You get a view of the Spirit in the first chapter, and you never lose
{343}
sight of it. It is the outlet from the whole scene -- a scene into which you have to return, but which you can take account of according to God. What could be greater than to be moving on now, under the leading of the Spirit, as Rebekah did. "Wilt thou go with this man?" It is moving on with the Spirit. She says, "I will go" -- she is resolved to go. If I learn what it is to be in the realm of the Spirit on the Lord's day, I get a view of the church according to the mind of God, and I will not let that go: it is that which will enable me to go on to the end. One would love to draw the young ones here info the current of these things. Then there is the power that carries you forward, in the camels of Isaac. What you find in @Genesis 24 is that Isaac came from the way of the well Lahai-roi: he comes from going there. It is Christ in heaven, in relation to the Holy Spirit, and the great system of the Spirit. That is the thing that sustains the assembly. He came from there, and "he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and behold, the camels were coming". She is coming home: it is *the end*. That is the position. The Lord is standing at the centre of things in relation to the church at the moment. Christ knows the full value of the well: it is the system of the Spirit In the power of this we can go through to the end, and hence the Lord announces Himself. He says: "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star". That is the announcement. The root of David is John's gospel, it is the Person of Christ; the offspring of David is Matthew's gospel. These expressions are perfectly intelligible to the Spirit and the bride. The bride understands. It is a very fine tribute to the work of the Holy Spirit, that He has the bride here in intelligence as to the Person of Christ. Normally, the church cherishes that. The Lord had said: "Who do ye say that I am?" and Peter knew who the Lord was, and the church knows who He is.
{344}
These two things put together in our souls keep us right as to the Person of Christ, and we want Him to come. "The Spirit and the bride say. Come".
One might say much about David, for he speaks of all that is best and most refined in Scripture. It is a question now of spiritual refinement. David refers to that, and music is the expression of it. It is he that elaborates the great subject of music, and carries it forward in the service of God. It runs through this book. The harp, a stringed instrument, is presented as used in *heaven*, and the singing is so select that only one family on earth can learn the song of the family singing above -- the 144,000 redeemed from the earth, who are with the Lamb, chapter 14. Think of the refinement and ability of that family in heaven and of all that the Holy Spirit has accomplished. The church is completely in accord with Him in these instincts and desires, so that "the Spirit and the bride say. Come".
That, dear brethren, is what one would seek to impress upon us: we are to move on with the Spirit in these circumstances so as to be ready for the announcement of the coming of the Lord, the announcement rather of His Person, which is greater than His coming, and the Spirit and the bride say. Come! We want that Person here.
May God bless the word to us.
{345}
APPEARING BEFORE GOD
@Deuteronomy 16:16,17
It will be known to most of us that Deuteronomy gives us the words of Moses himself. He is in the position, not of being commanded to say certain things to the people, but rather of saying them of himself, and in saying them, he would convey the affection that he had for the people of God. Thus this book brings out uniquely the "man Moses". In @Numbers 12:3, the Holy Spirit tells us that "the man Moses was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth"; thus he is a figure of Christ. We have to take account of the Lord Jesus as the representative of God here, but we have also to take account of Him as He was, or as He is, "the man Christ Jesus", (@1 Timothy 2:5). Moses was but a figure; the Holy Spirit says all that is possible about him, there was none like him! He will say all He can about any of us: we may be sure that our good qualities shall not be unheard of. We need not advertise, the Spirit of God will place His own estimate where it will be known. And so, as Moses is envied, and, alas, by those nearest to him, Miriam and Aaron, the Lord came down to the tent door, so concerned was He as regards His servant and the place he had. He was one of three; God had sent before the people Moses, Aaron and Miriam, (@Micah 6:4). Moses was one of three, but he was the first of the three. There is always that principle with God, and He has a very good reason for it. So that the man Moses was entitled to the place, not only had God given it to him, but he filled it well; and God came down to the door of the tent of meeting to settle the matter. We never need to defend ourselves, for it is a matter that God undertakes for everyone He came down specially to adjust this matter, and in the record of the adjustment the Holy Spirit says that the man Moses was the meekest in all the earth.
{346}
We get the man in this book -- what a place the saints of God had in his heart! But, as I said, he was not the Man Christ Jesus: he was the best there was in those days, but the heavens were never opened upon him, nor did a voice announce heaven's delight in him. So that over against this you have in Christ substance that God approves: "that *holy thing*". It is not only that holy babe, but that holy thing essentially, holy in all the growth "in wisdom and stature". There was substance in what He said: the Lord Jesus, in saying what He said, was what He said, "Altogether that which I also say to you", (@John 8:25). John, in his epistle, in bringing out the peculiar distinctiveness of Christianity, that it was a substantial thing as over against all other religions of the world, ancient or modem, deals with a thing: "That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life; (and the life has been manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness, and report to you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and has been manifested to us:) that which we have seen and heard we report to you". You have thus presented in Christianity what is substantial. Moses being what he was, could not be referred to thus; indeed, in this very book he reminds the people that God had spoken to him and said: "Gather me the people together, that I may cause them to hear my words", (@Deuteronomy 4:10). And he says: "Ye saw no form", "the day thou stoodest before Jehovah thy God". It was a question of words, of what they heard,, not of what they Jew. Whereas in Christianity it is what has been heard, what has been seen, what has been contemplated and what has been handled with hands. It is important to bear this in mind. But it was suggested in the man Moses. He was the best; he came nearer to Christ than anyone of his day; so much so that God came down and spoke with him mouth to mouth, face to face.
{347}
And so He says to Aaron and Miriam: "If there be a prophet among you, I Jehovah will make myself known to him in a vision ... Not so my servant Moses ... Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly, and not in riddles; and the form of Jehovah doth he behold", (@Numbers 12:6 - 8). So that there was a remarkable correspondence between Moses and Christ. What a reflection there must have been in him at times because of what Moses saw! He saw the tabernacle in pattern on the mount. No one could have set up the tabernacle save Moses; the specifications alone would not have sufficed. In Moses you have a man who *saw* the thing, and who *saw* the form of Jehovah. He was an ordinary man like the rest of us, but what flashes of light, not only in his words but also in his manner, would at rimes emanate from him! But then think of Christ! "In him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell", (@Colossians 1:19). What infinite substance you see in the Lord; what shining out, the very expression of the divine substance!
Well now, in this book you have the man Moses and what *he* said. "These are the words which Moses spoke"; that is how the book begins. So that it is not a question of repetition, but of a presentation of truth from the standpoint of such a man. In chapter 16 he takes account of Israel's year. Elsewhere our days, our weeks and our months are taken account of, but in this chapter it is a question of the veal. However many years an Israelite might have lived, they would all be filled out; that is to say, Moses is making room for God in the people for every year. There are the days of our years, but then there are our *years*.
The idea of compression is important with God. The life of Jesus represents more compression than any other life. If God takes account of Jesus for a day, it is as if he took account of me for a thousand years: "One day with the Lord is as a thousand years", (@2 Peter 3:8); for
{348}
what can that be other than what was in Christ. That is the idea of compression. And so the life of Jesus was wonderfully compressed: He was cut off in the *midst* of His days -- that is to say, they were but a half of seventy years -- but it was not until every item of the divine will was expressed.
David lived seventy years, his was a wonderfully compressed life. Several men of God were employed to write it, such as Samuel and Nathan; it was a life of events; he was full of days, full of experiences with God. There were blemishes, but generally ail those years of David were precious in the sight of God. No believer can but admit that our years should be filled up with God. Or, as I might put it, that God, in so far as we can fill, should be filled with us, to use such an expression reverently -- and we have to use human expressions. God has a heart, and He looks for something out of us every moment of our lives, but certainly every year. "Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which he will choose". You see how love in Moses by the Spirit provided for God, and for the years of the lives of His people, how these years were to be occupied. And so in the first month of the year a godly Israelite would be thinking thus: 'Fourteen days hence I have got to come before God'. What heart-searching there would be as the tribes in their different settings would be thinking thus of God! It is said of one that "God is not in all his thoughts", (@Psalm 10:4), whereas this provision is that God should be ever in the mind. In spirit Jesus said: "I have set Jehovah continually before me", (@Psalm 16:8).
In these verses the first, feast was the feast of unleavened bread, (@Deuteronomy 16:16,17). Earlier in the chapter it is the feast of the passover. Now, what I want to say is, dear brethren, that what the first feast would impress upon the mind is: if I am to appear before God, I cannot be there as inflated. Because we cannot deceive God;
{349}
God is not mocked. I may, so to speak, make a good show in some of the synagogues up north, or down in Beersheba, or toward the west, but how am I to appear before *God*? The first suggestion, therefore, is deflation; it is the feast of unleavened bread.
The feast of the passover has two sides. The one is more objective: "our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed", (@1 Corinthians 5:7). I do not do that, it is done for me. But the point here is the feast of unleavened bread -- the state in which Israel was to go out of Egypt. They were to seize the lamb, a lamb for a house, each according to the measure of his eating; the lamb was to be according to the capacity of the house, and if perchance the capacity was too small for a lamb -- for it was to be a yearling -- then the neighbour next unto his house was to share it. It was not only the neighbour, but the neighbour next unto him, for there are graded neighbours contemplated in Scripture: it was not the neighbour at a relative distance, but the neighbour nearest who was to share with him. If I am to sit down and eat the lamb with the neighbour nearest, then I must be careful as to the feelings I have for him. But there is no question of the *quantity* of unleavened bread. The neighbour is to bring the unleavened bread as well as I, and it is not likely we will have too much: but the Israelites were enjoined not to have leaven in all their houses.
So that the feast of unleavened bread is not the objective side. The objective side is connected with the lamb, and my measure, my capacity in relation to that. It is a whole Christ, and so the basis of unity is laid in the passover. Not a bone of Him was to be broken. There was a whole idea, and I bring my neighbour in to share it with me. One lamb, as it were, for the whole of Israel. And it was not to be sodden with water, it was to be roast with fire and eaten that very night. That is all objective.
But then, as I said, the quantity of unleavened bread
{350}
is not given, but the more I have, the smaller I shall be. What I want to show is that you have deflation here in the first feast; then you have expansion in the feast of weeks, and then again reduction in the feast of tabernacles. Now all this Is very practical. It is a question of how we begin the year, and with us, of course, of the maintenance of littleness, a self-imposed littleness. God will not lose an opportunity to make me small, as here in the flesh. He knows how to do it. He brings in circumstances to this end. And the saints as a rule do not miss an opportunity to make you feel small, and that is a service. But self-imposed littleness, self-imposed reduction is what God highly values, and that is the feast of unleavened bread. The neighbour comes in -- how much unleavened bread has he got? That is really the test; because ordinarily each lamb of a year old would be about the same size, but the difference would be in the quantity of unleavened bread and bitter herbs. How much has the neighbour got? How much have I got? So that it is not a question now of my meeting the brethren at Jerusalem; the point here is that I *appear before God*. How am I to appear? Throughout the Old Testament, in the types especially, you have the idea of God appearing to men, a most interesting subject; but this is, how am *I* to appear before Him? I have come down from Dan -- a long journey -- and I am here at Jerusalem, the place where Jehovah has placed His name, and I partake of the passover; I have got the unleavened bread with me. But now I say, that is not all. Earlier in the chapter they were directed to go back into their tents after this feast. But now I am to appear before God, God is going to take account of me, it is a question of appearing. In Chronicles God was looking out; not simply looking down on the mercy-seat, but looking out; that is one beautiful phase of the type, that God is looking out for any comer. And here are Israelites coming from all parts, and God is looking out
{351}
for them. It is a most searching matter at this first feast -- how much deflation? how much reduction? -- for in my spirit, if I have any idea of worldly status or if I have a little money, all these things are leaveners in themselves. I cannot appear before God as marked by any of these. I can appear before the world with them, they will help me there very much, but they will not help me in Jerusalem; I shall be ashamed of them there. The godly Israelite has come to Jerusalem to appear before Jehovah, and the first thing God would remind him of is, that it is the feast of unleavened bread, that sin must be judged, that all that would inflate must be disallowed. That would be the light that governed the position the first month of the year.
Well, I begin with this reduction in which God has pleasure. Although the lamb was a year old and developed, it was to convey what is attractive. The Lamb of God is lovable, attractive, @John 1. I feed on that; that is the great objective thought presented to me in Christ, what Jesus was here, "a small round thing"; it was a complete thing, but it was small.
Now, the second feast is "the feast of weeks". God said, as it were. You can stay here as long as you wish. At first I am limited to seven days; I go through an exercise of reduction in the presence of God. Now, He says, you are capable of being filled to the full. The Corinthians were straitened in their affections; the apostle says: "For an answering recompense, let *your* heart also expand itself", (@2 Corinthians 6:13). And so in the feast of weeks the idea is enlargement. It is the Spirit, the Holy Spirit -- the period of the Spirit. Think of what is opened up to me in the Spirit of God! It is called the feast of weeks, which just means it takes place at the end of a period; but there is no limit at all. Love will never limit us; it is a question of my capacity, whether I can take in all these things. As you get on to the feast of
{352}
weeks you see what God has prepared before the world for our glory! And God says, as it were. You can stay. It is the one feast on which there is no time-limit. And we can understand it, for in the Holy Spirit we have access into eternity. It is a marvellous thing God has opened up to us! Jacob spoke about the gate of heaven, but he did not go in.
<blockquote>'And see the spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heavenly door, <br>Has brought me to that favour'd hour <br>When toil shall all be o'er'. (`74:5)</blockquote>
This is your home. When the two disciples said to the Lord, "where abidest thou?" He said, "Come and see", (@John 1:39). We have come to it now: "The day of Pentecost was now accomplishing ... . And there came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where they were sitting. And there *appeared to them* ..." (@Acts 2:2,3). They were to get a conception of it, for Christianity is a substantial thing; it is not only what came out in Christ, but the Holy Spirit is here. Christianity is not a theory. The Holy Spirit is a Person. He appeared to them and He sat upon each of them -- that is where He is. So I have come to the realm of the Holy Spirit; I appear before God now in the largeness of the capacity which the Spirit gives. As it says elsewhere: "Borrow vessels ... let it not be few", and only when all the vessels were filled with the oil, it stayed, @2 Kings 4. God does not give His Spirit by measure from His side. But as for me, the measure is my capacity, when that is reached it has to stop. Think of the capacity that was in Jesus! The Holy Spirit came down in the form of a dove, bodily, that is to say, the whole idea.
This is a marvellous feast! A good deal of time was given to prepare: from the morrow after the sabbath on which the sheaf of the first-fruits was presented to
{353}
Jehovah. How glorious was Christ in resurrection! -- for that is the thought. In the sheaf being presented, waved, you get the idea of what God is looking at in Christ. Now God says, I will give you fifty days to prepare for this; there was to be 'a new meat offering'; the saints were to be presented as corresponding with Christ. God would have us thus before Him. It is His eternal counsel that we should be before Him in love, holy and blameless. I need not say that a good deal more could be said about this feast. The wave-loaves were to be baked with leaven -- sin is owned to be there, but rendered inactive by the fire. Pentecost involves access into eternity, what was before the world, prepared "for our glory". Not for beings of that time, but for ourselves; prepared for us before the world by God because He loved us, and because we love Him now. Love delights in company, it abhors distance, and so God would encourage us to remain in His presence, as this feast indicates.
The next feast is "the feast of tabernacles". There Leviticus. There it is a question of the whole course of God's dealings with His people; but not so here: the point here is appearing before God, and God selects three. All the males (the saints viewed in the intelligence which the Holy Spirit gives them) were to appear. The question now is, how small can I be after being in heaven? What the Holy Spirit leads me into as in the feast of Pentecost shuts out all that is of man all that is of the flesh. How much of that heavenly principle can I carry back? That is the idea of the feast of booths, for the word is "booth", it is a small idea. And what it means, I apprehend, is, how small I can be -- how great I am is illustrated in my smallness; because, really, from this point of view, my smallness is an evidence of my greatness. I disregard for ever greatness according to man; this is greatness according to God. And greatness according to God is
{354}
smallness *here*, as exhibited in Christ, the "small round thing" -- that is, the life of Jesus outwardly. No attempt at show whatever, it was all a question of bringing heaven here. The ark of the covenant illustrates it. How small it was relatively! Now the idea is, can I dwell in a booth with two or three brethren? I am in a small place, not in a big house where I can occupy a room of my own, but in a booth; there are no compartments there, the idea is smallness. And so, to bring it down to practical working out, it is a question of whether I love the brethren, whether I can be with the brethren in smallness and reproach; whether I can *live* with them, or whether it is simply a question of tolerance. In Nehemiah's day, you will remember, they had this.
The feast of booths has two parts. Compare @Leviticus 23:34 - 36, 39 - 43. The first had a fulfilment in Solomon's day, but not, the second. The first had reference specially *to God*, it was a "holy convocation"; the second part of the feast is brought in at the end of @Leviticus 23, and the kind of things they were to use to make the booths is mentioned, branches of trees, and the like. The latter part has the love of the saints for one another in view and their mutual joy before God.
It is said of Nehemiah's feast that there was none like it since the days of Joshua; that is to say, Solomon's did not come up to it. Solomon had the first part of it, from the fifteenth day to the twenty third day of the seventh month, but there is not a word about the booths, @2 Chronicles 7:9,10. Solomon had a great house, things were big in his day, according to God, of course, but the corresponding smallness was what was wanting. That is what I take the second part to indicate, and I believe that it marks, or is intended to mark, the end of our dispensation. As I enter into the truth of the Holy Spirit, I come out here in this world in littleness and in readiness to share with the brethren; it is no hardship to me to live with them in the smallest circumstances. Moses had
{355}
experience of living in very great circumstances in the king's palace, but it says that he fled to Midian, and in Midian he sat by the well. He says, as it were, I see now that it is no question of natural energy, of slaying Egyptians with my own hand, it is a question of the Spirit of God. He *sat by* the well, as much as to say, I have arrived at this, that it is a question, not of my energy, but of the Spirit of God. Then he watered the flock of the daughters of Reuel, he did not slay any of the shepherds. The presence of the Holy Spirit means that I am able to help, not to destroy. Then it says that he was "content to dwell with the man", the priest of Midian. So whatever the circumstances into which I am led in the government of God, I am to be content. In my relations with my brethren, or in my financial circumstances, I am restful; I know what I have got up there, by the Spirit, and I am content with what I have got down here; I make no effort to change. Moses was content to dwell with the man, and during all those years he stayed there he never-asked for my wages. Jacob did; it was a question of wages with Jacob, but not with Moses. The man who sits down by the well is not serving for wages; he that does so, when the wolf comes, will leave the sheep. At the end he is said to have led the flock of his *father-in-law*, showing what good terms existed between them, to the backside of the desert, to the mount of God, to Horeb. Could he have done better? I do not think so. He led them to the backside of the desert and came to the mount of God. What a word for every servant of Christ! And God said to Moses, as it were, I see what you are at, and He appeared to him in the bush and called him by name: "Moses, Moses!" (@Exodus 3:4). Moses understood this in his own experience, and therefore he could speak feelingly about the feast of booths. God said through him to the people earlier: "I caused the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt", see (@Leviticus 23:43). So
{356}
God, when He takes us out of Egypt, would teach us love. Now He would teach His people how to love; as the apostle says to the Thessalonians: "Ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another", (@1 Thessalonians 4:9). So He puts me alongside His people in humble circumstances, and teaches me how to love them. He says: 'I do not want you ever to forget how to love: keep this feast on the fifteenth day of the month. Appear before Me during this feast'.
It is very beautiful. Shall we not enjoy it in heaven being near to one another? We are now being taught for heaven. He took them out of Egypt eating the passover lamb. They were to replace Egypt. Egypt was slain in its first-born. Egypt is to be superseded by Israel. But what is the Israel that eats that lamb? Small outwardly, like Christ. So He says, I will put you into booths and you will love one another. The point in this book is to make them fit for heaven, for Canaan. Balaam saw them dwelling thus, they were like lign aloes by the waters, he looked on them with the vision of the Almighty. He saw them dwelling in tents, dwelling in love, for they had the Spirit typically there. God says. You must never forget this. The Lord said to His disciples: "Have love amongst yourselves".
Well, you will see that these are three important feasts -- the feast of unleavened bread, the feast of weeks, and the feast of tabernacles. May we understand them!
{357}
THE CITIES OF REFUGE
@Deuteronomy 19
Ques. Would you say how you apprehend the cities of refuge?
J.T. The prominence given to them in the typical books shews how important the subject is, at least in regard to what they represent -- that is, the provision made in grace for the Jew. The Lord on the cross, according to Luke, says: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do". And Stephen, in agreement with this, says: "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". It is the element of grace introduced by the Lord Jesus on the cross, in keeping, indeed, with His whole ministry in Luke: that the greatest means might be available for the greatest sinner's to be sheltered; for the ground of the cities of refuge is that they were regarded as doing the thing ignorantly, in unbelief.
Ques. It was God's provision for them in view of the murder of Christ?
J.T. Yes. That element of grace, introduced by the Lord on the cross and reflected in Stephen-and, indeed, in the earlier saints generally -- was to reside in the assembly. Here you will observe: "When Jehovah thy God hath cut off the nations whose land Jehovah thy God giveth thee and thou hast dispossessed them, and dwellest in their cities and in their houses, thou shalt separate three cities ..." That would mean that God had given salvation to His people, deliverance from their enemies, so that they were in peace, settled in the land; the element of grace would be prominent, not an attitude of vengeance, there was no such attitude in Christ; in the Psalms there is reference to vengeance, but not in the Acts, nor in Luke. It is grace. The saints, the members of the assembly, reflected that, notwithstanding the murderous attitude of the Jews. They reflected that spirit of grace, so that their very enemies, as in the case
{358}
of Saul of Tarsus, found a residence of safety in the assembly. The great lesson for us, therefore, would be the maintenance of grace towards those who might oppose or persecute. In the sphere of the saints there is safety from the avenger of blood, there is protection from vengeance, even though the person might be deserving of it. "Thou shalt separate" -- the saints, as delivered from the satanic power, were thus to provide for the sinner.
Ques. I was thinking of Paul's ascription to Timothy of "grace, mercy and peace". Are those the qualities that are found in one who is set that way?
J.T. Yes; you see in Titus the thing is very prominent: "For the grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared". All men. Its bearing is towards those who are guilty of murder, the murder of Christ was deliberate, but it was not reckoned to the Jews in that way, not as if they knew "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do".
Ques. Why is it that in this chapter you get three cities set apart provisionally? In Numbers it is six, but here it seems the last three of the six only come in additionally.
J.T. That is in view of extension.
Ques. I was wondering whether these six include the three beyond Jordan, or as the result of increase in the spiritual apprehension of things?
J.T. It would mean increase in spiritual territory. I suppose it would refer to Paul's ministry. There was the ministry of the twelve which went to a point, and the primary thought is attached to their sphere, Judaea and Jerusalem; the ministry of the twelve extended to a point but not to the full extent of the purpose that God had in His mind. So that the second three would mean what went on amongst the nations by Paul's ministry, beginning with the Jews in every case, only there was an extension -- it was an extended ministry among the
{359}
nations. Paul was really sent to the nations, but "the sons of Israel" were also included, so that he always made a point of going to the Jew first. The death of Stephen had brought out what they were doing, but he only asks the Lord not to lay "*this* sin" to their charge -- he does not make a general request. But the extension in Paul's ministry was provided for in the second three cities, showing the excess of grace; that what had happened at Jerusalem had really brought out that they knew what they were doing. Grace was presented to the Jews among the nations on the same principle as it had been presented at Jerusalem. What do you say?
F.I. I think that is right. I had in mind a little that this would stand especially in regard to the assembly in a Deuteronomy setting. I wondered whether, as there is increase in spiritual impressions of things, there is often amongst us a liability to fall short. There is the necessity for the enlargement of which you are speaking. We find ourselves up against these spiritual movements and often hinder one another; but if we are increasing on the spiritual side there should be that which should be for the preservation of others.
J.T. So you are adjusted according to that increase in regard to any opposition that there might be. Grace is always in evidence.
Ques. Would the epistle to the Hebrews fit in with the first three, "mount Zion" and "the city of the living God"; we get salvation referred to, and the Spirit is "the Spirit of grace", and reference is made to any who should lack grace?
J.T. I think so. That epistle addresses those to whom the first three directly refer. They refer to the Jews in the land, they were guilty of the death of Christ. "The dispersion" could hardly be so regarded, for they had no actual voice in the matter; but still the grace was brought to them, as it is invariably in Paul's ministry. He had to separate the disciples from the synagogue; but
{360}
the attitude primarily towards them was forgiveness. God was not charging them with the guilt of Christ's death. Paul said at Antioch of Pisidia: "Those who dwell in Jerusalem, and their rulers, not having known him, have fulfilled also the voices of the prophets … by judging him", (@Acts 13:27).
Ques. So that coming to mount Zion would be that, would it not?
J.T. I think so. In saying they had "fled for refuge", he directly alludes to the cities of refuge. The Jews had fled for refuge, and remaining on the ground of Judaism would expose them to judgment. The destruction of Jerusalem by Titus was the man-slayer; the governmental action of God overcame them. Had they come to the city of refuge they would have escaped that.
Ques. I was wondering how far the attitude of Stephen's soul and his prayer to God covered what those men were doing. It does not go any further than the *three* cities, do you think?
J.T. No; it was not a general prayer like the Lord's own. The Lord said: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do". He meant what they were doing in crucifying Him. But Stephen says: "Lay not this sin to their charge". The answer to this would mean that the murder of Stephen did not hinder the continuance of grace to the Jews.
Ques. Does he bring into practical effect the divine idea of these three cities?
J.T. I think he does.
Rem. As far as he was concerned he did not desire anything in the way of vengeance.
J.T. No; and it does not appear that it was laid to their charge, although I suppose the general conduct of the Jews is shown as Paul puts it in writing to the Thessalonians, (@1 Thessalonians 2:14 - 16). I think that is an allusion to their exposure to the avenger of blood. Instead of submitting to the gospel and taking advantage
{361}
of the city of refuge opened up in it, they kept on resisting, and wrath came upon them.
Ques. Would the act of Stephen in his intercession bring in in a priestly way salvation on that occasion? Were they covered in that way by his prayer?
J.T. No doubt; it must have been very delightful to God that in such dreadful circumstances he was able to maintain the character of the dispensation, which is an immense thing with Him. Like Abigail, who diverted David from shedding blood; it is the spirit of the church. "Vengeance is mine", God says, and "Avenge not yourselves". That is the great lesson for us, the spirit of grace, of forgiveness; we leave all else with God.
Ques. Did not Stephen's prayer in that way open the door for the extension of the activities of grace?
J.T. Well, Scripture says those that were scattered at his persecution went abroad preaching; it is a very fine result; and God honours that attitude in every one of us. Instead of vengeance here you have a widespread proclamation in Philip and in others.
Ques. Was not the spirit of that carried on in Paul himself? He says: "... all men forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge". That should mark us as together, as well as in our thoughts towards the world.
J.T. "... If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink". The assembly has become the residence of grace. The Holy Spirit has come in. God dwells here. The saints are formed in grace -- taught by it and thus fitted to exemplify the dispensation.
Ques. Grace should be the dominant feature amongst the saints?
J.T. That is conveyed in the city of refuge; the man-slayer comes in and finds that element, it is a home for him, he feels things are in his favour there.
Ques. What about Joshua, where the dries of refuge are in the hands of the levites?
{362}
J.T. That is an added thought which is very important. You might expect that in Joshua, because that book presents the heavenly side of things. Some of us were speaking about the five hundred to whom the Lord appeared, a number large enough to be influential generally. The impress of Christ risen and appearing to them would affect them, and this would enter into their influence. The levites were a goodly number, according to Numbers there were twenty-two thousand levites and eight thousand of them in actual service; so that they represent the amount of heavenly influence exerted in the book of Joshua. The priestly family in Numbers is small, but they had to do directly with God, and so their power was great; power with God in one man has universal influence. That is the idea of priesthood Godward. It is not a question so much of the number of priests, as the power of the thing, of that element. Moses and Aaron are among God's priests. They called upon the Lord and He answered them. @Psalm 99; it is not so much the number of persons as the effectiveness of the thing, whether it be in Christ personally or in one like Elijah or Moses. But one idea of the levitical family is numbers: "The assembly of the firstborn ones". The idea is that their influence is to become general, and that is what Joshua has in mind; and included in their cities (they had forty-eight, a universal number, four times twelve) were the six cities of refuge. In the hands of the levites, the heavenly saints, these were generally situated in elevated parts of the country -- "hill country". The idea is moral elevation, and the influence flowing from that. That is important in regard to these cities. The Jew would not find any spirit of vengeance in the assembly viewed in that light. The saints would be like Christ. Saul, in his opposition to them, met *Jesus*; the same kind of Man that was seen in the gospels -- "led as a lamb to the slaughter". That was what Saul met. He met that same spirit in the persecuted ones. As James said: "Ye
{363}
have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you". And so the eunuch was reading the prophet Isaiah, chapter 53, and he says: 'What does this mean?' And Philip opens his mouth and preaches unto him Jesus. That kind of man, that kind of spirit that Saul met with in his persecuting career. In the epistle to the Romans we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter, not yet slaughtered, but held there for the slaughterer to come; that is the spirit which is to mark the saints.
Ques. So that Stephen would be an example of that? He met his death in that spirit?
J.T. Yes, just as the Lord did; and then Philip preaches that Man, so that His Spirit goes abroad to the gentiles. Paul comes to Europe, and that means that you have the spirit of Jesus in the west-There is another thing here: "Thou shalt prepare thee the way, and divide the territory of thy land ..." They were to consider the distance to be covered by the man-slayer. It is very beautiful the consideration there is for the man-slayer; the distance is to be reckoned that he might have to take; there was to be a way, so that it would be possible for him to get to the city of refuge; there would be no barriers.
Ques. You would like to so present Christ that it might not be difficult for the soul to bow?
J.T. If you take Peter's first address, the way is made easy for the Jews, @Acts 2. In chapter 3 he tells them that they slew Christ in ignorance -- thus the city of refuge was open to them.
Rem. There is no toleration of unjudged evil; the act was one of ignorance, and so extraordinary grace was shown.
J.T. Hence the three thousand were added at Pentecost. There is forgiveness with God, and a way is prepared for the man-slayer to return. The addition of so many at once shows what grace was there.
Rem. And that principle should be just as active
{364}
amongst us as brethren together now. Here it is two working together, and how one who inadvertently slays the other finds grace; with us the way should be made easy for his restoration when one is convicted of sin and judges himself.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. I was thinking we need that as much amongst selves as we do in regard to the presentation of things to the world.
J.T. So that taking due account of the dispensational side of the teaching, you can use this type in the principle of it, as to anything happening amongst us.
Rem. If one has moved and inadvertently damaged another, how often you are held back because you are not sure of the conditions you are going to meet on the way back. There should be an increase in the administration of grace, so that such can find their way back easily.
J.T. I think that is very important; the person is thus encouraged to seek forgiveness and reconciliation.
Ques. Is not that the force of the word in the end of @Ephesians 4: "And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another"?
J.T. And it is put there on its highest plane -- "even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you".
Ques. You mean the spirit of forgiveness is always there?
J.T. Yes, there is forgiveness with God; there ought to be that with us; it is very beautiful in Stephen. So that if one has to deal with you about something, he is not hindered by any thought that you are a hard man, he knows you to be forgiving.
Ques. You alluded to 1 Thessalonians. The apostle carries it on to the end of the second epistle: "Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother". Is that the thought?
Ques. How about the instrument of service getting out of hand?
{365}
J.T. Well, in that there is something of remissness there is no evil or murderous intent, but want of care in the instrument leads to its being in a bad condition.
Ques. Do you think it might touch the thought of how you serve? There must be no carelessness lest you slay your brother.
J.T. The instrument of service is yourself, it is what you are. So that personality underlies service. The levite is a great person, a first-born, and should not descend to petty things; he must not allow fleshly motives, otherwise his instrument is sure to do damage.
Rem. In connection with what has been remarked: often the instrument does get out of hand.
J.T. "That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour", (@1 Thessalonians 4:4). The vessel is that which God would use. I believe Romans lays the basis for everything, so that in regard of the vessel or the instrument, even our members are to be "instruments of righteousness". There must be no axe with the head flying off; it would be an instrument of murder even though the intent might not be there. It I would be most culpable thing for a carpenter to work with an axe with its head loosely on.
Ques. That brings in the thought of subjection in all one's movements and service?
J.T. I think so. You see that your members are; instruments of righteousness, and such instruments would not damage anybody.
Rem. So that, as subject to the Lord, you would be very considerate to the brethren and others; you would not give offence in any way.
J.T. Romans is the great grounding epistle; young believers should begin there as in school. For the early impressions are the impressions that last, they are fundamental impressions; college education after does not I make up for them. One has got older and the impressions do not take on so well. And then to present the
{366}
whole body a living sacrifice; it is on the principle of sacrifice, for you are now definitely on the line of Christ; so that the instrument or vessel is in God's hands.
Rem. Self-consideration would not come in, but you would act like God.
J.T. The element of sacrifice in it would imply that you are on the same line as Christ. Sacrifice implies unselfishness. A man gives up his body. No amount of means can compare with a man's body. You present your body a living sacrifice. Such an instrument is not likely ever to damage anybody.
Ques. Would you say that the Spirit of Christ would shine out in one who is grounded in the epistle to the Romans?
J.T. I believe Romans is the basis of everything, as I said.
Ques. It develops the features that are to mark you towards your enemy, and in consideration for your brethren, which is your intelligent service.
J.T. Consideration for your brethren, and, after that, in chapter 13, the recognition of the powers that be. We may do damage in that field, if one does not understand the government of God. The powers that be are ordained of God, and if one acts in a legal manner, one may do much damage without meaning to do it. The fact that we do not mean to kill a man does not take away the great loss that may be incurred in his death.
Rem. When Abner killed Asahel with the hinder end of his spear he had to meet the consequences.
J.T. In @Romans 14 we have the 'weak brother'; you may destroy him by your knowledge. It would be the same sort of thing -- not understanding the principle of grace.
Ques. You might do a right thing in a spirit that would do damage?
J.T. Quite. Damage is done by disregarding the conscience of a weak brother.
{367}
Ques. So that in Ephesians we are to walk 'carefully', chapter 5:15?
J.T. Then in @Romans 15 we are to receive one another as Christ also received us, to the glory of God. Romans provides for having on the armour of light; we have not yet taken possession of the land, but as in the midst of darkness the armour of light means that you have light as to everything; whether it be trade unions or the Government, public things, relations in business, all these things are met by "the armour of light". The armour of God is Ephesians; it is for the land of promise. We do not want to alter things here. The land is a spiritual realm, but Romans contemplates our being in the wilderness, and going through it according to God.
Rem. So that Paul says: "As much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men".
J.T. Abimelech made a covenant with Abraham not to interfere with him or his son or grandson. @Genesis 21. As expressed in the "seven ewe lambs", Abraham would not do anybody any harm.
Ques. "Let your yieldingness be known" -- this would help us to live in our responsible spheres unperturbed and free from distress. Could we have a word about one who does the thing deliberately?
J.T. Well, it might apply to us in the spirit of it. *God* will deal with that. Alexander the coppersmith is an example. Primarily the reference is to the Jew; it became apparent that he did it intentionally, he really meant to put Christ to death. Paul said to them at Rome: "This salvation of God has been sent to the nations; *they* also will hear it", (@Acts 28:28). That would be an end of the six cities. The Jews went off wrangling among themselves. Their day is over for the tune. They had definitely committed themselves to their act, and the gospel is now no longer "to the Jew first"; therefore, in returning to the land, as they are today, they are exposing themselves to the avenger of blood -- the
{368}
judgment of God will overtake them there. Paul says: "Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil; the Lord reward him according to his works". He did not say: "I will reward him", but "the lord reward him". You do not ignore the thing. I suppose the present apostasy is like it. There is no city of refuge for Christian apostates at all, but a 'strong delusion', so that they may become worse; there is no hope for them at all.
Ques. I was going to ask: Why limit it to six cities?
J.T. I suppose the number would be abundant testimony to grace. Two is enough, three is full, and six is superabundant -- here the superabundance of grace.
Rem. There are three steps here: he lies in wait, rises against him, and smites him mortally, verse 11.
J.T. Lying in wait is the first step; a very solemn thing as showing how deliberate the murderer's attitude was. God is infinitely fair with man; in the broken state of things among the few they were not all committed to the death of Christ; some hesitated. I suppose in Joseph's case, who is a type (the Old Testament furnishes us with details), it would be known that both Reuben and Judah were not really personally murderers. Reuben sought to deliver him out of their hands; he counselled them to put him in the pit, but there was no water there. Judah counselled them to sell him; all that is taken account of by God; but Judah and Reuben were both guilty in that they concealed the matter and were thus partners to it. Had they recoiled from the thing and taken an open stand against the murderous attitude of the others, they might have saved Joseph, but they did not. A remnant were saved, but on the principle of grace; they accepted responsibility for the guilt, and "fled for refuge". "Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain"; every repentant one would admit that. That was the only way out, and in repenting they would come into the
{369}
city of refuge and save themselves from the man-slayer.
Ques. Would you say that God had sealed it upon the Jews as a nation -- "His blood be upon us, and upon our children"?
J.T. He finally bound that on them. I suppose the apostles really determined that: "Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven". That came about. Their sin was bound on them. Authority to do this was given to Peter, @Matthew 16:19, and also to the church, @Matthew 18:18.
Ques. You mean it was bound upon them in the governmental ways of God?
J.T. In @Matthew 18 the Lord puts binding before loosing, whereas in John He reverses it. John has in mind recovery in the last days. That is the attitude we take now. If a brother has been in the Roman Catholic church, he is guilty there; but if he is exercised, you release him and set his face in the right direction. You hold him out the hand of encouragement. All this would help in our relations among ourselves, that there might be the spirit of grace, and we might enjoy the inheritance together. If you compare Matthew and John, Matthew is the church gospel, when the church was in its pristine state. Peter personally had authority to bind and to loose, which was remarkable. The Lord placed confidence in them. John puts remission first, giving us, so to speak, *carte blanche* -- what we remit He remits.
Ques. You have in mind where brethren are found under all sorts of circumstances?
J.T. You would want to clear the way for them, you would not hold anything against them. We have the spirit of remission amongst us. You can well afford to do that if one is coming out, but if he is staying where Christ's authority is not owned or His name dishonoured, you put the thing on his conscience. When there is movement there is provision already there: "When the Lord thy God hath cut off the nations",
{370}
and so on. You are well set up, you are able to be gracious.
Ques. In verse 14 it says: "Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark". Would that have reference to a weak brother, or has it a general bearing?
J.T. I think both, especially the determining of local responsibility. The principle of local responsibility is: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour thyself". There is a certain boundary between you and your neighbour and you do not transgress that; and that should be extended to a local company.
Ques. What do you understand by "landmark"?
J.T. A boundary. You get an illustration in Jephthah's time, when the Ammonites sought to take the land which the Israelites had had for three hundred years: he showed that God had given it to them. He outlined the territory and pointed out that God had given it to them, and so the Ammonites must not take it away. The latter part of the verse speaks of the inheritance, it is therefore a question of what God has set you in.
Ques. You do not try to oust a brother from his position? A young one may have more light than an older one, and would wish the older one displaced. That would be removing his neighbour's landmark?
J.T. God has "set certain in the assembly". God has set a certain person in a certain position -- we cannot alter that.
Ques. Will you say a little about continuing until the death of the high priest?
J.T. The high priest denotes Christ, "having a great priest over the house of God". It would be this dispensation; until the end of it this rule continues. The death of the high priest points to a change of dispensation.
Ques. In verse 17 you get priests and judges. How would you connect that up? It says at the end: "Eye for eye, tooth for tooth", verse 21. Has that any bearing on the present time?
J.T. "If an unrighteous witness rise up" -- that is the
{371}
first thing. Then the men shall stand before Jehovah, before the priests and the judges which shall be in those days, "and the judges shall make thorough inquiry". I suppose Deuteronomy is the spirit of heaven governing us now; typically, it is heavenly things before we actually enter heaven. Moses, although he never entered the land as in the flesh, was wonderfully imbued with the spirit of it. In the light of it he writes this book. It begins: "These be the words which Moses spoke". They have reference to the land; that is, it governs the whole dispensation. Jehovah is the same Jehovah, but the priests and the judges were not the same; but whoever they were they were to be recognised. So that we are not to say "the former days were better than these"; the same principles govern them.
Ques. Does the principle of the judges exist today?
J.T. Surely. For us the spiritual application would be that the priests are the judges; they come first. Later, the judgment is to come from the priests; so that the question is whether we are among the priests? If we are, we will give a right judgment.
Rem. In Matthew's gospel this eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth is, so to speak, put into your own hands.
J.T. It would mean for us that there is to be rectitude, accuracy in judgment, fairness. If there be a matter between two brothers they are not to go before the unbelievers. To whom are they to go? To the most spiritual man in the meeting? No, but "the least esteemed in the assembly"; meaning that all in the assembly are priests. The least of them has more judgment than the Lord Chief Justice of England, because he has the Spirit of God, and the Chief Justice may not have -- he may be a Jew or an infidel.
In matters relevant to temporal things it is the least in the church; but if it is a question of restoration it is not the least in the church, but "ye which are *spiritual*, restore such an one". This is a harder matter.
{372}
THE SEASONS OF THE YEAR
The book of Genesis is very fruitful in illustrations and types of the truth of Christianity; and this chapter particularly so in regard to the truth of the glad tidings. What these verses suggest first of all is a world proceeding out, of judgment; all the elements for a new world being carried over safely in a vessel. The first chapter also presents a world out of judgment, only that we have not the living things carried over, nor is there a vessel. The earth emerged from the waters, but we have no idea of living things carried over, but creation -- a scene brought out of chaos in which God created and formed living beings; whereas here we have them carried thought. So this chapter contemplates in type (the ark) Christ Himself, at first in His own Person here upon earth, developing the elements of a new world; and then going through death, accepting the judgment of God as regards the world that then was, but carrying everything through. The greatness of Christ is thus brought to our attention in the ark; that He included in His mind every divine thought, every divine principle, every element necessary for the establishment of another order of things.
Thus Noah comes out of the ark under divine orders, and it is directed that his wife and his sons, and his sons¬ wives, should come out *with him*: It might not seem necessary that he should be ordered to come out, but the point is that this new order of things is under divine authority the will of God. There is no room for any other will. Then Noah was to bring the lower creatures out besides, which involves power. As you will observe in verse 16, first we have "Go forth", and then, in verse 17, "Bring forth"; the latter is a matter of power and all were to come out *with Noah*. All were thus to be under divine ordering; Noah being subject to command, was to
{373}
go forth himself, and his wife, and his sons, and their wives; and he was to bring forth with them all the others.
Now, that is what I wanted to mention first. And then to show the ground on which the gospel is announced. That is, Noah brought out clean animals, and having them, he built an altar and offered on the altar burnt-offerings to the Lord. In verse 20 it says: "And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar". He was not told to do that, for whilst all is under command, and under divine authority, we have in Christ that which pleases God infinitely; that is to say, the outgoings of His heart Godward. He offered Himself without spot to God for a sweet-smelling savour. Personally, as a Man He was delightful here: great enough to include all these thoughts of God for another world; but He was delightful to God as to His inner, motives. And so the rearing up of the altar was Noah's action; he did it of himself. Not that he did it independently, nor that the Lord Jesus ever did anything independently, as we read in John, "the Son can do nothing of himself". Even the laying down of His life was as under orders: "I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father", (@John 10:18). But He would lay it down. "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life", verse 17. It was His motive, it was the spring of love within; and that was what was so delightful to God, obedience unto death, the obedience of love -- "Not my will, but thine, be done", (@Luke 22:42). But the altar is built by Noah himself, and the clean creatures were of his own selection. It is to bring out in type the delightfulness of Christ as entering into death, for the heart of God, so that he smelt "a savour of rest".
Now you see God, not only in His authority, but in His restfulness in His delight in Christ; and not only a living Christ, but a Christ who entered into death, so
{374}
that a savour went up into the nostrils of God. That is the position, and it is important to see that God today (this is a picture of the present moment) is operating in relation to a scene or order of things marked by the savour of Christ risen from the dead, and in which His will is absolute; even Noah does not move out of the ark without it. Christ came out of death by the power of God; "raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father", it was the action of the Father; and God is so delighted with Christ as having offered Himself without spot, that the whole of mankind is now viewed in another way entirely by God, for Christ is Head of all. The position of mankind is altered in the mind of God. He has been looking at men from a different viewpoint from the time that Christ rose from the dead. The world, as @Romans 11 shows, is in reconciliation. Not that its lawlessness is ignored, but that God is taking up man in Christ; He is so delighted with Christ as having given Himself a ransom for all, that He is now viewing man not in the attitude of a Judge -- although wrath is revealed, but God is keeping that in the background -- He is glorified in Christ and He looks at every man from that point of view. He smelt a sweet savour and said in His heart: "I will not again curse the ground ... ... for man's sake". Think of what is in the heart of God! We often speak of the love of His heart, "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life", (@John 3:16); but think of what God *has mind* in His heart -- this is most deeply interesting: "I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake", verse 21. He says: I know what is in man's heart, not withstanding I am offering to men salvation and eternal life in My Son. He knows their hearts are only evil continually. He says here: "For the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth".
Is it not so, young people and old people? Cannot we
{375}
older ones witness to the truth of this from our own experience? Naturally the imagination of our hearts is evil from our youth. It is not only what I acquire from my environment, but what develops from within; these two things work together, what is in man's heart from his youth and what is outside of him. The Lord says in Mark that there are thirteen things that proceed out of the heart of man. It is bad enough for them to be in it, but worse that they should proceed out of it, that a man has no power to hold them in. All the legislation in the world does not keep in these thirteen things, they are in the heart of man, but they also proceed out of it. God does not need to wait for their proceeding out of it; He knows that they are there; He knows what is in the heart from the very start -- man's heart is evil from his *youth*. And the thoughts find an outlet; in @Romans 3 we have the different organs referred to as instruments of this wickedness that is within, contributing to the ocean of wickedness without; and hence the result, the world, "lies in the wicked one". Each one, as these wicked thoughts proceed from him in actions, contributes to the sin of the world.
What about these things, dear young people? Is there anyone deceived as to himself, building up on what he is as a man or woman in the flesh, thinking that by religion or good works, or by church-going he can please God? Alas! There is not much even of that today, for we have entered upon an era of awful apostasy. On Lord's day people play cricket, golf and tennis, and throw this country and in every other so-called Christian country. Yet there are a few still who go to church, and may be building up on that, but it will not do. On that line "all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags". God has formally said that what man is, is unalterable. Before the flood he was only evil every day. But God brought in the flood and now it is "the imagination of
{376}
his heart is only evil from his youth". There is no change in the natural man. But God is looking at him in a favourable light, making it easy for him to come to Him. God has made a way, He is not imputing trespasses. His attitude is that of forgiveness because of the work of Christ. He is looking out, as the father of the prodigal was looking out, to see you coming. However far away men may be, in China or Africa, God is looking out to see them coming, there may be only a few coming, but God is looking out for them. Think of the attitude, the long suffering of God, not only waiting, but looking out! As of old in Solomon's temple, the attitude of the cherubim was towards the house, not simply looking *down* as recorded in Exodus, that is on the sacrificial death of Christ, but looking out to see who is coming to take advantage of it, to secure what God has provided in the sacrifice of Christ. He looks down on the blood on the mercy-seat; He looks on that and forgives. He has dealt with your sins in the death of Jesus. That is to say, His sacrifice has glorified God in respect of sin, so that He can be just, and the justifier of him that believes on Jesus. That is the thing. He is the justifier. Think of that action of God; not only that He is just in telling you of the death of Christ but He would *justify you*.
That is what He is doing today, justifying people -- and He can do it because He is "just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus", (@Romans 3:26). It is a wonderful position -- He is looking out, and He is a very long time looking out. Whether a person is old or young, man or woman, as soon as a movement begins in his heart towards God He sees it. He is looking for it. "When he was a great way off", the Lord says, "his father saw him". What is a great way off in the eyes of God? A long, long distance, so that God takes notice of the very first movement of the heart towards Him.
Think of that being noticed in heaven! The beginning of that writing is when you begin to repent; and "there
{377}
is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth". Do you think it is simply passed over as an incident of little or no value? No! It is recorded; your name is written down and will never be forgotten in heaven; the moment you repent it is entered into the history of heaven. Think of making history in heaven! We read of the makers of history today. The history of this wicked world; but think of making history in heaven! Did this ever occur to you? There is not a Christian here who has not made history in heaven. Each occasioned joy in the presence of the angels of God as soon as he began to repent, and the more he repents the more joy there is. Repentance is not simply one act, it is a continuous thing. Think of the blessed God being moved at the movements in your heart! Many things happen which fill the newspapers, but heaven takes no notice of them; when millions of people are busy at work in their offices and workshops, and one sinner turns to God, heaven takes notice of that. God is not ignoring what is going on in this world, it has all to be accounted for, but heaven is occupied with what God is doing here on earth, in answer to what He has done in Jesus.
What I have said makes plain what is here: "while the earth remaineth" -- this order of things which God has lengthened out now for centuries upon centuries, and it is still running. Everyone of us here as Christians can thank God that it extended down to our time; had it closed a hundred years ago we should all have been left out. But it is continuing still; we should read here "All the days of the earth", because it is not simply one sum of time, but *days* of time, and days mean periods of operation. The first chapter of Genesis shows plainly enough that days are periods of operation. God works by the day. So that if we divide up all these nineteen centuries into years, then months, then weeks and then days, we have some little idea of what God has been doing. Every day's work is for man's blessing. He has been working
{378}
all these days, and what myriads of souls have made history in heaven! We are in one day now. God has been working all day, for the day is longer with Him than with us, it begins in the east and runs on to the west; it begins away in New Zealand and runs on until the sun goes down on the Pacific coast. I mean to say that is the working time -- the preaching time, the ministering time. Are you going to be left out today? This is *your* day; this is the day that the Lord has made, the day of salvation. God is working, saving souls today. Will you not be one of them? "Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts", (@Hebrews 3:7,8). "Now is the accepted time; now is the day of salvation". Are you accepting the glad tidings?
I want to show how the seasons help in all this. The first is "seed time", for God by His word comes into our thoughts, you see. He brings us into His thoughts, but He condescends to come into our thoughts and the first season here is seed time. Then the next is harvest, then cold, heat, summer, winter, and then day and night. They are all regulated by the sun; because God comes into our way of thinking, and speaks of the sun rising and setting. It is not to teach us astronomy; He could do it much more effectively than men of science can, though I am not disparaging science, yet that is not what interests God. What He is doing is saving souls. He is saving souls for another world which will not be governed by the sun, will not be dependent on the revolutions of the earth. There will be "new heavens and a new earth". This one is temporary; however long it may exist, it is for a time. But God is saving souls for another world altogether: there will be no cold in it, no winter, no night there. So you see this world is God's operating world, as you might say, a great mechanical system in which God is working out a moral system. That is what it is. God's working platform. He has been pleased to come into it and to speak as we would speak, so that we
{379}
might understand Him. But obviously all these seasons or subdivisions of working time are governed by the sun and that sun is Christ, that is, spiritually. For God teaches us that the invisible things of Him are clearly seen in the things that are made, and the sun is a type of Christ; and you as born again may be regarded as the earth; the earth brings forth fruit of itself -- that is to say, it has inherent life. The meaning of it is that the believer in whom God has begun to work has something inherent that responds to Christ, and the seed, is sown in that connection. You come here this evening with a measure of exercise, you have been invited and you are glad to come. But why? Because there is some kind of a seed in your soul that God only can meet. That is the kind of thing connected with the earth; it is the soil that God has made. God has been working with you, and what I am presenting to you is the seed. You may have heard it before, but it has not dropped in, not got down to the real earth, the "good ground". The good ground may not have been there. We read of some falling by the wayside and the birds of the air devouring it. That is, you heard the gospel, and on leaving the room it all left you, Satan took it away. Then again the word falls on stony ground with no earth, no real soil, and when tribulation comes, when you go to the office next day and somebody sneers at you and taunts you, you have no root, and the word is gone. Then again it falls on to thorny ground. You hear it and enjoy it, and the cares of this life, the lust of other things, come in. The next day, Monday, the cares of business or of household duties, or the desire to have something in this world, spring up and choke the word, for there is no root. Then the Lord says: There is another kind of soil: "But that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience", (@Luke 8:15). You have had to do with God, He having wrought in you, and you listen to the gospel
{380}
and receive it, answer to it as the only thing that there is to prepare you for eternity. That is the case of most of us here, thank God! And so the Lord says it springs up and bears fruit thirty, sixty and a hundredfold. That is the thing. Everyone of us here of whom this is true, is evidence of the power of the gospel, that it has been received honestly into the heart and has been effective to the salvation of our souls.
Well now, that is the seed time. The 'harvest' comes after that. The harvest may not be full yet, but there is a little evidence of definite acceptance of the gospel, an evidence in our walk and ways. We read our Bibles, we pray, we love to be with the Lord's people, we love to ear the ministry of Christ. There is the evidence. There may be greater, thirty, sixty and a hundred, but even tenfold would be evidence, but the Lord begins at thirty. He contemplates the effect of the gospel in that way. That is the fruit and the harvest.
But alongside of that you have cold, The cold that we have experienced here in these northern latitudes, as we know, is the effect of the earth turning away from the sun. That is God's doing. Man, with all his power, could not do anything there, he could not change the world; he may produce aeroplanes and steam engines, but what could he do with the earth? But the power of God turns it away, and for a purpose; all is in perfect wisdom. Cold is useful; and so it is that the sun hides his face in a measure, and there is a meaning in that. We read that the Lord heard that Lazarus was sick, but He did not go to Bethany at once; Lazarus died without the Lord near, but this was for the glory of God, and for his own blessing, too. If the Lord seems to withhold His shining we know it is for a purpose. The seed is sown and the cold helps. You may begin to think: Why is all this? But the time will come when the sun comes back in all his power, and you say: I see now that the Lord meant me to bear fruit, and this cold was necessary for it.
{381}
Some may be discouraged: but it is necessary, it is divinely ordered. And then the heat comes. The sun comes back in his power. Matthew presents the Lord as the sun shining in his power, the countenance of Christ. How delightful to have the sun shining in his power after an era of cold! You begin to name things; you call this heat so delightful to you summer!; it is the same thing, but now it is a division of the year. It is a period in the year that you have come to know; we all look forward to it, it is a delightful part of the year, and we do not say 'heat', we say 'summer'. You come to name it. Why should men come to name it? Because of their experience of it. You find in Scripture the principle of naming things. Adam named the creatures, and Jacob named the house of God. Something makes an impression on you, and you name it; so here the time of heat is called summer.
Then there is winter, too. Now you begin to make provision for the winter. The ants do that, and other creatures. It is remarkable how in nature the winter is provided for. You have already experienced, you see, the cold, and that it is a time of the year when the enemy may get advantage over you, so you begin to make provision against that. I have learned what it is by experience; I call it 'winter', and I provide for it. If I provide against the cold I shall NOT be discouraged: it will be warm in the winter as well as in the summer. It calls forth more vigilance, more watchfulness, more forethought. I keep in the heat. That is to say, I take every advantage of spiritual heat and comfort. Thus you see these seasons, divinely appointed, make intelligent, watchful persons of us, persons of forethought, suited to the assembly of God. These revolutions of the year mean that God is teaching us all the while. It is His working time. His working arrangement, so that He can make the most of us.
Then, finally, we have "day and night", You come
{382}
back to the days of the earth. You are not a yearly Christian only, or a monthly or weekly one, but you are a daily one. That is to say, you are a worker with God, and not a day must be lost. There must be no holidays at all, it is too urgent; day and night, and every day, is for work. The Lord says in John: "Are there not twelve hours in the day?" (@John 11:9). And again: "I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh, when no man can work", (@John 9:4). I cannot be idle; God is bringing us into conformity with Christ, with Himself. Jesus said: "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work". It is on a daily principle. God gradually works out His end, and He is getting His material for a world in which there shall be none of these things, but one eternal day -- the day of eternity. There is no night there, no work either, but a term of peace, of restfulness, of joy, in the presence of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and with all the redeemed saints. That is what God is working out. Do you want to be in it and be one of us in that eternal day? May God grant that you will be!
{383}
DIVINE SUPPORT
@Zechariah 3:5 - 7, @Luke 2:8 - 11, @Acts 27:21 - 24, @2 Timothy 4:16,17
In reading these scriptures I am thinking of the manner of divine support, especially in circumstances such as those in which we are, or are likely to be; all that I have in view centring in the statements regarding the angel of the Lord standing by, or the Lord standing by. I hope to be able to group my thoughts under four heads: first, the angel standing by; then as in Luke, the angel being there by them; then the angel standing by Paul; and finally the Lord standing with him. These are most interesting records of divine support afforded to the people of God, and first, in regard of adjustment. We shall find ourselves, if we have not already in need of adjusting support. The need may be humiliating, but apart from the support accorded we shall remain unadjusted; and disregard of adjustment from God time at least, from the service of God.
Joshua is regarded in @Zechariah 3 as the high priest, so he was in the position of service; but he sorely required adjustment and was where it was available. He was standing "before the angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him". We are reminded, therefore, that in the need of adjustment we are confronted, not only with the influence of our own feelings and, it may be, our own wills, but with the direct opposition of Satan. He is concerned that the adjustment should not take place; for if it does not take place, we are for ever disqualified for this service; or if we continue in it, we discredit it, and discredit the God
{384}
whom we assume to serve. These are matters well known to Satan, and hence his resistance; he is standing there to resist the adjustment in you or me. If he cannot turn us aside altogether, he will hold us unadjusted in regard of God, and in regard of service and what is becoming to the service. But what is peculiarly encouraging here, is that the Lord is called upon to rebuke him: "The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee". The purpose of God was involved. Each one of us is taken up in relation to this; He would have us in accord with it. So the "filthy garments" have to be removed; garments dragged, it may be, in the gutter of evil religious associations; or defiled commercial, social or family associations. Our garments easily become defiled and although we may not notice it or may be indifferent to it. God notices it and He is not indifferent; He is concerned about our garments. As taking us up through the gospel. He robes us with the very best; and He is concerned that we should not deteriorate, nor that our practical ways should be out of keeping with His own great thoughts seen in "*the best* robe".
So here the Spirit of Christ says, "Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments", or, "festival garments" as it may read. We have here the angel of the Lord standing by in these operations. It is not done in any haphazard way; it is done under direct divine surveillance; the Spirit of Christ calling for it. It is imperative; Satan is rebuked; Jerusalem the chosen is in view, and the fair mitre and the festival robes are put on Joshua, the angel of the Lord standing by.
Standing by here is not presented as specially intimate, the circumstances forbidding intimacy or mutual feeling. In other words, they are circumstances of comparative distance between God and the soul; but nevertheless the operation goes on, for God has taken
{385}
the matter in hand and Joshua is subject. We see no evidence of pulling away the shoulder, or any exercise of his own will in refusing the adjustment. Satan is kept at a distance, rebuked; and the whole operation took place under divine superintendence, for God has things done well; and so as the believer yields, the adjustment is perfect. In the first instance, therefore, the fair mitre is put on and then the festival robes, the angel of the Lord standing by. The next thing that comes in here in connection with this standing by, is a *protest*.
It is well if God protests in our souls; for whilst we may be amenable up to a point for adjustment, we may not be ready for a further process, whereas God is bent upon perfecting us. He goes the whole way with us; and at times in the process, a protest is necessary. So it says here, "The angel of the Lord protested unto Joshua, saying. Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by". He is now dealing directly with Joshua, to bring him entirely under the will of God, and into accord with the divine current -- the current of the Spirit of God.
I am dwelling on this point of adjustment, for it is of real importance. If we do not need it now, it will certain by come up. Indeed, the need of adjustment is constant, especially with young Christians. I have often thought and said, that generally we need several conversions; certainly the apostle Peter had two, and we need not assume that we are immune. Generally we need more than one conversion, for conversion means turning round. So here in the case of this servant, Joshua the high priest -- we have the protest of the Lord; that is to say. God insists on a walk in His ways as imperative, if we have to do with His house, and to
{386}
judge and keep His courts. It is a great service accorded indeed to every one, for each of us has his part in the house of God, and in the service of God in His holy courts. The psalmist said, "A day in thy courts is better than a thousand", (@Psalm 84:10); you see how God reckons time. What holy enjoyment belongs to the courts of God! and what a privilege to have to do with them and keep them! But this privilege is accorded to us on the ground of adjustment here, that we may walk in His ways; and then finally the privilege is given of a place to walk amongst "these that stand by". As to this *God* gives us a lead. In the angel of the Lord 'standing by' we have the suggestion and say, I would like to do that too, for it is a great matter to be found amongst those that gland by the testimony of God. How much there is to stand by at the present time! The interests of God, centring in His house, are here on earth, assailed from every quarter, the enemy having ready instruments for this. How imperative it is that there should be those that stand by and who walk amongst those who stand by, as we read, "I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by".
Some of us are too local, others it may be are too universal; there is constant need of balance; but the idea of persons walking obviously indicates that some do travel. Some of us are privileged to travel literally, in standing by, or seeking to stand by, the interests of the Lord on earth. Others may not be privileged in that way -- most are not -- but if we do not literally travel about the world to stand by the interests of Christ, we may certainly do so in our prayers, and perhaps that is the most effective way. There are many travelling in that way. It is divine; the ways are made, the Lord Jesus has led the way in traversing the world in prayer. "I do not demand for these only, but also for those who believe on me through their word", (@John 17:20). You see what a wide scope the Lord had in His prayers,
{387}
not only those that were immediately with Him, but all that should believe on Him, even ourselves. He not only traversed the world, as I might say, at that time; but the *whole dispensation* was in His mind. So with the apostle Paul who said that he combated for the Colossians, and the Laodiceans, and as many as had not seen his face in flesh. (@Colossians 2:1). He walked indeed as none did in his day, among those who stood by: "From Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum", he said, "I have fully preached the gospel of Christ", (@Romans 15:19). What walking! What journeying! Truly he had a wonderful place among those who "stand by". So we have a lead in the Lord, and in His great servant as to these "places to walk among these that stand by". We see therefore, what is opened up to us as adjusted, the angel of the Lord standing by during the operation; and then the protest that we should walk in the divine ways, so as to judge in His house and keep His courts, and then further to be accorded the privilege of walking among those who stand by.
Now in Luke it is not adjustment that is in view; but we have shepherds keeping their flock by night. They belong to a class that began with Abel; they belong to the shepherd class led by such men as Abel and Jacob and Moses and David, all foreshadowing the great and good Shepherd. We have therefore, the saints represented as belonging to this unselfish class; for a shepherd presents the idea of unselfish occupation; a very fine position to be found in Moses, as a type, helps as to this. In contrast to Jacob he sought no wages; nor did he become a sharer in the ownership of the flock. No true lover of Christ will seek to share in the ownership of the flock. Sometimes we hear people pretending to serve speak of *their* flock; the Lord Jesus resents that. It is the flock of God; it belongs to the true Shepherd who laid down His life for the sheep; who brought all His own together, so that there should
{388}
be one flock and one Shepherd. No true servant, therefore, will seek to share jointly in the flock. Jacob did; he served for wages and became alienated from the owner of the flock. That is a sure result for one who serves for wages. But Moses set no wages for his service to Reuel; as he fled from the land of Egypt he took up lowly service in Midian, "content", it says, "to dwell with the man", (@Exodus 2:2). A shepherd of the flock of God has to learn to be content with any circumstances, for it is an unselfish and onerous calling; and so Moses served his father-in-law, as far as Scripture shows for forty years without wages. There was nothing said about wages, nothing said about part ownership of the flock. At the end he led it to the backside of the desert to Horeb, the mount of God. Could he have done better? No, he could not have done better than to lead the flock to the mount of God. That is the idea; and he became the shepherd of God's flock for forty years in the wilderness, during which time they were nursed in the desert, their manners borne with, and all through Moses; for Moses represented God among the people, being "faithful in all his house". @Numbers 12:7 is a marvellous tribute to one who began as a shepherd.
So you see in what an exalted calling these men were, they were keeping their flock by night when others were in the towns and cities in census time. We know what that means. Young people need to be warned in regard of cities and towns on these special occasions -- how the enemy has the advantage there. But here are shepherds outside of all that, tending their flock by night unselfishly, and it says, "An angel of the Lord was there by them", verse 9; heaven honoured them. How precious is that in the service of a shepherd caring unselfishly for the sheep of Christ! "An angel of the Lord was there by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them". What an incentive to be engaged
{389}
unselfishly in the care of the sheep and lambs of Christ! It was an honour from heaven; and greater still, as I may say, "the glory of the Lord shone around them". What an environment! And then a multitude of the heavenly host coming down and encircling them, saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". All this is most touching. Then the message to them, "For unto *you*" -- again their honour -- "Unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord". Thus we see how heaven supports us here, as standing by, and as unselfishly caring for the interests of Christ.
In the third instance, we have one becoming dominant through moral power, in a set of most trying circumstances; circumstances that were intended to test to the utmost, the faith of the servant. For many days without sun, or stars, storm-tossed, with the ship about to be wrecked; it is the servant now, and what a servant! I have alluded to him already, a servant of servants, we may say, and in these circumstances he says, "There stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve". Let us rest on those words and let us understand from them, the dignity of the service of God, and what tests we may be brought to in it; for it is not a pathway of roses; it is a pathway of thorns externally, one *in* which we may legitimately be weary, but *of* which we never weary. Paul was not weary of it although supremely tested in it. We need not expect, as in that service, to be immune from the tests, for God in His love tests us according to put strength. He sits as a refiner of silver, and He would bring out the strength of faith and endurance, all to make us in accord with the path of the great Servant. "Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth", (@Isaiah 42:1). It touches the heart to read the history and the sufferings of that Servant as recorded in Isaiah -- His form and His visage marred more than that of any
{390}
man, and finally, led "as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth", (@Isaiah 53:7). That is "My servant" -- Jehovah's Servant, and God loves to bring out in those who are in the position of servants, the traits of Christ; they are relatively the same as they were in Him. It is "Christ in you", and God is pleased to test us, as in the furnace, for it brings out the endurance, and the divine nature working in us, which is fragrant to Him.
I would commend to you the chapter in Daniel which speaks of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego in the furnace. It will interest you to see how *many* times their names are mentioned in it. What does this mean? It means what pleasure God had in those names -- Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego. There was a fourth person walking with them in the furnace heated seven times, and he was like unto the Son of God; as if He came in beforehand to honour them, in their marvellous expression of the Spirit of Christ, in the way of endurance and suffering. God would put us to that test, to honour us especially in His service; and here the apostle is tested to the utmost in this long, cheerless voyage. But he says, "There stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve". The point that I would make, is that his standing by, in the most trying and adverse circumstances, brought him into dominance; the servant becomes dominant in a moral way I speak to all of us; because these circumstances are sure to be reached in some form or another as we faithfully serve Christ; and the point is whether we shall go down under them, or rise above them. It is one or the other. What happened here was a majestic rising above them, the angel of God standing by; the apostle becomes, in a sense, master of the ship.
There was to be no harm to any one, for it was the dispensation of grace after all, and God was maintaining
{391}
it. They were all to reach land; but what was the secret? The secret was prayer; the Spirit of Christ seeking the salvation of everyone that sailed on that ship. That is a very fine thing, that you do not want to lose any of the brethren; you do not want to lose one that sails with you. "God has granted to thee all those that sail with thee", verse 24, the angel said to Paul. Need I say he prayed for them? Yes, he sought the salvation of everyone on that ship, and God gave them to him; I mean, salvation from the shipwreck, from the sea. It has its own prophetic significance, but I do not dwell on that. I am speaking of what the apostle was in those circumstances, how he sought the salvation of all unselfishly. The soldiers would have got off the ship selfishly, but the apostle sought the salvation of all, and thus became dominant; so that under his wise direction and forethought everyone was saved. Thus, in these circumstances we become dominant, the angel of the Lord standing by, so that all are saved. It is a very fine thing that one should rise with spiritual power above the circumstances and save all that "sail with" one. How this enters into local meetings and the general position of the saints is quite obvious.
Then there is the last scripture; it refers to the apostle in his closing moments before the emperor, where it is a question of his answer. The Lord had told His apostles that, as brought before kings and rulers, they need not prepare their discourse, but that the Holy Spirit would teach them in that hour what they should say. I want you to note this, because it is a question of ability *learn quickly*, That is, as the outcome of proper education, one becomes so accustomed to learning, under training and schooling, that he learns quickly. So you find the Lord speaking of His servants being brought before kings, persons whose presence would be so disconcerting ordinarily that one would be disposed to have his defence carefully memorised.
{392}
The Lord says. Do not do that. In fact, I believe the Lord would discourage even memorising of discourses for service. But I am speaking now of what it is to appear before a potentate, that is to say, an extreme position in the testimony. The Lord says, "Take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say". Can we doubt that the apostle Paul was governed by that principle? I believe that he adhered to it; he was so accustomed to the action of the Spirit of God in him, that he could distinguish, between the Spirit inspiring him to say something and his own judgment, (@1 Corinthians 7). So, when he speaks here of his first answer, can we doubt that the Holy Spirit taught him? I believe it was a suitable answer, and evidently so spiritual that those present who should have stood by him, fled; they were unequal to the pressure. Possibly they might have thought it was extreme unwise, but at any rate, he says, "All men forsook me". But could also say, "The Lord stood with me and strengthened me". Paul was to do the speaking, but the Lord supporting him. What a blessed experience in the presence of the lion's mouth! Who can say what tension of soul was his? But we may be assured he was as palm as were Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego in the fiery furnace or Daniel in the den of lions; we may be assured the great apostle was as unperturbed as they. It does not say the mouth of the lion was shut; the Lord did not resort to that. He could have stricken the emperor; He could have closed his mouth, but He did not. He delivered Paul from it, which was in a sense greater. That is to say, it is a question of the power of Christ standing with us, in the most extreme position of opposition, and delivering us. Need we then have any fear as we proceed in the testimony of God? I do not think so for a moment. These instances are to strengthen and invigorate us. The Lord will not forsake
{393}
those who stand up for Him; He will stand by their and will deliver them; not only from the lion's mouth on a particular occasion, but from every wicked work and preserve them to His heavenly kingdom.
Well, may God bless these thoughts to us. I believe they are needed; that we may be all standing by firmly as adjusted, standing by unselfishly in the interests o the Lord, and He will stand by us, and give us triumphant entrance into His everlasting kingdom.
{394}
UNITY
@Exodus 24:3 - 8, @Numbers 1:1 - 19, @Joshua 4:1 - 8
J.T. These scriptures suggest unity under three heads: first, in relation to the covenant; then in relation to the kingdom; and then in relation to life. The Lord, I believe, will help us in considering this subject thus, for they are incentives to unity, which is an essential feature with God in all His dealings with His people, and He promotes it in every way as introducing it among us. We may see in Exodus the connection with the covenant; Moses, as you will observe, setting up an altar and twelve pillars "according to the twelve tribes of Israel", verse 4. It was an opportune time for the introduction of the idea of unity among the saints, for they had just had the experience of deliverance out of Egypt, and of God's covenant opening up His heart to them, in type, at least, so that they are ready to undertake to keep their part in the covenant. It says, "And Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments; and all the people answered with one voice, and said. All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!" They were undertaking unitedly, "with one voice", to keep the covenant; as if their hearts were under the influence of what had been set before them in the deliverance out of Egypt, and particularly from the mount. Then "Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah" for the people, they having undertaken to keep them; and then he sets up the pillars. He "rose up early in the morning, and built an altar under the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel", as if from their side there was the acceptance of the covenant; then the altar indicating their readiness for sacrifice, at least in the mind of Moses; and then the pillars denoting the unity of the tribes as in the mind of God. For unity is not simply a matter of one meeting, or meetings in a district or country; the
{395}
full idea of unity includes all the saints; so that the twelve pillars here would denote, that unity according to God was to be maintained. Then all was ratified by blood, showing typically that all is secured through the death of Christ.
S.J.B.C. Would the thought as in the twelve pillars come in at the Supper in connection with the one loaf, and the cup of the covenant come in afterwards? The blood was sprinkled; I suppose that is the aspect of the blood we have at the Supper? There are many who come to the Supper having simply the blood for shelter before them, the blood on the lintel and the side posts; but the blood of the new covenant leads us a long way beyond that.
J.T. Yes. So it says, "And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said. Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words". That is to say, we are bound up with the covenant; the 'words' convey it. We nave therefore before us, a great incentive to unity; the body of Christ is suggestive of our unity: "We, being many, are one loaf, one body", @1 Corinthians 10:17. And the blood sprinkled upon the people, the blood of the covenant answers to the cup, as the Lord said, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood", (@1 Corinthians 11:25). So that the Lord's supper is intended to promote unity. Of course, it is a memorial too; unlike the heap of stones that Jacob and Laban reared, on which they ate and separated from one another. That was a symbol of separation rather than of unity, and that should be avoided -- agreement to differ, eating with different thoughts and diverse feelings in our hearts.
A.M. Would "We, being many, are one loaf", give the idea? (@1 Corinthians 10:17).
J.T. That is what I thought. "We, being many", meaning, among other things, that each would not have his independent view as so many units in the world. It
{396}
brings in a unity that is essential to the thoughts of God, to His testimony here; for the testimony is bound up with that unity. The vessel of it, the Christ, @1 Corinthians 12:12, is based on that; it is a question of the unity of the saints as *anointed*.
A.M. Do you suggest that we begin really with the thought of unity by appreciating it in that way?
J.T. That is the way it stands. That is the first thing the apostle has to take up with the Corinthians. They were not united at heart; they had different leaders amongst them, so that the first thing He points out is that the divisions among them involved the denial of the testimony; when one said he was of Paul, another of Apollos, and another of Christ, he says "Is the Christ divided?" chapter 1.
S.J.B.C. It was just the one thing they seemed not to have written to him about, and yet he takes it up as the most important error amongst them.
Ques. Would the coming under the direction of Christ as Lord, be the remedy for this danger?
J.T. That is contemplated earlier. The Lord was recognised in their song as they crossed the sea; there was the acknowledgment of the lordship of Christ. But then, whilst that ought to promote unity, a greater incentive is His own death, expressed in His supper. It is what He thinks of us, it is His body and blood *for us*.
F.I. Is the same principle seen in @2 Corinthians 3 where the apostle says, "*We* all" (he takes in all) "looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory"?
J.T. Exactly. There you see a great unifying feature. You are changed by looking at the glory in the face of Jesus into the same image. It is a positive thing. The glory involves the ministry of the new covenant; that is to say, it makes it effective in our hearts. It is a delight-fill service of the Lord Jesus, to bring in the love of God
{397}
and make it effective in our hearts; and we, looking at that glory, are changed into the same image; there is a similarising effect that goes beyond the first epistle. We have the principle in the first epistle; but the second brings in the positive thing, the glory in the face of Jesus; and the effect of it in us, is really much the same as the second giving of the law. We have the principle here in chapter 24, but the second giving of the law, is the amplification of it; it is like the new covenant, for Moses- face shone.
Ques. Would the introduction of the Supper in chapter 11 be the great remedy for the condition of lack of unity at Corinth?
J.T. That is how it stands.
Ques. And would the "commandments of the Lord" have a great connection; the recognition that what was written, were the commandments of the Lord?
J.T. Exactly; so you have the authority of the Lord in the commandments; and "His commandments are not grievous", as you apprehend Him in His love.
What you see in Exodus is, they go into Egypt as the sons of Israel. "These are the names of the sons of Israel", chapter 1:1. Then you have the names of the tribes; they are viewed in their, dignity as the sons of Israel. And so in Corinthians the fellowship is the fellowship of God's Son; there is dignity in the fellowship. The pillars here would denote the mutual dignity of the tribes, as to what they were in the mind of God. We have to so regard them, because, although their histories afford most sorrowful evidence of the fleshy which Jacob takes full account of in his blessing in @Genesis 49, yet in spite of all, every tribe was blessed; and so they go into Egypt with the blessing. They go in as blessed, and they go in in dignity as "the sons of Israel"; and these pillars would suggest what they are in their dignity, in the mind of God, and the unity that is to mark them, for they had committed themselves to the
{398}
covenant. They are, typically, in possession of the love of God in Christ, the blood is sprinkled upon them. Those twelve pillars would denote a unity that would never be impaired.
S.J.B.C. Would you connect unity too with the seventy elders, and then the young men, and then the people? They were all one.
J.T. Yes, you get variety in the details. In the opening of this remarkable scripture you have the direction given to Moses, "Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel". Then in verse 9, "And Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up, and they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness. And on the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: they saw God, and ate and drank". That is, you have these pillars and the sprinkling of the blood, clothed in the suggestion of heavenly dignity; that they were to go up with it to the mount of God, and they were to be ennobled; they are called 'nobles', and they eat and drink, and see "the God of Israel". So we are surrounded here with wonderful incentives to practical unity.
P.L. Would this be found in the expression at the beginning of 1 Corinthians -- "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord". Is that the idea of their being blessed as going into Egypt?
J.T. Yes, and then the dignity of the fellowship. This suggestion of unity is set in the midst of beautiful touches of heavenly dignity, and that is how unity is promoted. God has ennobled us, and our nobility should lift us above the littleness of the flesh in rivalry and personal feelings. So in the Lord's prayer to the Father in @John 17, He clothes the idea of unity with most wonderful thoughts about us; for practical unity
{399}
is one of the most important things in the testimony.
F.I. Why is it the youths are brought in as offering up burnt-offerings, if unity is established in the twelve pillars?
J.T. To bring in the idea of freshness.
F.I. Like the thought of the "new man". The new man is youthful fresh life. The older we become the more difficult it is to impress us, but a youthful person may be impressed aright. I suppose Israel was that. "When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and out of Egypt I called my son", (@Hosea 11:1).
A.M. Would you say it is the power of divine love that produces unity according to the divine thought?
J.T. Well, it is, and then youthfulness the freshness of spiritual life. God says, "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land not sown. Israel was holiness unto Jehovah, the first-fruits of his increase", (@Jeremiah 2:2,3). That is what is seen here. God would impress us with His thoughts, hence "the words" here. The words are recorded so that they might lay hold of the people; the people had committed themselves to them.
Ques. Would you say the Supper having its proper place in our hearts, would promote unity and youthfulness? It is an appeal of the love of Christ to us, bringing about a recognition of the rights of Christ?
J.T. Quite so, and then it keeps us fresh and young. Although we may be old in years we may be young in spiritual life, and maintain our freshness.
Ques. Are those the conditions that enabled Moses to take the blood?
J.T. That is how it stands. "And Moses took half the blood, and put it in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar". The blood put in the basons is in relation to us, for application to us, so that the full
{400}
force of it might be understood. "And he took the book of the covenant, and read it in the ears of the people; and they said. All that Jehovah has said will we do, and obey! And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said. Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words". So that now we are brought under the blood, not here as a shelter from the judgment of God, but, typically, as a token of His love. That is what is before us.
Ques. Would the blood of burnt-offerings and peace-offerings bring in the idea of devotion?
J.T. Exactly, it is burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. Peace-offerings denote fellowship. Burnt-offerings denote what Christ was to God -- wholly devoted to His will.
W.B.T. Is the fact that these actions are mostly Moses-, a suggestion from the divine side?
J.T. Yes, God taking them up on the ground of their acceptance of the covenant. I do not think it marked them much; but still the reference in the prophet would show there was something there at the beginning, the "kindness of thy youth".
Ques. The Hebrew servant comes in between chapter 19 and this one. We get the same words spoken by the people in that chapter; but there was no blood sprinkled on that occasion, but the Hebrew servant comes in between. Why is that?
J.T. The Hebrew servant, being presented immediately after the law is given, is Christ, who would not only magnify the law, but go beyond, it, in love. The thought in the Hebrew servant enters into the Lord's supper, for it is there that the will of God is seen as carried out; there also we see Christ's devotedness to God and to the saints.
Rem. And on the basis of that Moses can now sprinkle the blood on the people.
Ques. Do you connect @1 Corinthians 1:9 with
{401}
chapter 11 at the Supper? Do we reach the fellowship of God's Son there?
J.T. That is the dignity of it. Chapter 1 is the fellowship of God's Son; and chapter 10 is the fellowship of His death; and then later we have the fellowship of the Spirit. Those are the three aspects of fellowship in the two letters.
S.J.B.C. It is always the fellowship *of*.
J.T. Yes, whereas in John's epistle it is *with* So it is the*character* of the fellowship in Corinthians.
N.McC. Would you say another word as to the blood? You referred to it as being a token of the love of God.
J.T. It being put in basons here, would call attention to that. The *volume* is to call attention to what there was on God's part; so that the Lord calls attention to the cup as the new covenant in His blood. I believe in the 'basons', you have the thing there before you in volume; it is the *fullness* of the death of Christ in type.
W.B.T. Is there freshness every time you take the Supper?
J.T. I am sure that is one great feature, to maintain freshness of affection. Then in Numbers, we have unity in connection with the kingdom; not exactly in the thought of the lordship of Christ, although that is involved; but as a moral feature of the kingdom There are Moses and Aaron representing the authority of God; but there are twelve men who are expressed by name, representing the tribes; a unity of moral influence. The tribes are grouped around the tabernacle where God is. That is to say, it is the kingdom of *God*, in these first two chapters of Numbers, in the sense in which it is said to be "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". The people are set in their tribes round about the tabernacle where God is. There you see an incentive to unity under moral
{402}
influence; the influence of spiritual power in persons, in elders, or in whomsoever it may be, all coming under the influence of God dwelling there. In the antitype it is the position in which we enjoy "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit".
F.I. I think it is good to see that what you have in mind, is that unity can be maintained in kingly position, because of those who bring them into it.
J.T. That is right, but all in relation to the tabernacle in the centre.
P.L. Does that bring you to chapter 7 where you have the offering of the princes at the dedication of the altar?
J.T. Yes. The princes are representative of all. You see in those twelve men the wealth of Israel in perfect unity, all influenced by the same thoughts of Christ. It is a very fine position in @Numbers 7. It is the outgoing of the wealth of Israel, represented in those twelve princes; each one influenced by exactly the same thoughts of Christ, typically -- and there could be no greater expression of unity than that.
Ques. Would that be in view of the journeys of the people according to God as Numbers gives us?
J.T. Yes. They have not begun to move yet, but they are set round the dwelling place of God. What an environment that is! Although in the wilderness, God is dwelling there; and these men were each set in relation to the standard of his father's house, and each father's house in relation to his tribe, and each tribe in its own set of three, and each three in relation to the tabernacle. Jehovah is called upon to stir up His strength before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, @Psalm 80. That is what was there; the presence of God, and His influence exercised over all. That is very fine. Understanding it, you realise what the kingdom of God is. It is not the kingdom of *heaven* in Romans, but the kingdom of *God*, the presence of God *here*, in the power of the Spirit, and the sway of God in that way.
{403}
Ques. Does that come out in 2 Corinthians? "I will dwell among them, and walk among them; and I will be their God, and they shall be to me a people", chapter 6:16.
J.T. Exactly. God dwelling among us and walking among us, what an influence that is!
F.S. What is the thought of each man being a head of his father's house?
J.T. He is head by moral power. It was not by lineage, the heads of the tribes were that by moral power. It is not a question of appointment exactly, but what you are by moral power, so that the Lord recognised them. These are the men that were "summoned of the assembly;" they were held responsible in their respective tribes.
Ques. Would you say that unity is maintained by moral power?
J.T. That is another phase. The first is the covenant, what God is to us in grace and in love; and then moral weight promoted amongst us by the Spirit, so that we represent the authority of God. The kingdom of God is more moral authority; what He is in His influence, as here by the Spirit. The kingdom of heaven implies Christ in heaven; but the kingdom of God is the Holy Spirit down here. God dwelling here by the Spirit, and all the saints surrounding Him.
Ques. Was this intended to preserve the children of Israel?
J.T. It is not intended to be an arbitrary rule. It is a benign kingdom ("righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit"), and that promotes unity.
Rem. It is practically seen in @Romans 14, as the result of chapter 5 being made good in us; and we come out in its character for God here. In Exodus we get the first year, and those men were acquainted with God during that year.
J.T. Yes, and another thing is that Numbers
{404}
contemplates the position in the wilderness. "Jehovah spoke to Moses *in the wilderness* of Sinai in the tent of meeting, on the first of the second month, in the second year". So that they had had a year's experience.
S.J.B.C. The book has been called "In the wilderness".
J.T. Showing that it is God taking account of us in our wilderness circumstances, and the provision He makes for us there. He would say as it were, 'I am perfectly aware of what you are going through'. He speaks in the wilderness. It is God Himself in it, and knowing what it is, but in His own appointed abode, the tent of meeting.
Ques. I have heard it remarked that the wilderness was no part of the purpose of God; but it is an essential part for us, is it not?
J.T. It is. In it we become acquainted with God in adverse circumstances.
<blockquote>'What the God that thou hast found'. (`76:6)</blockquote>
The God that we shall know in congenial circumstances in heaven, is already known to us in adverse circumstances, and is thus well known. It is a time of acquiring a knowledge of God that we should never have, if there were no wilderness. If God took us to heaven immediately on our conversion, we should never know Him in adverse circumstances. It is in these that God is brought out: <blockquote>'In the desert God will teach thee <br>What the God that thou hast found'. (`76:6)</blockquote>
So when you get to the end of the wilderness in @Numbers 21 they move directly to Pisgah. There are four points reached, the last of which is "Pisgah, which looks over the surface of the waste", verse 20. That is to say, you have a retrospective view of the wilderness, and it is that you might recount what God has been to you. So
{405}
Numbers at the end gives us the encampments of the people. Loving His people. God records their encampments. He had a part in those encampments Himself, and it is for us to go over each of them, and recount what God was to us in them.
A.M. Referring to what you said earlier about the sons of Israel going into Egypt, do you think that Joseph had the thought of unity before him, when he gave commandment in view of "the going forth of the sons of Israel"? @Hebrews 11.
J.T. Yes, and of their dignity too. Now the third point may rightly be called the unity of life; that is, we have arrived over Jordan. The people have reached the land, having crossed the Jordan, and that denotes the energy of life. They could not have crossed it had not the ark gone before, which was power in Christ. The waters of Jordan were driven back by that. "What ailed thee, thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou turnedst back?" (@Psalm 114:5). It was the ark, the presence of the Lord; but then, as the Jordan was driven back and they went over, a man of each tribe took up a stone, and carried it over on his shoulder into the land. That denoted that he had power, not surely to drive back Jordan, but power enough to take up a stone and carry it over; showing that it is life, the quickening power of God in us as seen in Colossians; quickened with Christ. That is evidenced in power to take up a stone, as the representative of each tribe in life, and take it over into Canaan, and set it together with the other eleven in the place where they lodged.
A.M. Would this be more the inward spiritual power in regard to unity?
J.T. I think so. It is Colossians, where the apostle combats for them that they should be "united together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God", chapter 2:2. It is a unity in life; a basis for our procedure
{406}
together into the divine thoughts, into the purpose of God. We can proceed in it thus in unity.
S.J.B.C. I suppose you have the moral thought in Corinthians, "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body", (@2 Corinthians 4:10).
J.T. Quite so. As in crossing over they are united in life, the twelve men carrying up those stones denoted power, so that they were set down together in life. Now the point was whether that was to continue; whether, in Colossian language, a man should come in and persuade them with words of philosophy and vain deceit, or whether they should be diverted by ceremonialism, the worshipping of angels and other things. The point is to hold on that line together, in the energy and unity of life, so that we should be led into the full thought of God for us, "the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge", (@Colossians 2:2).
Ques. Is the unity becoming coloured by what is heavenly in this passage?
J.T. Exactly.
Ques. How would the men of @Numbers 1 help in this connection?
J.T. You have still twelve men acting, but acting now on the principle of life; life is there. Each man carrying his stone represented his tribe; typically, the tribe is living, and all are set down together.
S.J.B.C. Do you mean life practically in the soul?
J.T. Not simply the Spirit of life as in Romans; Colossians is *quickening*; we are made to live with Christ by the power of God.
P.L. Would it suggest an impression of what is spiritual, upon the men here, whom Joshua had appointed of the children of Israel?
J.T. Yes, because Joshua is the spiritual leader of the people. He is the leader in Canaan. It is Christ really
{407}
as spiritual Leader; and so you get in this chapter that "On that day Jehovah magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they had feared Moses, all the days of his life", chapter 4:14. It is Christ acquiring a new place in our souls as our spiritual Leader; He is magnified in our eyes.
Ques. Does that connect with Colossians?
J.T. That is the point. The greatness of Christ is brought before us in chapter 1. The greatness of the Person of Christ in His varied glories is brought to bear upon us, so that He is magnified in our eyes. Christ in us is the mystery, and He becomes "all and in all".
Ques. Are we dependent upon Colossian truth to take us over?
J.T. Well, you go over following the ark. It is a question of attraction. We are taken "by the hand" and led out of Egypt, but we go into Canaan as quickened, as following the ark.
Rem. One man of each tribe took the stone.
J.T. He was representative of all the tribe. It means that we go over Jordan in power; it is a question of power in the soul.
P.L. Does "lodge this night" suggest they are not in the full position which Ephesians presents?
J.T. Just so; the point is, you are going further, going up into the enjoyment of the full thought of God. This is a lodging place. They went back to Gilgal; that is another thing that comes out in the next chapter; but, first of all, there is the thought of lodging and these twelve stones there, representing a living state of things in the whole of the people. The children would ask, "What mean these stones?" They meant the power of God; that God had driven back the Jordan in Christ; but He has also quickened us, for we have carried over the stones, so to speak, and this implies the power of life, as we have said.
Ques. Are these "living stones" is Peter suggests?
{408}
J.T. That is another view. It is not the idea of building here, but as representing the tribes as coming up out of death; it is in unity.
Rem. The two and a half tribes went over in array before their brethren.
J.T. That shows the idea. Although the two and a half tribes left the land of Canaan later, they are seen here in the completeness of the unity.
{409}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN
@1 John 2:20,27; @Numbers 3:24(latter clause); @Numbers 4:2,13; @Numbers 5:6,8
The mention of the Spirit of God in the various books of the New Testament is a subject well worthy of enquiry, as assisting us to apprehend the view point in each; and I have selected this epistle believing that the Lord will graciously help, first, as regards the *teaching* of the Spirit. The idea of teaching is, I need not say, very extensive in the Scriptures. As in nature, so in a spiritual sense, as born again we have to learn everything; and so we have many teachers. Even nature is accredited with teaching; and then God Himself teaches. Scripture speaks of Him teaching a 'plowman', (@Isaiah 28:26) -- showing how the idea enters into man's circumstances, for God as forming the creation, has not left it, to work its own salvation; it is not something thrown out to evolve itself at its own expense -- God is in it. We are told that in Him we all live and move, showing how near He is to us even creatorially, entering into man's circumstances, for man is His prime object in creation, and teaching him, as I said, even how to plough, and how to sow his seed. In a numberless variety of ways, God enters into His own creation, imparting intelligence to it.
But when we come to the spiritual realm, we have, so as to make the thing simple -- the teaching of grace in which all young believers particularly, should school themselves; a teaching in which God is very gentle with us, allowing much contrariety and pass unrebuked There is also the teaching of the Lord, which implies authority and a standard of education, in connection with which we get discipline, and there is the teaching of the Holy Spirit, with which we are now immediately concerned. The Holy Spirit is first mentioned in this epistle in connection with teaching, and it
{410}
is in addressing the juniors in the graded school of God -- the little children. "I write unto you little children", (@1 John 2:12). Some of us who are older, are prone to look down with a measure of patronage on our younger brothers and sisters, but not so John, although he makes the fullest allowance for growth. Our younger brothers and sisters should accustom themselves to that, to the respect of grey hairs, but particularly of spiritual stature. Heaven will be graded that way; and it is so in the assembly, and in the families of God. It is sobering for the young ones to accustom themselves to the recognition of the advanced growth in others. On the other hand, John connects the Holy Spirit with the little ones, and does not in the least convey to them that they are know-nothings, but rather that they "know all things", verse 20, and that makes a very great difference. It puts the young brothers and sisters on their feet, as soon as the Holy Spirit conveys to them that they know all things. But then this has to be understood; it is what I may call a potential statement, meaning that the Holy Spirit is in you, not simply as the earnest, of the inheritance, a very precious feature, or as the seal of God that you belong to Him, but that He has dignified you -- in the way you read your Bible, in the way you attend the meetings, and in the way that you speak of the things of God. You do not speak of them as the most learned unconverted theologian does, but alongside of him you are dignified and he is despicable, unworthy of speaking of these things; in other words you are anointed, you have an unction, as it says, from the Holy One, and you know all things, at least in the principle of them. He knows nothing, nor can he know anything, he is unable on his present platform to know anything; he is attempting to know these things and to speak of them as a natural man, as a student with a trained mind, knowing the original languages, but he is utterly unfit to have to do with the things of God, "For what man", says the
{411}
apostle Paul, "knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God", (@1 Corinthians 2:11). These men may know the things of a man, but the things of God are only known by the Spirit of God. The youngest believer has the Spirit of God, even the Corinthians had, and we have the Spirit of God that "we may know the things which have been freely given to us of God". Thus the apostle John encourages young Christians by putting this dignity upon them, and consequently he tells them that they do not need "any man" to teach them.
John is taking young believers (I am speaking to them particularly now) out of the range of men, for it is a question of men as such in this chapter, he tells them that antichrist is coming, and that there are many antichrists. Young people, going to schools and officer may be unaware of the influences that are being exerted abroad -- subtle influences in many respects -- to shut out Christ from their minds by bringing in man, and the sayings and teachings of man. So the first word here in regard to the Spirit is "Ye have an unction from the Holy One" -- not a degree, or degrees, according to man, but "an unction". A university degree gives a certain dignity to a man; the letters at the end of a name are intended to convey dignity and authority. Now, what we have here is that, only it is "an unction from the Holy One"; not that any Christian would assume anything, but the point here is the dignity of the believer, even the youngest, as having the Holy Spirit; that the means of his learning and the character of his knowledge, is by the unction from the Holy One. Now that brings me down to what is very practical, and that is that all that is *merely* human, natural intellect and natural ability, is to be shut out from our mode of learning, and our mode of speaking
{412}
one to another -- from our Bible readings, and above all from our ministry. The more the natural element has a place, the more degraded the teaching and the knowledge are; whereas where the anointing from the Holy One is owned, all will take on a certain dignity, and a corresponding superiority to anything that you could find in this world. A meeting of persons dignified in this way has its own distinction, which when put alongside a meeting of the most renowned theologians is noticeable at once. The unction from the Holy One puts a character on us that is inimitable; it places us far out of the range of man; there is power with it; there is something in it that man cannot deny. As was said of our Lord, "Never man spake like this man" -- there was something there that could not be denied; and that is what God is producing. So in verse 26 the apostle says, "These things have I written to you concerning those who lead you astray: and *yourselves*", that is to say, the apostle looks upon these dear "little children", not as shiftless, unprotected persons, but as "*yourselves*" -- those who have received an unction which abides in them.
Now let us take account of ourselves, not to be self-occupied, of course, but as comparing ourselves with what the world can offer, religious or otherwise. God has been doing great things for His people in our own times; it behoves us to bow in thanksgiving for what He has done. It is a day of small things, I admit, but it is nevertheless a day in which God's Spirit remains among us, and His covenant. (@Haggai 2:5); in which He says to us, "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit", (@Zechariah 4:6). And so the apostle would direct us in this And what is there outside? One would challenge, anybody in the whole of Christendom as m what them, is let them bring it forth. Now you will understand that I am not seeking for a moment that we should be
{413}
self-occupied, but rather occupied with what *God has done*, so as to be grateful and humbled about it; for what He has done He will do -- *and more*, if we are dependent. Now what about "yourselves"? He says "the unction which ye have received from him abides in you, and ye have not need that any one should teach you; but as the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true and is not a lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him", verse 27. Now you see the position as to "*yourselves*". In the gospel of Mark, when the Lord came down from the mountain with the three selected ones, the cloud having disappeared and the voice ceased, it was "Jesus only with themselves"; They had seen the King in His glory, in His majesty, as Peter says; they had seen "the Son of man coming in his kingdom"; heaven was brought down to the mountain top for them, but all that had disappeared, and what an impression they must have had as they came down! It was "Jesus only with themselves", but the Jesus who was with them, had been the central object above, in the "excellent glory". That One who was the object of the Father there, and of all else, who had been transfigured before them, was now the humble Jesus with themselves. Did they need more? No, they did not need more; nor do we need more; for in speaking of the anointing I am speaking of Him. Christ in glory sent down the Spirit, that He might be upon us, that He might characterise us, that *yourselves* might be possessed with this, finding all outside but darkness and confusion. I would specially urge the young ones to look into this, into that which you have come into as believing on Christ. This epistle teaches us that what we have come into is already victorious, our faith, which "has gotten the victory over the world", chapter 5: 4. And yourselves, our very selves, as I may say, through the grace of God, are brought into all this through the anointing, as he says, "which ye have received from him", and which "abides in you".
{414}
Now you see we have come into this dignity of the spirit into a certain fixedness; and that is the next thing I wish to speak of to speak of. I am not just speaking of fellowship, I am speaking of the word *abide* as used in this epistle; it refers to fixedness in certain relations. In this particular passage as having the unction, and as having been taught of Him, we find that all outside is not only confusion and darkness, but unnecessary; you do not need it. Of course I am not speaking of ordinary education for business,…and so on, I am speaking of what is spiritual; and this passage contemplates a certain fixedness, as being possessed of the unction, which "is true and is no lie". There is not a shade of untruth in it. The fixedness of which I am now speaking is as true as that the earth abides in the sun. It is as intelligent by the Spirit, that the believer is in a certain fixedness in relation to God, and his righteousness in this respect, is in remaining in that.
In chapter 4:13, we learn how we *know* that we are in this fixedness: "Hereby we know that we abide in him and he in us, that he has given to us of his Spirit". Now you see there is a sort of dual action in this principle. God has in His people, according to the teaching of this epistle, that in which *He* can abide. A marvellous thought! I commend it to the brethren. What God has in His people, viewed in the effect of His work, as seen in this epistle, is that in which He abides. I do not know in what way this could have appeared earlier. God had great delight in the creation; it was 'very good' to Him. It was all the work of God, and He rested in a certain way in it; He was complacent in it. I can understand how God delighted in the work of His hands, having blessed it all, and how it was before His eyes as a restful scene. Indeed, the Holy Spirit commenting upon it hundreds of years afterwards, says, "on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed", (@Exodus 31:17). But when we come to the incarnation we have something
{415}
beyond that. God waited for thirty years before He announced His delight in Jesus. What can we say? He did it, and Jesus waited all those years for that announcement. It is as if God would indicate to us that if He announces His delight, it is because of moral worth. This is within the reach of all of us, for what value am I unless I am of *moral* worth? And that is what came out in Jesus. Thirty years brought out the perfection in a Man in private life; known to Mary as to no one else, I suppose, outside of His Father, for she is the Lord's mother; known also to His brethren in some way, but poorly appreciated, but perfectly known and perfectly valued by His Father. So you see there is the idea of the Father *resting* in that One here; and He speaks both to Him and of Him. At His baptism the voice says, "Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased", (@Mark 1:11); and at the transfiguration, "*This* is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", (@Matthew 17:5). There was an object on this earth in whom God the Father could rest and abide. There was perfect fixedness, if I may reverently use that word of God, in a Man here. Every breath He breathed related to God. He was cast upon God from the very outset, as the Scripture tells us; every word that He uttered, every movement of Christ related to God. Having come in as a Man in obedience, all was for the Father. Everything that He did was because He saw it in the Father. "The Son can do nothing of himself". He says, "save whatever he sees the Father doing: for whatever things *he* does, these things also the Son does in like manner", (@John 5:19), How delightful to the Father! There was the affection of course which went back before the incarnation, for He loved Him before the foundation of the world, but I am speaking of moral worth, of that which came out in Him; of what God intended in man here; so that as the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form, it abode upon Him -- that is the idea. There was nothing
{416}
there that would disturb the divine sensitiveness in that Man, for that, I apprehend, is the meaning of a love in bodily form, so that *God rested there*. It was far beyond the rest He had in the Sabbath, although no doubt the Sabbath was a figure of the incarnation; He rested there and was refreshed, but what He had not hitherto found in man. He now found in infinite perfection, that is what we find here. So in chapter 3:24 the apostle shows us how we may know we are in this fixedness: "Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given to us". It is not now a question of words, but of the Spirit, that we are conscious of this blessed abiding in God, and God in us -- for what underlies it is moral worth.
You see, therefore, the function and service of the Spirit in this epistle, first in teaching, then in bringing about this conscious abiding in God and God in us. It indicates the divine thought as to us, that we are intelligent, outside the world, independent of it, and are now such objects to God that He is restful in us, that He abides in us and we in Him, and that we know this, in that He has given to us His Spirit. It is not a mere statement of Scripture, but there is the consciousness, God abiding in us, and we in Him, by the Spirit which He has given to us.
Now chapter 4 also speaks of the Spirit as "the Spirit of God", it is characteristic. We are told how we are to know the Spirit of God, and this is another matter, because this chapter is treating of spirits.
Many cults have sprung up and even the elect are exposed, so we are given a test in chapter 4, in which the name of God appears something like twenty-nine times. It is a question of *God*: "God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins". These great statements fit into this wonderful chapter, but I am
{417}
speaking now of the spirits, and what is intended to expose to us the spirit of error, and how we are to know the Spirit of God, verse 2. It is not now a question of men or teachers as in chapter 2; it is a matter that may baffle the very oldest of us here, that is to say, the operation of spirits abroad, how we are to discern the Spirit of God in the midst of all this spiritual activity. Agnosticism and blatant infidelity have not the place they once had; but they have been replaced by 'Christian Science', spiritism, and other like systems. There is the action of spirits all round us, but we are taught of God here, to know how to discern these spirits and to know how correspondingly to discern the Spirit of God. I cannot dwell upon it now, but the test is "Every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God", verse 2. The Spirit of God, therefore, occupies us entirely and absolutely with that order of man The spirit of error will deny that order of man, and win build up on the man that God has rejected and set aside for ever in the death of Christ. The Spirit of God confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh; it is His Person of course -- a divine Person, but in flesh, that order and kind of Man, another any teaching, any spiritual movement, that does not confess that, is not *of* God; it is the working of error, and the spirit of antichrist. In chapter 2, we have antichrists; here it is the spirit of antichrist, which is more subtle. We have to 'discern' the antichrists who go out, but the spirit of antichrist is that which builds up man after the flesh, that is the test here. Anything that presents itself in the way of spiritual teaching, while building up man after the flesh, is not of God, but is the spirit of error.
In chapter 5 we come to the *witness* of the Spirit. It says, as you will observe, in this well-known passage as to the letter of it, "it is the Spirit that bears witness", verse 6. The Spirit is presented to us as a witness in relation to the things mentioned. "This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus the Christ; not by water
{418}
only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is the truth. For they that bear witness are three: the Spirit, and the water, and the blood", verses 6 - 8. (Verse 7 should not be there, for there is no need of witness in heaven.) Therefore we are in the presence of witness now, and a witness in relation to these two things in connection with which the Lord Jesus came. Observe that He came by water and by blood. It is not the incarnation exactly, it includes that, for that is how He came historically; but it is Christ come *to die* -- Christ come in relation to His death; for His coming would have no logical result or meaning, did He not come in relation to the water and blood. The world being what it is, and we being what we are naturally, His coming in as a Man could only have made things worse had He not come to die. He came in connection with the water and the blood, as if He brought these two things; as if He came in with this provision of cleansing; and then it is added "It is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is the truth".
Now, dear brethren, we are in the presence of the means of setting the saints in eternal life, for the epistle has this in view. The epistle contemplates a grand finish; that is, Jesus known in our souls as the true God and eternal life; we are thus kept from idolatry. We have the three standing witnesses before us. The first, not only for the judicial removal of our sins, but of ourselves; for self clings even to the most spiritual of us; it is the last thing we get rid of -- self -- some little thought lurking at the bottom of the heart that, after all, there is something good there, whereas there is *not*; and the water is the standing witness, in conjunction with the blood and the Spirit, that there is not. It is the water first, because we may be very ready to acknowledge our guilt, and yet retain something of self; and that something shuts us out effectively from the enjoyment of the spiritual blessing that God has in view, that is, eternal life in
{419}
His Son; for in that, I have left behind for ever, myself, according to what I was in the flesh, as well as my sins. The water has reference to what I am: "bodies washed with pure water" refers to myself -- "Entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh", (@Hebrews 10:20), and then, verse 22, "washed as to our body with pure water" -- that refers to myself; that is to say, all that I am morally, as a man in the flesh, is left behind effectively by this cleansing. The water is the divine provision for moral ... cleansing, including defilement contracted by contact with the world.
All this truth requires special attention in view of eternal life. The water and the blood are standing witnesses; they speak objectively, and if I reject the witness of God I make Him a liar. The Holy Spirit is an *active*, witness; in Hebrews we read "Wherefore as the Holy Spirit saith", that is in chapter then in chapter "The Holy Spirit this signifying", and in chapter 3, "The Holy Spirit also is a witness to us". I want you to notice these three things. What the Holy Spirit says is actually a quotation from @Psalm 95, and it is what *He says*. Who would despise the Old Testament? It is the very language that the Holy Spirit uses to speak to *our* hearts -- "Wherefore, as the Holy Spirit saith. Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness". This was written hundreds of years before, but it is what He says; He is saying it now, using the language of the Old Testament to speak to us. Then in chapter 9 He alludes to the types. What the types mean is that the Holy Spirit *shows* us things. Who then can neglect the types? That is to say, the thing is shown as on a black; board, to use a simple school figure. There is what He *says*, and there is what He *shews*; and the whole of the types are on that principle: "The Holy Spirit this signifying" referring to @Leviticus 16. Then in Hebrews
{420}
10:15, "The Holy Spirit is a witness to us"; and again it is by quoting the Old Testament @Jeremiah 31 -- all showing what a place the Old Testament has, in the ministry of the Spirit among us. I am only bringing forward these passages to show the force of witness here; that the Holy Spirit is an active witness in regard of these two things, the water and the blood, and all to the end that we might be clear in our souls to enter on the blessing that God has for us, that is, eternal life. "And this is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in his Son". May God help us to listen to this witness; it means a way opened up for us into the blessing of God.
{421}
READINGS ON FIRST CORINTHIANS (1)
H.H. Do you think that the question of public order comes before us in this chapter both in regard to the man being head of the woman and the Lord's supper?
J.T. It would appear so, following on the question of fellowship in chapter 10, which embraces our general external relations. This question of headship follows on that, leading up to and preparing for the Lord's supper. There is a great directing principle involved in headship in whomsoever it may be seen; even the head that regulate the world are generally known. In Isaiah you have the allusion to the head of Syria and the head of Samaria; for the Christian this passage identifies headship as a principle flowing down from God to Christ, and from Christ to the man, and from the man to the woman.
Ques. Is this more the moral idea of headship? It is universal, is it not? every man and every woman.
J.T. Yes, I think in its application it will appear literally in the future; it will be well known then whence direction comes. Today, the heads of nations are known, and there is an attempt to make a sort of central guiding body; but this passage would steady Christians as to where *they* look for wisdom and guidance; so that abstractly, the headship of Christ applies to every man, but we can see that the intent here, is that Christians should recognise it. The testimony to what will appear universally later is to be seen in us now.
R.B. Do you mean that while it applies to every man it is only known in those who form the assembly?
J.T. I think that is right. It is only known in those who are enlightened by the gospel as to the place Christ has. The king, it is said, reigns by the grace of God; but the idea of the headship of Christ is not recognised outside those who have faith, nor is it intended otherwise.
{422}
Abstractly, Christ is the Head of every man, but the full expression of that awaits the millennial time, when all will recognise that wisdom emanates from that source.
D.L.H. Christ is viewed as having taken His place in the creation, you have got perfect order from God descending through Christ to the man, and then to the woman; but it is the creatorial order which the assembly has to discern and maintain.
J.T. Well, exactly; it is creatorial order which will appear in the millennium, but who will say why Christ is put immediately after God? That is. His Person is involved. John the baptist announced that He was preferred before him, but this is not general among men. It is the recognition of the Person of Christ, that He is the first-born of all creation. Therefore, He comes in, not as part of the creation, but really his Creator, that by virtue of His Person as the Creator, He takes His place mediatorially as next to God. Faith alone can discern that. I do not know whether that is what you have in mind.
D.L.H. Yes. In the millennium the divine order that God established at the outset will be maintained. It will be found to be man's blessing and if men recognise it today they get the good of it -- but in the assembly it has to be maintained.
J.T. I think that is how deliverance comes in, that those who have faith recognise this order. It delivers us from all other claims, politically and nationally, so that you have God in His place, and Christ in His place. Well, the next thing is we have got man in his place -- it is man in the abstract -- and then we have woman in her place. It is not the thought of the wife here nor the marriage state but *man* and *woman*; you have here deliverance from the world in this sense today, making way for the assembly, where the headship of Christ alone is known. It is not a question of the headship of Christ in the assembly; that is Colossians; but this is more that
{423}
we should be delivered from other headships, so to speak.
J.J. Would the woman in @Mark 14, who anointed His head, set forth that idea of deliverance?
J.T. Exactly, she would recognise there the wisdom that was in Him. Isaiah says, "The head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin". There was the country and the city and the king, and so with Samaria. All those were going down, but then there was Immanuel who was coming in. That is what faith would look for, the One whose food was butter and honey. "Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good", (@Isaiah 7:15).
E.S.H. And would it fit in with "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given"?
J.T. Exactly. "His name is called Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Father of Eternity, Prince of Peace". I think that in our chapter it is what we need in the way of deliverance, so as to bring us into the absolute headship of Christ in the assembly, as in Colossians.
D.L.H. And was not this to correct disorder that had crept into the church at Corinth?
J.T. Very clearly. Only that down to the end of verse 16, it is more general, leading up to the assembly in a delivering sort of way. All who form the assembly are drilled, so to speak, or instructed practically, in the idea of headship, so as to make way for headship as in Colossians, in which it is said, "*He* is the head of the body, the assembly; who is the beginning, firstborn from among the dead, that he might have the first place in all things".
M.W.B. What is the link between the veiling or covering and the thought of headship here?
J.T. I suppose one thought of the assembly is suggested in the woman having on her head her hair which was given to her in lieu of a veil. The covering enjoined here is confirmatory of this, based on it. One idea is that whatever there is in the way of beauty in the female, it is to be reserved for the husband -- it would
{424}
work that way, as Rebecca veiled herself. The covering here is also the recognition of headship in the man.
M.W.B. Is there any thought of the church veiling herself as regards the world, and being exclusively for Christ as a veiled vessel for no other eye than His?
J.T. The modern manner of women is repulsive; it is exposure rather than concealment, shewing the reversal of the instruction here. It becomes, therefore, an exceedingly valuable passage, especially in view of our coming together in assembly. The idea of headship and feminine modesty is, as it were, drilled into us in this passage, because we are in the presence of these things -- the headship of God, the headship of Christ and the headship of the man, in all our relations. The principle ought to wear into us, so that, as in the assembly as convened it has not to be taken on, it is here -- it is a sort of element of one's being. It is not new to me as I come together in the assembly.
R.B. You mean, as having learned headship?
J.T. Yes, I know headship, it is a part of my being. It is a delivering order, because we are in the presence of all this looseness constantly. If I am in my business or my house it is not a question of the headship of Christ to the assembly; Christ is "the head of the body, the assembly" -- the article is there in Colossians. That is not what exercises me in my house, although, of course, always true, but *this* passage is what I am concerned about in my house.
M.W.B. What is the difference between headship as here presented, and the general idea in @Romans 5?
J.T. Well, I think @Romans 5 is to bring in the idea of grace. Christ is commendable to me. He becomes Head to me on moral grounds, as the One who has brought so much, as with the woman in @Luke 7, in Simon's house. The Person before her had brought grace to her, and so He would be her Head. Obviously the allusion to the feet would indicate that she discerned the carrying power
{425}
there, that had brought what she needed to her; so I think in @Romans 5 it is the overwhelming ways of grace in my soul, grace reigning "through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". It is the overwhelming character of grace coming into the soul in that Person. It is what He is to the believer, as such Romans is what Christ is to me as a needy sinner. He has met my need. So He is Head on moral grounds. You feel it is due to Him; and I think the woman in @Luke 7 is an apt illustration of it. She could see that those feet had carried to her what she needed, and she was full of the sense of grace. She was forgiven much and she loved much; and so in the presence of Simon she would recognise and honour that One.
H.H. F.E.R. said years ago, that we needed the witness of a divine Person as soon as we were forgiven, referring to @Luke 5 and he said the witness in connection with us was the Spirit; so that although the situation on the one side is set forth in Christ, yet it is only realised when the Spirit is received.
J.T. Exactly, so the Spirit in @Romans 5 sheds abroad the love of God in our hearts, but it is all through Christ. If the Holy Spirit has come in; He has come in through Christ; whereas here it is a question of the apostle calling attention to something which the gospel, in itself, did not teach them. They were not like the woman in @Luke 7; they needed this instruction, hence he says, "I wish you to know that the Christ is the head of every man, but woman's head is the man, and the Christ's head God".
H.W.S. Would this be more on the line of regulation?
J.T. I think so, particularly at Corinth where human wisdom had so large a place. Where did they get it? These Corinthians could tell you where they got it; the classical writers and philosophers were known. So one great feature of this epistle is to shut out the natural man and this is most effective: "The head of every
{426}
Christ". Thus you might challenge any of those philosophers, Where did you get your wisdom? He would not recognise Christ, whereas the Christ had come in, and He was the wisdom of God.
J.J. Is that what you mean by the delivering thought?
J.T. It certainly does deliver you from the man who has wisdom in this world.
H.F.N. Is there any link between Peter's confession in Luke, "Thou art the Christ of God", and what comes out here that the head of Christ is God?
J.T. I think that is very suggestive. As Man He receives all from God. Even in John the Lord says, "The Son can do nothing of himself save whatever he sees the Father doing".
H.F.N. The centurion in @Luke 7 says, "I also am a man placed under authority"; and have you the thought running right through Luke that Christ, as Man, moves in relation to the headship of God?
J.T. I believe that is very important to notice. In Mark, it is simply, "the Christ"; and in Matthew, "the Christ, the Son of the living God"; but in Luke, it is "the Christ of God". That is to say. He is here on account of God; hence the extensive references to Him as praying in that gospel.
H.H. I would like to ask why the man is to be uncovered and the woman to be covered?
J.T. Well, is it not because the man is the image and glory of God? God is to shine out -- God in Christ. The glory of God is in the face of Christ and it is reflected in the man; you do not want that covered; that is where God shines. He is the "image of the invisible God". God is ever invisible as regards what He is essentially; but in Christ you have the fulness of God. He is the expression of His substance. The idea of substance is one of the most interesting things, that there is that come in which may be taken account of substantially. Hence, in both Matthew and Luke it is that which was conceived by the
{427}
Holy Spirit. "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God", @Luke 1:35. That is to say, it is substantially and essentially holy. There never was a childlike that! There may have been children relatively holy, but never a child substantially holy. There is in Christ the shining out of God, and this is reflected in the man, and so he should not be covered.
H.H. Do you mean that man is intended to be the public representation of that?
J.T. Exactly. Adam was to be that; he was to shine in the creation, but now you have Christ replacing Adam. He comes in between man and God so that you have the effulgence of the divine substance and glory. That is not to be covered. Then, if you come to the church it is that which is for Christ, and all that shews, the idea of reservation, that she reserves her beauty for Christ.
D.L.H. When Adam was created in the image and likeness of God, God really had Christ in view; so the thought of glory here, is connected with the idea of likeness. God carries us back to the original creation of man before sin came in.
J.T. Adam was the "figure of him that was to come". What you get in Colossians is striking: He is the "image of the invisible God". It is not that He was but He *is* the invisible God, He remains so; but you have One who is His image.
R.B. Do you connect image with representation?
J.T. That is the idea; He represents God to me, but it is what God is in His moral authority. He is also *like*? God, so that I know God. If I see a person who is like Him, I know Him. Thus likeness of God refers to the divine features, so that God is known. Of course in Jesus, God was present, so that he who saw Him saw the Father.
R.B. Then in glory do you mean there is the shining forth of God?
J.T. Exactly. There are the two things, but image would be what God is in the way of authority over my
{428}
soul, all His rights are implied. On the other hand, I look on Jesus and *see* God in Him.
W.C. Does the countenance and appearance of David suggest the thought?
J.T. Exactly. He was overlooked, but when he came in, the Spirit says, "This is he". There was a stir in the company. Samuel had rightly said, "We will not sit at table till he come hither", and as he came in he was seen to be "ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance and beautiful appearance". Yet it takes both David and Solomon to bring in the idea of the right, man. Because Solomon is the son, and the man of wisdom; David is the warrior; David is not said to have been loved when he was born. That is to say, you have Christ in Solomon, figuratively, from the very outset. It says, "Jehovah loved him". Hence in the book of Proverbs, you have a man of wisdom, a man who is a son of his father. You have in him the idea of headship, a man who can go right back to the beginning, before the earth was and speak about wisdom, as it was then. Indeed wisdom is personified there. He is able to present wisdom as it was with God, before the world was. So you have what was before the creation of the world, and where are the world's philosophers alongside of that? The apostle Paul speaks of "that hidden wisdom which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory", chapter 2:7. That is the thing; it pushes out the wisdom of man. Where did they get their wisdom? It is only a wisdom of words. The substance is not there at all, but what you get in Solomon is substance.
J.J. Do you not think Paul had Proverbs in mind when he wrote this epistle?
J.T. No doubt. He had wisdom in his mind, and that is delivering; it brings the right man before you. You see where wisdom lies, and you are ready for it as seen absolutely in Christ. Thus, the early part of 1 Corinthians is to put the man who represents the
{429}
wisdom of this world out altogether, and make room for Him who is the wisdom and power of God.
Ques. *So* is the line of communication with God kept open? I refer to praying and prophesying here, verses 4,5.
J.T. Exactly. How can you have a woman marked by these things unless she recognises this order? I am sure Philip's daughters recognised what is taught here.
J.J. The idea of man being the image and glory of God may be deficient in men generally but is it recovered in the assembly?
J.T. You see it in those who are subject to Christ, as taught here; the thing has to be taken up abstractly now, in the sense that it is not generally seen.
H.F.N. Would you say a little more in regard to the thought of substance?
J.T. Wisdom says: "I walk in the path of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment: that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance", and the woman in @Luke 7 is one of those. "She loved much", and it is said in the next chapter that certain women were with the Lord, who ministered unto Him of their substance. So I thought it would help to see the idea of substance in a spiritual sense. It is much more than doctrine. Luke says, "the holy *thing*", not 'that holy Babe'. It is a question of the substance that was there, absolutely free from all taint. It was begotten of the Spirit of God; the substance was from God; and so John says, "*That* which was from the beginning"; there was substance there.
This chapter, if rightly understood, prepares for Colossians; for in the assembly it is not the head of Christ is God, and the head of every man is Christ, but Christ is "the head of the assembly" absolutely. There no intermediary at all; He is the head of the assembly, and hence the body or substance is of Christ. The body is not a theoretic idea; it is substance; it is of Christ.
R.B. Are you connecting the thought of substance
{430}
in relation to the body as the mystery "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge?"
J.T. Yes; substance in the sense of spiritual wealth is there.
R.B. That involves Christ the Head *and* the body.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Is headship a greater thought in Colossians than in Ephesians, where He is given to be head?
J.T. Headship in Colossians is a question of His personal right. He *is* it, not simply made it, but in virtue of His Person He is it.
Rem. In the same way as He is the image of the invisible God.
J.T. Quite so.
M.W.B. Would you say a little more about the Person being involved in the thought of head? We have generally linked the thought of head with what He is as Man, yet it involves His personal dignity.
J.T. It does in Colossians. We have been translated by the Father "into the kingdom of the Son of his love", and then the Holy Spirit opens up what this Person, not what He is made. "In whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins; who is image of the invisible God, firstborn of all creation; because by him were created all things, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth, the visible and the invisible, whether thrones, or lordships, or principalities, or authorities: all things have been created by him and for him. And *he* is before all, and all things subsist together by him. And *he* is the head of the body, the assembly; who is the beginning, firstborn from among the dead, that *he* might have the first place in all things: for in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell". (@Colossians 1:14 - 19). So you see it is what He is and who He is.
H.F.N. Coming into manhood that is what He is, not what He is going to be, but what He is; and everyone who loves Him falls in with that.
{431}
J.T. So you can see worked out in the body the substance of the head, which is a marvellous thing. "The body is Christ", it says (@Colossians 2:17).
J.J. All that is referred to in Colossians refers to Him as Man and we have to maintain that.
J.T. As a most practical feature, submission to one another may be introduced here. The idea of subjection is not only to Christ, but to the brethren. Subjection to Christ is worked out in this connection. Christ is not here personally, but the brethren are; so if we wish to be subject we may wisely begin with the brethren, because we can never realise headship, save as we recognise the brethren and respect what is due to them Even ordinarily, there is respect due to men gathered in their *own* circumstances, and above all to the saints of God, those in whom the Spirit of God is. There is respect due to them, and subjection to the Lord is worked out in my submitting humbly to my brethren. I think that fits in here. Headship properly is worked out in Colossians and Ephesians. According to Colossians it was in the presence of Christ here in manhood; He is those things mentioned in chapter 1. We do not need to be told this as loving Him. Mary of Bethany or of Magdala, may be taken as illustrative of the recognition of these things in Him. If you had brought the former the best product of human wisdom, she would have turned it aside as not worth looking at, because *all* wisdom was obviously there in listening to what the Lord had to say. Now, all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are in the mystery.
R.B. How great the Person of Christ appears in our eyes in seeing He is this and not only that it is given to Him!
J.T. I think those who love Him recognise Him.
J.J. Why does it say, "For in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell" (@Colossians 1:19), and then, "For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily"? (@Colossians 2:9).
{432}
J.T. Chapter 1 brings out the greatness of the Person. It is a most remarkable word there, the word "fulness". It refers to Him in incarnation. Who can comprehend God? but there is the idea of *fullness* which is for us. Fulness is the shining out or display of a thing in all that it is. Well, think of the "fulness of the Godhead", that is, all that God is as shining out. That dwelt in Christ; and it was pleased to dwell there. The word 'Godhead' is not there, but 'fulness' carries with it is the full thought of God.
Ques. Do you connect that with Immanuel?
J.T. Exactly, God was there -- "God with us". You might have a person in your house, but all that he is might not shine there, but all that God is as being displayed, or to be displayed, was pleased to *dwell* in Christ.
H.H. The thought of completeness is included, nothing is omitted.
J.T. Nothing at all. In whatever way His fulness was expressed it was resident there, it was pleased to dwell there.
Ques. Does the thought in Hebrews correspond? "Who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance".
J.T. I think so. We are accustomed to the word 'substance' in a material sense, but it is applicable to God according to what He is, and Christ is the expression of it.
J.J. So when He said, "Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor have seen his shape", that was substance.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Would Hebrews give you the two thoughts, the "effulgence of his glory" and the "expression of his substance"? I wondered whether this first part, the headship of Christ, would be seen publicly in the world to come.
J.T. I think so. I think all this will shine out there.
{433}
READINGS ON FIRST CORINTHIANS (2)
@1 Corinthians 14
J.T. I suppose following after love here refers to the inside position.
H.F.N. Yes. I think the brethren would be very thankful if you would give a little help in regard to the threads in this part of the epistle following on the Supper.
J.T. Evidently in the section from verse 17 of chapter 11 to the end of this chapter, we are occupied with what governs us inside as gathered. It is the assembly in function; not simply all the assembly come into one place, but in functional relation. Then we have the body in chapter 12, the chapter deals with "spiritual manifestations", in connection with which we have the Spirit, and the Lord, and God, in verses 4,5 and 6; so fully comparing chapter 12. Chapter 13 is the power in a moral way for operation, so that we can function according to God; and hence following after love would mean that we think of it first, and all the time, as gathered together; for unless that be in evidence, there would be the tendency for each of us to isolate himself in the exercise of his gift. The large place the apostle gives to prophecy as over against tongues, in following after love, would be to save us from isolation in thought in our service in the assembly. It may not seem so easy, especially if a man has gift, as he sits down with his brethren to think of himself in relation to the others.
Ques. What analogy would there be today between speaking with tongues and prophesying?
J.T. There would be nothing answering to speaking with tongues save in the tendency to isolate oneself. The danger that the apostle is guarding against, is the tendency to isolate yourself and bring forward things that might be intelligible to you but not to the company.
P.L. Would chapter 13 suggest the way we identify
{434}
ourselves in suffering and serving love with the saints, in conditions which we may be called to meet with our gift in chapter 14?
J.T. Quite so. I think you may see many things working out, even a line of things, but the question is whether they are intelligible to the company, and whether you are sure that what you say will touch the normal spiritual intelligence of the saints. If I am governed by love in ministry, I will consider the spiritual capacity of the saints; and, however intelligent and intelligible what I have may be to me, whether I can make it so to them.
Rem. The Lord said to His disciples, "I have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them now", (@John 16:12).
J.T. Yes; that referred to their great incapacity; but the assembly normally has spiritual capacity and spiritual intelligence; it has the Holy Spirit.
W.C. Do you connect this particular line with every time the saints are together, or especially with the Supper?
J.T. This chapter does not view the saints at the supper. It does not say, "when ye come together in assembly", as in chapter 11:18, but when the "whole assembly" comes together in one place. We have to distinguish between the assembly viewed functionally, and all the members together at any time.
H.F.N. There has been a good deal of question raised in regard to the exact setting of this chapter, and to what kind of meeting it may apply. It has been said to be definitely linked up with the Supper, but that can hardly be so, as you say.
J.T. I think chapter 14 is very general. It is certainly linked with chapter 11, for it is one section from chapter 11:17, to the end of this chapter; but I think chapters 12 and 13 are to show how the thing is possible, and in what a variety of ways the assembly may be viewed as gathered. This chapter contemplates gatherings which
{435}
afford opportunity for the exercise of gift. It treats of the exercise of gift; it is a question of ministry.
H.H. And gift is to be regulated by love.
J.T. That is the point.
H.H. Would you say that one's measure on that line, is determined by the measure in which one is formed in the divine nature? It could not go beyond that.
J.T. Quite so, you are following after love, verse 1. You are in the midst of the saints and love is supposed to be there. It could not have been in Corinth to any great extent, so it has to be *described* in chapter 13. That chapter of course would afford light for following after love; but then normally the brethren as together have some love, and it is a great thing to follow and develop what is there; so that you are not isolated as among them.
H.H. 'Good to the *feeblest* heart' -- everyone would have his measure on this line.
J.T. And if I am following after it, it brings out the best that is there. There can be no profitable meetings unless we touch so to speak, what there is in the saints. In ministry you take account of what there is.
C.H.W. You think then that the saints could be gathered together according to this chapter with a view to the expression of love in this way?
J.T. Yes Love, in whatever form it may be expressed, is the great thing; "The greater of these is love". That is what will mark the assembly in heaven eternally. You want to get the best there is, and you do not isolate yourself; you seek to get at what there is in the brethren. You think of them in their church relations.
P.L. Do you find that in Elisha's exercise of his prophetic gift? "Bring me a cruse"; "Fetch me a minstrel"; "What hast thou in the house?" Is he working on what is available?
J.T. Quite so. What the minstrel was to him, love in the brethren is to you. Love in the company is what touches you and sets you free.
{436}
H.H. You have to allow it is there if all partake of the Lord's supper together.
E.R. Gift is subject to desire; is that an important thing?
J.T. I am sure it is, but it will be love that will desire the gift. That is, you desire it because you love the brethren.
E.R. We should expect more development because of that.
J.T. I am sure if any one sees the need of service, and desires the gift he will get it, and in the exercise of it the great thing to be aimed at, is to "follow after love".
Rem. You minister to that which is there.
J.T. You bring out the wealth there is. The Lord's supper, being objective, is intended to bring out that and attach our hearts to Him, but the gifts that exist, as exercised in love, touch the strings of our hearts in a peculiar way and bring out the wealth that is there.
C.H.W. In what kind of meeting can this function amongst us today?
J.T. The light furnished here practically enters into all the meetings of the saints. This is a very general chapter; it speaks of the whole assembly as come together. But if we "follow after love" we shall *find* it.
Ques. Would you say that if the gifts are not regulated by love, they arc used for the display of the persons themselves and tend to bring about parties?
J.T. Is not that exactly what existed at Corinth? But you are not to think of isolating yourself. If I sit down among the brethren thinking of my ability and my gift and of what I may say, I am simply isolating myself. I believe that is implied in the great space given to tongues here. That is the bearing of it now. It is quite right to speak to myself and to God, if I cannot speak to the brethren; but if I am following after love I want to speak to the brethren, because I know that normally there is something in the brethren in the way of love.
{437}
E.J.McB. Love is secured for God in the assembly, and it is to be there always.
J.T. The Lord intended to leave it among the saints; "Have love among yourselves". The thing is there; well, it may be there and not brought into action, and one great thing in the exercise of gift is to set it in movement.
E.J.McB. You mean, rather than have a display meeting, you have a meeting that moves the spiritual affections of the brethren.
J.T. That is the thing; and you have got something that belongs to eternity, if you get the saints moving in that relation. Then, following on that there would be light and intelligence; but love is the great thing.
Rem. The simple one saying Amen, would suggest that the affections are moving.
J.T. If a brother says Amen heartily, you feel he is touched in his inner being.
P.L. Is what is before us, seen in pattern in God Himself filling the tabernacle with glory, at the end of Exodus, and then speaking to the children of Israel, calling to Moses out of the tabernacle, in the beginning of Leviticus? The tabernacle being anointed would be like the saints steeped in love.
J.T. Just so. In the beginning of Exodus Moses is seen sitting by the well, as if that were the great thing, something of God springing up. If you come into a meeting, that is the attitude you take on. There is something there of God; the Holy Spirit is there. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" That is the attitude Moses took up, he is sitting by the well, and in due course he administers all that comes out. So that from chapter 35 to the end, you have what came out in the saints, the heave-offering for the construction and service of the tabernacle. Thus the point in ministry is that we are working in relation to what exists. That is to say, the
{438}
well is there, potentially, and Moses is sitting by it. The first touch you have of the administration of the ministry in Exodus, is in Moses and Aaron going and summoning the elders of the people, and Aaron speaking to the people what God spoke to Moses, and it is said that the people worshipped. That is the first thing, the ministry touches the heart Godward.
J.R.S. Is it that Moses gathered the meaning of the burning bush sitting by the well?
J.T. Well, the latter preceded the former and would prepare Moses for the divine appearing in the bush. He had slain the Egyptian, but he now learns that it is a question of what God would do, something that springs up by itself. One may touch it and set it in motion, but the thing is there to be set in motion, and so, in chapter 35, after Moses gives the instructions as to what is required, it says that they departed from him and brought the things that were needed.
H.H. The closing chapters of Exodus show that the tabernacle set up, was all the product of mutual contributions.
J.T. Exactly. All was brought to Moses and he approved it, and as the tabernacle is set up, everything is in function. If it is the ark, it has the covenant within it; if it is the table, it has the shewbread upon it; if it is the candlestick, the lamps are lighted. Everything is actually in use as it is set up. So the great thing in ministry is to bring out what there is in *the* saints. Of course you bring in Christ and add to that, but you have something to add to, if you touch love.
J.J. The assembly being there, the woman in that way setting forth the subjective side, you would expect to find love, and if you build on that you will surely get love. There is intelligence there, but affection seems to be the great idea.
J.T. I think that is important, and the minister being representative of Christ, would promote and add to what
{439}
is there. There is that in *the saints* by the Spirit, which J responds to Christ as ministered.
H.F.N. The exercise of the servant in regard to each J locality would be to discover this feature of love, and it would govern his ministry. He would touch different localities in a variety of ways, as seeking to discover what was there in the way of love.
J.T. That is what I understand. In appearing to the company in @Luke 24 the Lord shows that He took account of what was there. When He went with the two to Emmaus He did not ask them what they had, they were in the wrong direction; but when He comes in to the company He asks them what they had got. "Have ye anything here to eat?" He says. The principle is that there is something.
J.O.S. Is it that something that convicts the person coming in or is it the ministry?
J.T. It is the ministry that convicts the conscience, but then love is an immense thing; it helps you in what you have to bring out. The gift is to radiate the light, but then you get a tremendous impetus in the sense of love among the brethren. It is only due to them that you should recognise that. I should not think of the brethren in any other light; it would be discreditable to them to think of them in any other way than that.
Rem. The distinctions in verse 6, of revelation, knowledge, prophecy and teaching would cover the ministry, in the divers forms of it.
There is great variety in view as seen in the simile of the pipe and harp and the trumpet, the first two having to do with the affections, and the other in view of conflict.
J.T. You have in verse 26: "Whenever ye come together, each of you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation". The apostle says in verse 6, "Now brethren, if I come to you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, unless I shall speak to you either in revelation, or in knowledge,
{440}
or in prophecy, or in teaching?" This is how he would come to them; it would be the attitude of his mind if he came to Corinth.
Now we hope there are brethren whom God is leading forward; the need is very great and it is well that they should understand how ministry is obtained, whether it is got from reading what others say, or otherwise. Here we have the attitude of the apostle's mind, were he to come to Corinth.
J.J. Would revelation hold good today?
J.T. As regards revelation strictly, there is nothing added today. But the Scriptures contain things that I have not been developed. The Lord said He would beg the Father to send the Spirit, and then that the Father would send the Spirit in His name, and that when He should come He would teach them all things and bring to their remembrance what He had said to them. Now that is very important. It is not only what is in the Scriptures -- the principle of everything is there -- but what the Holy Spirit has. What a reservoir of things exists in the presence of the Spirit of God here! All that the Lord Jesus said, and not only that, but all His life well known to the Holy Spirit. "All the words of this life" is carried down in the Holy Spirit. Therefore, if you are going to minister, it is obvious you have to take al these things into account. It is a question of the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God. You get impressions directly from the Holy Spirit.
E.J.McB. Do you mean that Paul would have gathered up impressions by the Holy Spirit in the company, that he would make use of to the brethren?
J.T. He got revelations direct from the Lord, we know, but he had part in service in the ordinary way too, and would recognise the temple of God in his ministry, and the love existing among those he served. (@2 Corinthians 7) affords help in this respect. There are two things that govern in regard to ministry: Luke says,
{441}
"Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high", that is, you do not have to move; it is a question of what comes to you as waiting on the Lord; but Matthew says, quoting the Lord, that you have got to go to Galilee. Those two things govern you. The Holy Spirit is acting from Himself, and He is concerned that what you are going to say is to be representative of heaven, and to be in moral dignity; it is not simply the Holy Spirit but "power from on high"; it is to be that. The other is that I travel a long way to get it, I see I must do that; exercise of soul comes in there.
H.H. I would like to submit something in regard of "revelation". The Lord would give a lead in ministry amongst us, and that would be of such a character that different brothers in their different measures and ways would take it up, as for instance, light in regard to Christ Himself. You say, Plow do you get your sermons? Is it the line of what God is doing at any particular time? Your exercise is linked with what God is saying to the saints all over the world, at the moment.
J.T. I am sure that is important, and if you are representative of the Lord you ought to make it clear that there is plenty with Him. "Freely ye have received, freely give". There is plenty with the Lord and He loves you to draw upon Him. He wishes it to be conveyed too, that there is plenty with Him, and that He so loves the saints that He lavishes His wealth upon them. As these things are kept in mind, there will be "the spirit of wisdom and revelation", not exactly anything new, but new features of what is in the Scriptures.
F.S.M. Would you say that there is an important difference between getting an impression from the Lord, and going to the Scriptures for light and help as to its development -- and going to the Scriptures for something to say?
J.T. There is. The indication or impression from
{442}
the Lord is the most important thing. And then the Scriptures. It is remarkable how the Scriptures furnish you in your service; it is very wonderful at times how the Holy Spirit brings things out; they are placed there to be brought out.
F.S.M. As you get your word from the Lord the Scriptures become living with power on that very point.
Rem. Moses got a revelation in @Exodus 3 to fit him to go to the people.
J.T. He got his impression and that stayed with him; he had already taken up his position by the well, and from that point you see progress in the man. The women came to draw water, they filled their troughs and the shepherds drove them away, but Moses helped the women, he did not attack the shepherds, and then he watered their flock. Then he is occupied with the flock for forty years, and then Jehovah appeared to him. He led the flock to the right spot, to Horeb, and there the mind of God is opened up to him, and it remains with him. And then it is a fine example that the first bit of ministry you get from Moses, causes worship. It is not fine speaking, but the word touches the hearts of the saints Godward, and they worship.
Rem. Would that be a prophetic word -- as we say? I had a thought that in the recovery of the truth, interpretation has a very great place; in J.N.D.¬s days a great deal was recovered to us in the expounding of the Scriptures, but today the word that is necessary and touches the saints is more of a prophetic character.
Ques. John was directed to take the "little book" (@Revelation 10); would that have any bearing on what you are saying?
J.T. It has. You might prophesy and you might stop as many alas! do. God uses them and they come to a stop It is a question therefore whether I am to "prophesy *again*", hence the Lord comes out there as an
{443}
angel, with a little opened book in his hand, which is exactly what we have today. As was remarked, the Lord has used the earlier brethren to open up the Scriptures to us, but the thing now is whether I take the word and *eat* it. The point is whether you are going to *continue* prophesying. "And he says to me. Take and eat it up: and it shall make thy belly bitter, but in thy mouth it shall be sweet as honey. And I took the little book out of the hand of the angel, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth as honey, sweet; and when I had eaten it my belly was made bitter. And it was said to me. Thou must prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings", (@Revelation 10:9 - 11). It is the appropriating of the thing, and the bitterness of feeling that it causes in the soul as to what exists in christendom -- that is what qualifies you morally to continue prophesying.
H.H. That is in line with going to Galilee; you have got to take up the suffering and reproach, in order to continue ministering.
J.T. And to have right feelings about things. 'The little opened book' implied something that was about to happen to the nominal people of God, and you cannot but feel these things. We must not be deceived by externals; we must remember that externals -- big meetings and the like -- are not everything; there may by an underlying state that God may expose, and that little opened book might disclose that there is something coming in in the way of governmental action. God allows things to happen, and though you know beforehand they are going to happen, they make you sorrowful and sober, and if you can feel things. God will use you again. I do not think God will use unfeeling people; it is the belly that is made bitter.
P.L. Would you say prophesying again is seen in Paul's second epistle to the Corinthians?
J.T. Yes; he went down to the depths, chapter 1:8 - 10, before he wrote it.
{444}
J.J. What difference do you make between revelation and prophecy?
J.T. As applied now, revelation is something you get into your soul by the Spirit. You are waiting before the Lord, and it is as clear as if it were spoken to you; and then you put it in order. Prophecy comes in in the way you present it, but in the presentation of the word you are with God and God is with you.
Ques. Would revelation enable you to speak with authority?
J.T. It does; you know you have the word from the Lord. I do not think anybody should minister unless he is assured in this way.
J.J. So verse 3 is of immense importance and very positive: "But he that prophesies speaks to men in edification, and encouragement, and consolation".
P.L. Are the two thoughts of journeying and tarrying illustrated in Elisha? @2 Kings 2. He was determined to take the journey whatever it cost, and then he has to tarry for power from on high.
J.T. Yes, and there you come to another thing: "If thou see me when I am taken from thee"; he was to see Elijah go up. That is to say, the ministry as indicated in Elisha was to have a heavenly touch. It is seeing a person go up, that is moral, elevation; it is outside the range of men. The whole clerical system is within the range of men, but Elisha saw him go up; "My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!" That is the thing. The power of God was there, but in a man going up.
Ques. Would you say that the prophet would be very sensitive as to what was there amongst the brethren and minister accordingly?
J.T. Exactly; that is what comes out here at the end, sensitiveness in the exercise of spiritual gift and mutual feeling, so that one is not isolated. If one is speaking as an isolated person, he does not mind one bit how many
{445}
there are there to speak; he is thinking of what he is saying himself and how well he is doing it; whereas if he is governed by love he is thinking of the good of the hearers, and if another sitting by has got something, he is conscious of it; he is so in touch with what is there that he becomes silent, verse 30.
Ques. Would that bring out the two things in Revelation? "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies".
J.T. That is a question of the hearers. They are often very critical, overlooking that the obligation to hear is there as much as the obligation to speak. If I do not hear, why not? I cannot always say it is because the voice did not carry. The exhortation in @Revelation 2 - 3 is very wide in its bearing. I am obliged to hear what the Spirit says. It is imperative that I should hear; that is what I have ears for.
J.H.T. Do you think we have the thing emphasised in Paul in Troas? There was the ability to speak long, and the interest on the part of the saints to listen, and then the love seen in the servant descending and embracing Eutychus.
J.T. The incident shows what latitude there is in the assembly, that he began to speak before they broke bread. I suppose there must have been a certain exercise with him; the necessity must have been there that he should speak so long. God is concerned that the breaking of bread and all that goes on in His house, should be *in the full light of Paul's ministry*. He is concerned about what we are doing, but He wishes it done according to the light or principles He has provided to govern the assembly.
{446}
READINGS ON FIRST CORINTHIANS (3)
@1 Corinthians 15:1 - 19,51 - 58
H.H. Is this section linked with chapter 1:30, where Christ is spoken of as redemption?
J.T. I suppose it is; there could be no redemption without resurrection.
H.H. You mean Christ will come and claim the body.
J.T. Quite so, that is included in the idea of redemption, that He is the Saviour of the body. At the present time it is soul salvation, but redemption includes the body.
Ques. Why does the subject matter of this chapter come into this part of the epistle?
J.T. Well, among other things it tightens up "the stringed instrument", the assembly being so regarded. There are two kinds of instruments, wind and stringed, and the assembly is to be a stringed instrument. The harp is the only kind of instrument used in heaven, and it is stringed.
H.H. "What is piped or harped", chapter 14:7.
J.T. Exactly. A stringed instrument is more effective, in that you can play and sing together.
F.L. Do you get this thought in Hezekiah, resurrection coming in and then his going up to the house of God to play on an instrument of ten strings?
J.T. That is it exactly, and Habakkuk also plays on his stringed instrument; and he walks on his "high places"; this chapter makes way for both -- -- for the high places and the stringed instrument, that is, high morally and, anticipatively, high actually. But the introduction of the facts of the gospel and the introduction of the appearings of Christ to certain persons, is to make way for the instrument. It is remarkable that the apostle does not confine himself to the general fact of the Lord's appearing as in the Acts. In Acts, you have the general fact of His appearing to them during the forty days -- the duration of the period, but here it is the persons to whom
{447}
He appeared; shewing that the apostle would remind us of personality, in what he is dealing with.
Ques. What would the wind instrument suggest?
J.T. It is a question of life: "Everything that hath breath". The Holy Spirit is alluded to in the figure of water as well as air. The air represents the higher thought of life, so that God is praised by as wind instruments, so to speak; but there is the stringed instrument which is more for Christ to use.
J.R.S. Was not the stringed instrument introduced into the service of God by David?
J.T. It is mentioned before, but you get the *best* things with him, especially in regard of music -- but I only refer to that so that we may have the general thought before us as to these appearings; that it is not simply the general fact of the Lord's appearing during a certain period of time, but *of the persons to* whom He appeared.
J.J. Would there be any special point in the fact that He appears to Peter first and to Paul last?
J.T. I think there is order in the persons. You will observe it is not Simon as in @Luke 24: "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon"; it is not that here. You might expect that, if it were merely a question of the gospel. He is speaking of the gospel, but he is speaking of it not exactly as representative of grace, but of spirituality and personality. Here, the point is the personality expressed in the word Cephas.
Ques. Is it a gospel that has assembly material in view?
J.T. Exactly.
Ques. To furnish material for the carrying out of what has been developed from chapters 11 to 14?
J.T. Yes, we have the order of the assembly, etc., earlier, but now we have the suggestion of the kind of persons who have part in it. These are points of very great importance, because at Corinth personality acquired in this world had currency in the assembly. Men
{448}
have personality in this world from education, family or money, and that had place at Corinth.
P.L. "This one and that one was born in her". Is that personality in relation to the assembly -- Zion?
J.T. I think so.
H.H. Why does the apostle go over these different ones to whom the Lord appeared? He speaks of five hundred brethren at one time of whom some had fallen asleep, and so on, and last of all to himself.
J.T. As has been suggested. @Psalm 87 helps us as to the persons born in Zion. Perhaps we might enlarge on the personality side in these appearings according to their order; the first appearing here is an allusion to material very different from that current at Corinth; What was current in the world as marking off persons was accepted among the saints at Corinth. 'Cephas' is not that, it is not acquired in this world, it is a personality acquired from Christ. It is not Peter but Cephas; it is the word used by the Lord in @John 1:42. It is a question of the person more than the material; it is material, but the kind of person that includes the material. It is to shut out personal distinction acquired in the world, that that should not gain recognition in the church.
E.J.McB. Then do you look on the appearing as a mark of divine favour to the one to whom He appeared?
J.T. Yes, so as to *impress* him. If one ponders what it is to have the Lord appear to one personally, a definite impression would be received; it would shut out any distinction that the world could confer. It is exclusive, because the word really denotes material. It shews what Peter was according to Matthew, but denotes also what he was to be called, according to John. You have what the man is, and then what the man is to be *called*; hence if I am on this line, I do not think of a brother in connection with the distinction he has acquired in this world.
J.S. So to be called Cephas would stand over against any previous family name.
{449}
J.T. So Matthew gives the material, and John the personal distinction, in that the Lord says, "Thou shalt be called Cephas". But then Luke brings in the idea of personality at once. In speaking to Theophilus he almost immediately introduces a great heavenly dignitary. It is peculiar to Luke that you have a heavenly dignitary introduced by name. Well, what would the "most excellent Theophilus" be alongside of that person? I mean, he would have to think of that. He was excellent of course, but that excellency is dropped in the Acts.
So you have Gabriel referring to the Lord as born, as a 'thing': "the holy thing"; meaning that all that should be there would be intrinsic and not merely external; it is a question of what is *intrinsic* in Christ. "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God", @Luke 1:35. There intrinsic, substantial excellency there, and then It is *called* "Son of God". All that is to shut out any distinction acquired in this world; it has no place in the assembly of God whatever; it might have in *government* of God. Gabriel says "*He* shall *be great*": greatness according to God is there.
H.H. That paves the way for the second appearing, to the twelve, does it not? Men able to take their proper part and place in connection with the assembly.
J.T. The twelve coming in after that, your mind is directed to those persons who were there under the Lord's hands so that He could manipulate and use them at His pleasure. This was not the case at Corinth, because they were building up parties they were not there for Christ for service, they were serving their own ends, whereas the twelve were under His hand. And then, "five hundred brethren at once". The thing spreads out to the *brethren*, the idea being that there should be the means in the Lord's hands of spreading abroad this spiritual influence, by so many impressed by an appearing at one time.
{450}
J.O.S. Would that mean an accession of light as to the Lord Himself in resurrection, and qualification for a place in the assembly?
J.T. Yes, there would be something there on each occasion to impress them spiritually; so that the Corinthians should be rid of their big men, comparing this one with that one. "These, measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves", (@2 Corinthians 10:12). The One to compare with, is this great personage that appeared.
Ques. Why is it in that connection the words are introduced, "Some are fallen asleep"?
J.T. It shows how Paul followed them up. They were of such value in his mind among the saints, that he followed them up: he knew them all.
P.L. You mean, in that sense, he could give an account of the brethren.
J.T. I can understand that if Paul were to go to an assembly he would say. Is there one of the five hundred here? He would have in his mind, that the presence of one of those men in a meeting, would imply a spiritual element of very great value. He took note of them; he knew how many had fallen asleep.
J.J. There is no suggestion as to what kind of meeting this was where those five hundred brethren were. I mean, the appearings infer that certain conditions were present for Him to appear, although there are individuals as well -- James, Cephas and Paul?
J.T. The five hundred would undoubtedly afford the levitical principle as in Joshua, which is distinct in this respect from Numbers. In Joshua, it is the distribution of heavenly influence; they were everywhere, so to speak. The Lord provides in this way the means of influence. It is not a question of gift, but of the impartation of influence flowing from impressions.
J.J. So wherever they were in their cities they could be appealed to.
{451}
J.T. The forty-eight cities of the Levites imply universality of heavenly influence.
Ques. Is there any idea of heavenly testimony in this chapter?
J.T. I think so. What you get is the inward spiritual touch that is implied in the appearing of Christ. You have to think of the effect an appearing of Christ would have on your spirit. Well, the five hundred receiving this impression at one time, would be the means in the Lord's hands of the distribution of a spiritual influence.
J.R.S. And that influence would imply unity.
J.T. It would indeed, especially as it happened at one time.
H.H. It would make the resurrection world a very great reality to them for Christ to appear to them, the One who died on the cross.
J.T. If you came in touch with those five hundred, or any of them, you would feel they had entered into the realm that was 'before the world'. They would have nothing to do with the Corinthian world as in chapter 2.
J.H.T. Is that why the city given to Caleb was given to the Levites? It was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.
J.T. It is mentioned where the heavenly testimony was refused. It is in @Numbers 13 that you get the statement that it was built before Zoan. In not hearkening to the testimony of the spies, Israel were refusing "that world". The Corinthians were letting in the present world.
P.L. So immediately after the forty-eight cities are given to the levites in Joshua it says, "Jehovah gave to Israel all the land which he swore to give unto their fathers". Is that the spirit of what is heavenly?
J.T. Yes; the heavenly feature being established, the Spirit states that the full thought of Jehovah for His
{452}
people had been reached, @Joshua 21:43 - 45. They had not only title to the land, but "they took possession of it, and *dwelt* in it".
J.J. What is your thought about James?
J.T. I think James shews what *one man* can do. The allusion would be, no doubt, to what he was personally at Jerusalem, and what one man, can do as divinely impressed.
P.L. Elijah being referred to by James, would confirm the thought.
J.T. Elijah says, "There shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by *my* word". That is, he calls attention to himself as divinely accredited, and the appearing to James would set us up in individual responsibility, standing for the truth at all cost.
P.L. So James in @Acts 15 says, "Listen to me".
J.T. The five hundred is what goes on into eternity; it is the brethren impressed, spiritually by Christ.
J.O.S. Would the thought be that those to whom He appeared would have such an impression of Christ, that they would exclude from the circle of the saints everything that was not suited to it? There was a definite witness in His presence of what is suitable in the assembly.
J.T. Quite so. You have the twelve alluded to twice. They are first alluded to by number, signifying they were under the Lord's hand of love; He can use them at His pleasure.
Ques. Is "the twelve" an entity and "the apostles" so many individuals?
J.T. I think the twelve would be an entity, but in such holy affectionate relations, that the Lord can manipulate them at His pleasure. I do not know any thing more desirable in this respect, than to stand in relation to the brethren in love, in such a way that the Lord can dispose of us as He pleases. Twelve has wonderful divisibility, showing that the Lord can divide
{453}
us as He pleases, in the service of His love. Then you come to "all the apostles", which is not a question of number, but of complete delegated authority; they were those who represented the authority of the Lord.
J.J. Do you think that included other than the twelve? -- persons like Barnabas, who were called apostles?
J.T. It is *all* the apostles, but I judge the twelve only are alluded to.
Ques. Would Paul's description of himself shew the result of the appearing -- "least of the apostles"?
J.T. That is very fine, and the way he alludes to himself as an abortion. What a small estimate he had of himself! His calling was in sovereign mercy, and so he says, "By the grace of God I am what ram". Others could say what he was, but what he was, was by the grace of God.
H.F.N. Why does he allude to the fact of the grace of God three times over? He does not refer to the mercy of God exactly.
J.T. I suppose grace contemplates how much there is to be overcome in me if I think of mercy, it is a question of God taking me up whether I am good or bad; but if I think of grace it is the means God has of overcoming the very worst in me. Paul says he was a persecutor of the church.
P.L. Would you say what silences the clericals at Corinth is "Have not I seen Jesus our Lord?" Does the result of the appearing put us in mutuality with our brethren, as less than the least of all saints?
J.T. Yes, and then he had such a great regard for the church, which is another fine touch here. Elsewhere, he would tell us what an insolent overbearing man he was and that he persecuted the church. But here, he had such fine tender sensibilities as to what the church was to Christ and he had persecuted *that*. All this was intended to reflect on the state of things at Corinth.
{454}
H.H. I wondered whether he had brought out in that way the instrument often strings by his persecution. The sufferings of the saints had brought out the melody that was for the heart of God.
P.L. As seen in Stephen particularly.
J.T. Quite so. That was, no doubt, where he first met *Jesus*, "Why dost thou persecute me? ... I am Jesus, whom *thou* persecutest". There was complete correspondence between Jesus and the church.
Ques. Would you say how these appearings would affect local conditions today?
J.T. They affect them in the way of influence. We have had a good deal about ministry and the exercise of gift in the earlier chapters, but what we are dealing with now, is available logoff the saints. It is a question of spiritual power available to brothers and sisters alike. What apprehension have I of Christ by personal relation with Him? The measure of my personal relation to Christ is the measure of my influence for good, and that is most important, as I was remarking, as to the levitical feature of Joshua.
W.C. So does the appearance of the "Captain of the Lord's host" to Joshua connect in that way with the appearings here? The people were in the land.
J.T. That is so; it is really the only appearing you get in Joshua. There are divine appearings, as you know, throughout the Pentateuch, but the one in Joshua is a *military* appearing; the "Captain of the Lord's host". It was to remove all the evil to make way for the heavenly influence.
P.L. To secure the church militant.
J.T. Quite so. Heavenly influence is one of the most important things we may exert.
J.T. Would you mind saying a word as to the end of Mark? You have referred to Matthew and Luke. You get three appearings of the Lord in the end of Mark, first to Mary, then to the two, and then to the eleven as
{455}
they reclined at table, and I thought you would get the great moral effect of movement as the result. He first appears and then speaks to them, and after the Lord speaks to them He "was taken up into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. And they, going forth, preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs following upon it". I was wondering whether those would be some of the effects of His appearing.
J.T. It is all on the same line. Mark emphasises the *unbelief* of the disciples more than any of the others, and think it is to shew how wonderfully patient the Lord is with us; the kind of material He has to deal with in us. Mark did not write these things to disparage the apostles, but rather to remind us of the material the Lord has to deal with and how much He has to overcome in us *all*. He anticipated all that, but He commissions them, and as having appeared to them He goes up. So that He shows how He can secure you in spite of the obstinacy and unbelief of your heart in such a way that He confides in you. It is one of the most blessed things to have the consciousness that the Lord confides in you. He sat on the right hand of God and *they went forth* and preached *everywhere*, shewing that His judgment was right; and He Worked with them, "Confirming the word with signs following".
P.L. "The heart of her husband confideth in her", (@Proverbs 31:11).
Ques. Do you think we might learn to link ourselves with the work of God wherever it is, so that we should not lose an appearing? Some of them had two or three, and what valuable men they would be with those impressions, in every kind of meeting. Thomas missed an appearing because he was not concerned to be there with his brethren.
J.T. What is recorded should create alertness in us; like Anna, who did not miss the great occasion; not that
{456}
she knew it was going to happen, but she was there; she did not miss it.
W.C. Would you get in Daniel one who cultivated the conditions -- mourning and fasting?
J.T. Quite so, and he had appearings.
P.L. "The time of the evening oblation", would invite an appearing.
J.T. Then another great illustration of it is in @Genesis 17. It says that God broke off speaking with Abraham. He had appeared to him, but He broke off the communication and went up; so that it would be a question with Abraham whether he would have another appearing, because we must not be satisfied with one. If the Lord is pleased to vouchsafe such things we want to get them. So it says that He went up having broken off the communication with Abraham; and then immediately Abraham carries out to the letter, what God had part is the circumcision more emphasised than in the last paragraph of that chapter, and then it says, chapter 18, "he sat at the tent-door in the heat of the day", and three men were standing near, meaning that the thing that had been broken off was now to be resumed, and even more fully than on the previous occasion, because God came *in company*, and was standing near him, all, as it were, to honour the implicit obedience of Abraham.
H.F.N. In the one chapter the communication is *broken off* but in the next the speaking is *finished*.
J.T. That is another thing. It is very beautiful that there is such a thing as God acting in this way; testing us as to whether we value the privilege. Now Abraham did, clearly, because he was in the attitude of expectancy, as you might say, in the heat of the day. He was not taking his rest, but was at the tent-door when the three men stood near. Abraham took the initiative at first, but after the repast, unexpected and delightful things come up from the Lord Himself in the manifestation; and
{457}
then it goes on to Abraham interceding for Sodom, and then it says, "Jehovah went away when he had ended speaking to Abraham". It is not now broken off, it is finished. He went away and Abraham returned to his place. That is a complete spiritual chapter.
J.J. Why is so much detail given to the resurrection here?
J.T. Because they were denying it. We are reminded of what may be working where there is worldliness in the assembly. The very worst kind of doctrinal evil may be working. It might not have been seen generally, but the thing was there. The resurrection was actually denied -- a most serious matter.
Ques. Have you any thought why burial is emphasised in this chapter?
J.T. It is part of the sacrificial work; it was required to finish the work. Man had to be buried, put out of sight sacrificially.
H.H. It means disappearing from the platform of the world for us.
J.T. Exactly; that man is only out of sight in burial.
H.H. It is to prepare the way for a better personality than had been accepted in Corinth.
J.T. Quite so; in the chapter alluded to in Genesis, although God had already told Abraham about Isaac, he tells him again, and so the world -- Sodom -- has to go.
H.H. There was a very different state of things at Sodom. In one place the flesh was all dealt with in one day in circumcision, and in the other it was tolerated in its most violent form.
J.T. What a testimony there was in Abraham as to God dealing with sin! It is Colossians. There is circumcision, and then burial in Colossians, so that we may understand being risen by the faith of the operation of God who raised Christ.
W.W. It is very great support to the gospel in regard to Isaac being brought in. The world must go and the
{458}
prominence of the true Isaac would be a test, would it not?
J.T. That is the idea in the assembly, the principle of "that world and the resurrection". Colossians brings that in.
G.W.W. Have you the thought in your mind that while there is a state necessary to appreciate an appearing, there is a state produced by the appearing which renders one fit for the assembly to maintain it?
J.T. That is it exactly; and then he goes on to bring out the resurrection in its full bearing, touching the heavenly: "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", all to shut out at Corinth and from amongst saints generally, not only what is bad, but what is earthly.
H.H. I suppose the house from heaven in the second epistle is the other side of it; but this chapter deals with what Christ claims from the grave in regard of His saints?
J.T. Yes; it is the fulness of redemption.
R.S. Is that why "the end" is brought in? "That God may be all in all".
J.T. That is brought in parenthetically, to fill out the thing and to complete the subject in our minds, so that we may see the full bearing of all this; how that God is to be all in all and that Christ is to be subject Himself. It is a marvellous thing for us. Why should we not be subject now? That should bear on us, that the Lord Himself is to be subject eternally. One great principle throughout this book is subjection.
J.J. Then the victory: "Thanks to God, who gives us the victory". Should that be said by each one in each locality?
J.T. Quite so; He giveth us the victory. Coming into the truth we have come into something that is already victorious. I often feel that should be made clear to souls, that they are not coming into a losing thing, something that is defeated by the power of this
{459}
world, but they are coming into a victorious thing, ever victorious. "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith".
H.H. He speaks about the last enemy being destroyed in this chapter.
J.T. So it is certain victory. In Romans it is "The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly", but here He *gives* us the victory.
P.L. So you have the "loud voice" of the Lord as He dies in the greatest outward humiliation.
J.T. Yes; it is the power of resurrection.
J.R.S. Is it to bring before the Corinthians the true dignity of their position?
J.T. Yes, so that they might, in power, shut out the world.
It is the thought of present victory and the evidence outwardly of the kind of personality that will appear in "that world".
{460}
"WHAT MEAN YE BY THESE STONES?"
@Exodus 20:25,26; @Exodus 28:9 - 22;@Joshua 4:1 - 7
I have been thinking, dear brethren, of this enquiry in @Joshua 4; one, doubtless, which most of us have noticed: "What mean ye by these stones?" In the light of this enquiry I have read in Exodus first, for we have to understand what the stones in Exodus mean, as well as those in Joshua. In fact it is well to be challenged as to whether we can answer such questions when they come to us, for this is not written down in a merely historic way. The book of Joshua is typical of Christians, and the enquiry may therefore be rightly made at any time in our dispensation, "What mean *ye* by these stones?" They represent something that Christians have as memorials, and anything of the kind that we have, or employ, in our public relations with God and one another, ought to be intelligible and explainable. According to the margin, verse 6, the enquiry might be made tomorrow, that is immediately, from that time onward, "What mean ye by these stones?"
Now I wish to apply all this to Exodus. Indeed it may be applied to Genesis too, and other books of Scripture, for the idea of stones is very prominent in the Scriptures. It is alluded to in @Genesis 11 as you will remember, stones *not* being used by the world's builders. They employed bricks instead of stone, shewing that they were not in the understanding of the import of stone. Their material was of their own making. The obvious inference is that their building would not be permanent, in the nature of things it would not last. The world comes to an end. It passes away and the lust thereof, but he that doeth the will of God abides for eternity. They were not doing the will of God. A man said to his fellow, "Come on, let us build ourselves a city and a tower, the top of which may reach to the heavens; and let us make ourselves a name". They were not doing the
{461}
will of God, they were world builders; and their successors have continued, using material of their own making, which will not last. But stones are of God's making. In Scripture it clearly alludes to what is permanent, and that is what I wish to dwell upon. It is what we are going on with in our meetings. The things engaging us would be of little value if they were not permanent. What occupies us may be very foolish in the eyes of our religious neighbours, but it is permanent, and is the working out of the will of God. The Lord stresses the idea of doing the will of God. He brought the full idea of it into the world and exemplified it in every respect. It underlies all moral worth. He came, saying, "Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me), to do thy will, O God". This -- the will of God -- underlies all moral worth, and he that does it "abides for ever". The world passes away, and the Babel builders in using brick for stone, wrote themselves down as building that which would pass-away. Although bricks may last a good while, they are man's manufacture, and cannot in the very nature of things abide unto eternity; whereas stone suggests something that abides. It is permanent; a substance that is in the earth, of which indeed geologists make much; but they omit from their findings the *moral* idea, which suggests permanency.
Now I speak of Exodus, first, in regard to an altar which is what each of us should have, and what we should have in a collective sense as well. Individual altars are found in Genesis, but no collective ones; but Exodus contemplates what is collective, a *people* with an altar. And so I wish to dwell on this feature, for it refers to our public relations with God. There are our secret relations, and I have no doubt that verse 25 may be linked up with our secret relations. Where God makes an altar *inoperative*, He wishes us to be known here as His worshippers; so He first specifies an altar *earth*. There is no 'if' to that altar, it *is* to be made; as you will observe
{462}
in chapter 20:24, "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me". It alludes to our public relations with God, as those who worship Him; and we acknowledge in it what we are -- earth. But then that would be of no value if our Lord Jesus Christ had not come as Man. Altars might be made without recognition of Him, they would be of no value whatever. The altar of earth therefore, contemplates our acknowledgment of what we are and that our Lord Jesus Christ becoming Man has met, that condition. It has been met, in that in Him, as made sin, sin in the flesh was condemned, and that He "bare our sins in his own body on the tree", (@1 Peter 2:24). He was "crucified in weakness, yet he lives by God's power", (@2 Corinthians 13:4). He was "put to death in flesh but made alive in the Spirit", (@1 Peter 3:18); so there is in the altar of earth, in our approach to God, the acknowledgment before Him of what we are by nature, and how that is met. We can offer on it, as it says, "Thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen: in all places where I record my name I will come unto thee and I will bless thee". There we see, dear brethren, how God comes to us. The Lord comes to us, in this humble but public acknowledgment of what we are by nature, and that we approach God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Our burnt-offerings, our peace-offerings, our sheep and our oxen, represent the spiritual wealth that we possess; the spiritual apprehension of Christ is accepted and owned there, for He comes to us -- a very precious thought.
But then in verse 25, there is an 'if', and that refers to *spiritual ability*, whether we can build an altar of stone. The alter of earth is enough to give us a status before God, but it does not carry us to the *full* length which divine love would seek, and therefore, as I said, it is a question of spiritual ability if we make an altar of stone. If we do that we have in our minds an additional thing, the idea of permanency; for our present mixed condition
{463}
*is not* a permanent condition. The way of approach is mad? For us, in spite of it, by the death of Christ. Romans and Corinthians answer to this. It is a question of a public position, which God recognises. It is the efficacy of the death of Christ, and God recognises our altar on this basis. Without it we are not Christians at all. Without an altar, there is no use in pretending to be in relation to God. But with it, even an altar of earth, we are accepted; and not only accepted but God Himself records His name in connection with it, and comes and blesses us. But He looks for more, and hence, dear brethren, the 'if'; it is a question of ability, and in raising up an altar of stone we come into the consciousness of permanency, and that it is in Christ *risen from the dead*. It is one thing to accept the statement of Scripture relative to Christ -- or indeed any truth -- but it is another thing to have an apprehension of the headship of Christ, to apprehend Him risen; to get into our souls the idea of a Man in resurrection. He is in a permanent state, a state He will never give up. Though He was "Made of the seed of David according to the flesh", yet He was declared, "marked off" as it should read, "Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead", (@Romans 1:3 - 4). The soul thus apprehends Him as the Son of God.
I want to mention the subject of sonship. Paul says God revealed "His Son in me". I wish you to note the word 'in' there, not 'to'. It refers, I believe, to inward capacity for a divine operation; for a divine shewing, or revealing. The Lord challenges the blind man whose eyes had been opened, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" The point is what the man could apprehend. Was he ready for such a thing is that? Was he capable of it? The man immediately says, "Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?" He acknowledges the Lordship of Christ, having said in testimony, "He is a prophet". Room had been created in that man's soul by one
{464}
event after another, so that he is ready for this revelation. And the Lord says, "Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee". That puts the man back on his history. It is well to be thrown back on our histories; not in self-occupation, but as to what we have already gone through, what we have already apprehended; then we are ready for something more. As they *listened* He spake a parable; it is a question of what we can take in. So the Lord says to this man, "Thou hast both seen him" -- that refers to past history -- and "it is he that talketh with thee". It was not simply that He was speaking to him, *but with* him -- on the man's level, as we may say. Great as He is. He would link that man with Himself. They were both outcasts, but they were linked up eternally in the man's acknowledgment, "Lord, I believe". And he worshipped Him. Do we believe on the Son of God? He could have had his altar of earth, but the Lord wished him to have his altar of stone, and that no hammer should be lifted on it, no human touch; he should apprehend the Son of God. There can be no art of man's device in that connection, it is repudiated.
We are now in the presence of the Son of God. You can go backward and forward when you come to the Son of God. You can go back as far as you can, and forward as far as you can, but He is the s unchanged and unchangeable; yet He came in man's form, to remain in that form eternally. Blessed fact for us! Thus we are assured of a means of relationship with God in that blessed One. That is an "altar of stone". It is a question of whether we are equal to it. It is open to us. That is the suggestion of Exodus. Exodus is typically mainly objective, and so opens up possibilities, and this possibility is to enter upon the apprehension of the Son of God, and to have our altar in that connection. Indeed we may by faith go as far as to say we are risen with Him, for the knowledge of the Son of God brings in association -- brings in our relationship with Him as sons
{465}
of God. It is an inlet to a very blessed subject of what we are, in the Son of God.
I wish now to pass on to chapter 28, and surely we may ask, "What mean *these* stones?" It is not now simply an ordinary stone, suggesting permanency, but a *precious* stone, and an array of them. For indeed when it comes to ourselves it is "every precious stone". In Ezekiel we read of precious stones. The king of Tyre, chapter 28, is adorned with "every precious stone", but there are only nine enumerated. There are more in connection with the heavenly city, and more here, for there are twelve. What a suggestion in these precious stones; not only of permanency, but of preciousness in permanency; preciousness in the divine estimate, for God has placed these things in His creation, for a language. The Scriptures abound with the use of created things as a language, as a means of conveying divine thoughts and in order to make things clear to us. The types are alluded to in Hebrews as the means through which the Spirit *shews* things to us. These things were to *shew* forth divine thoughts, not only for Him to speak through them, but to *shew* through them. It says in Hebrews that He *speaks* "As says the Holy Spirit", (@Hebrews 3:7); and shews, "The Holy Spirit shewing this", (@Hebrews 9:8); and *witness*, "The Holy Spirit also bears us witness", (@Hebrews 10:15), all by the use of the Old Testament.
So these precious stones were set in the creation by God to be a language to us; and how blessed that God, before ever we were, had these precious things in purpose, to convey to us how precious we are in His estimation! So you get the two onyx stones, put upon the priest's shoulders. Two is *adequate* testimony. The tribes are thus carried upon the shoulders, separated, may I not say, by the *heart* of the High Priest? *Is* that a separation? Could there be a stronger link in testimony than the heart of Christ? We are held, and maintained -- for it is a question of strength first of all, both shoulders
{466}
are used to support us. It is not the idea of two as a dual thought, but as if the Lord would say, 'I will have you in testimony, and I will support you in that, but you are not separated in it'. The two and a half tribes missed this thought of unity. They thought they could make up for the obvious difference between them and the nine and a half tribes, by the altar of Ed, "a great altar to see to". But that was not in keeping with the shoulder pieces of the High Priest, it was rather a witness to a division that they made themselves; for they had said, "We will *not* inherit ... on yonder side Jordan". There are many like that; selecting a position in self-will, even rearing up an altar; but however much they may say they do not mean it, if there is *will* in it, they *do* mean it. We may say much that is plausible to prove that we do not mean certain things, but if there is will in it we do mean them, and the Lord knows it, and we know it. They raised *their* altar and said it was not a separate thing, but it was. They did not want to inherit over Jordan, and they were the first to be taken captive.
Well, there is the support on the shoulders, but then there is the breastplate also. The saints are thus precious in the sight of God. Would that we could see each other as He sees us! Think of these precious stones formed in the creation, in order that God, in due course, might convey to us how valuable we are! Six names on either side held together in unity on the shoulders of the high priest. Then, as if to confirm and enhance the thought, the twelve stones in the breastplate are in four rows; each stone having its own distinctive feature. Who needs to assert his distinctiveness? Who needs to assert his worth above another? Who needs to boast in himself? As the apostle says, "He that boasts, let him boast in the Lord", and again, "Let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me". You see there is no need for the assertion of our distinctiveness. We have got it in the surest possible place, and that is on the heart
{467}
of Christ. Everyone has got his distinction; and there, in the breastplate of the high priest, were the whole twelve names -- row after row. Permanency is there. One would enlarge on the thought of what the saints were to Jesus, in John's gospel; and in the institution of the Supper, in Luke's gospel; He says, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer". And then in John there is the feet washing, and one taking his place in the bosom of Jesus. The idea is, that it was available, and he took advantage of what was available, and leaned on the breast of Jesus. We are all loved by the Lord, but the position on His breast has to be taken. The distinction of each is secure, for each precious stone expresses it, as in the heart of Christ. Is that not enough, dear brethren? What is particularly noticeable in Exodus is what we are, in His mind, in our service here. The particular value He attaches to each one is spoken of in these precious stones. We can leave it all with Him, and it will save us from cleavage, and maintain us in unity. Not only collective unity, but in value. Twelve indicates that we are in His hands, and are perfectly pliable as wrought in love. He can dispose of us for His pleasure, to administrate according to Him. Well now, that is Exodus; and, as I said before, we may well ask our hearts, "What mean ye by these stones?" They speak volumes to us!
In Joshua we have the subjective side; and the idea of twelve is maintained. But there is in it the idea of the individual with strength. Each of the twelve men was to take up a stone out of Jordan, and put it on his shoulder and carry it out. That is not an objective idea, as we speak, it is a subjective idea, and means that I have some power. I could not take up a stone out of the bed of Jordan and put it on my shoulder and carry it out to Gil-gal, unless I had some power. In the epistle to the Corinthians it says "quit yourselves like men; be strong".
{468}
"Let all things ye do be done in love". It makes the way to a unity in life. I can regard unity as in the saints on the shoulders of Christ, and also as in the heart of Christ, and thus can have confidence in the saints "in the Lord". In Galatians the apostle reckons on the Lord to keep the saints together in the truth. In Joshua, typically, believers are quickened with Christ, corresponding with Colossians, and thus they have power. When you come to the confines of Jordan the power of resurrection is in evidence, pre-eminently in the ark, Christ -- but also in the saints as quickened with Him. Earlier in the narrative, in Numbers, leading up to this, the saints are moving, after they got the Spirit. They are contemplated as having the Holy Spirit in @Numbers 21, and they move on continuously until they get to mount Pisgah. So far it is a question of the Holy Spirit. But when you come to the brink of the Jordan, it is the ark that is in evidence, and the power and order that mark the saints. In Colossians the only mention of the Holy Spirit is in chapter 1:8 "your love in the Spirit". So in Colossians it is not the Spirit Himself that is prominent, but His work, in the believer, giving power in the soul to take the Stone on his shoulder and carry it out, but it is not a question of any Israelite but of the tribes. It is a question of the saints following the ark over Jordan, and on the way over taking up twelve stones (signifying unity) to carry them out into the land of Canaan. There is thus a testimony in Gilgal of the power of God, not only in Christ, but also in taking the saints out of death with Him. It is power in life out of death. Not simply "newness of life" as in (@Romans 6:4), *but life out of death*, qualifying us for Canaan. There we come to the primary thought of God before sin came in. Adam is caused to fall into a deep sleep, so that God may bring in a life out of death. What kind of a life? Not a life after the ordinary creation, as with animal or vegetable life, but with Eve it is a question of life *out of* death. It is the thought of God in
{469}
relation to the assembly, what He has in His mind. That death actually came in by sin is another matter; God foreknew all, but He shewed, before the fall, what He had in His mind. We cannot say that on account of this, death must have come in some other way than through sin had the fall not occurred, for God knew that it would happen; but the manner of Eve's creation shews that life out of death was no afterthought with God.
So in Colossians we have been "buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him", that is status -- position -- "through faith of the working of God". It is not actual or material yet, but I am raised through faith of the working of God. Then it goes on "You ... he has quickened together with him", (@Colossians 2:13). That is a present thing. Thus I can take a stone and carry it out of the bed of Jordan, and set it down as a memorial that I have come out of death, that from this point of view, all my previous history is finished with. Quickened together with Christ, brought into that land in association with Christ, in His life, that is the end. To take up this blessed position and enjoy it is a matter of spiritual power, but it is there to be taken up. The twelve stones here represent life in unity. Colossians promotes unity. The apostle says "being united together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge", chapter 2:2,3. So you can understand the force of the question, "What mean *ye* by these stones?" We have to answer it; as in the land I say that they refer to the fact that I have been into death with Christ, and have come out by the power of God. If my life contradicts this, I cannot rightly convey what they mean, but if I am living in the power of Christ's love, quickened together with Him, I can not only say what the stones mean but I express it. It is the unity of life. May the Lord bless these thoughts to us all!
{470}
PARABOLIC MINISTRY
J.T. This is a well-known chapter, but I feel there are some features in it which the Lord would emphasise for us at this time.
The first feature to which I would call attention is that the Lord dismissed the multitude. In this gospel we have to distinguish between His leaving certain positions or persons, and His relations with the multitude. In the beginning of the chapter, verse 1, He is said to have gone out from the house. We have to distinguish between this house, alluding to the Jewish system, which had now manifested itself as reprobate, and the crowd, who were still interested in what He was saying. The house in the beginning of the chapter, refers to the state of things disclosed in chapter 12, an organisation in which Satan has a footing. The Lord leaves that; but there is the crowd or multitude, who attend to what He is saying. Analogously there is that today which has proved itself reprobate in regard to Christ; but there is also the crowd, who are more or less interested; and we have to attend to them. The Lord still regards them, although speaking parabolically to them.
The second house, referred to in verse 36, is where He expounds all things; and where we get disclosures as to the church, although it is not actually named. I suggested the passage because I believe it covers our position now; first in relation to that which has proved faithless to Christ; next in relation to the multitude; and then in connection with what we have inside the second house.
F.S.M. Would the second house answer at all to the fellowship today?
J.T. That is the setting of it. I suppose the chapter would bring out the influence, or leadership, of the Lord, shewing that we are governed by His movements, rather than by a command. This evangelist presents Christ
{471}
as the King, and He is Influential, Those who follow in Matthew get the light, chapter 8:10; so that what comes out is the great influence of the Lord in the midst of the state of things depicted; and then the second house, into which He enters and *attracts*. Our position is determined by His movements. It requires attention to discern what His movements are.
F.S.M. It is there, that His disciples came to Him.
J.O.S. Are the disciples those of whom the Lord says in the last verse of the preceding chapter that they "do the will of my Father which is in heaven"? Such get the benefit of the exposition which the Lord gives.
J.T. Quite so. This chapter indicates a crisis and the necessity of knowing how to move arises.
J.H.T. Would the movement of Paul at Corinth correspond with this? "Departing thence", it says, "he came to the house of a certain man, by name Justus", (@Acts 18:7). And then at Ephesus he departed, and went to the school of Tyrannus.
J.T. Exactly. We see in chapter 16 that the Lord leaves the scribes and Pharisees, and goes away. This gospel is marked by movement and separation from evil. Our position is determined by discerning His movements, and being regulated by them.
F.S.M. The Lord would value those who desire to have these things expounded to them, and who are prepared to follow Him.
J.T. I am sure the Lord values it when we are regardful of Him, and are governed by His movements, without His asking us to do anything. It is the sort of thing which makes for healthy church conditions. It is not simply that I do what I am told to do!
E.F.L. It gave Him the opportunity to make the exposition.
J.T. David became an object of interest, from the very outset. He is described as very attractive, and in the same chapter a young man says, "Behold, I have
{472}
seen a son of Jesse, the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a comely person, and the Lord is with him", (@1 Samuel 16:18). That is the idea -- "I have *seen* a son of Jesse". He discerned his grace and his ability, and commended him to Saul. So, as David moves on, this and that one takes notice of him, until he slays Goliath, and then the soul of Jonathan is knit with the soul of David, the maidens of Israel sing his praises, and all Israel love him. Subsequently certain ones followed him: if he went to the cave of Adullam, they went. That is the principle. The king becomes so attractive that he dominates, not by arbitrary rule, but because of these great features. What you get here is that the Lord's position determines ours. It makes for vigour in us, so that David's followers take on this character.
J.H.T. Is discipleship essential to the understanding of the assembly?
J.T. I thought it preceded it. The person Himself becomes known. A revelation is beyond anything that you see: there was more in the Person than the disciples could see by observation.
J.H.T. Peter could not have had his revelation among the crowd, could he?
J.T. No. There was that which everyone could see at the end of chapter 14; but there is that which is beyond what we see.
F.S.M. Are there not features about God's King which are unique? He rules by love, by the power of His own glorious Person.
J.T. Yes: "Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty", (@Isaiah 33:17), but first we must see Him in His prowess. The way in which the crowd is held by the Lord here, and the power which He has with them, is what struck me. Current religious things are not out of the Lord's control. A crowd is not orderly, but He has power to dismiss them.
{473}
J.H.T. Are you thinking of His influence?
J.T. Yes, and that it makes a way for us. There are thousands in Christendom ready to listen. He does not honour them specially by speaking as He speaks to the disciples; but He has an eye to them and does speak to them.
J.H.T. Have you any thought as to the distinction between the parables in Matthew and in Luke?
J.T. The parables in Matthew have generally a Church bearing. The first four here, are formally called 'parables'. He is still speaking to the crowd in christendom; but there is a judicial element in the way in which He speaks to them, so that they are formally called parables, verses 3, 34. The second three similes of the kingdom are not formally so called. In the New Translation the word 'again' is omitted in verse 44, as though what follows is on a higher plane than what has gone before: whilst verse 53 has the word 'parables', covering all in a general way, these three are on a Higher level than the earlier ones Verses 10 - 14 explain the distinction.
J.H.T. The special light in the house, verse 36, is the result of following, is it not?
J.T. The Lord honours the movement of the disciples in going in. He says, as it were, 'You are going to get more now that you have come inside'. You can be a Christian in a sense outside, but you do not get the precious things that those do who are governed by the Lord's movements.
F.S.M. You must follow Him to get the light He is giving? How would the thought of the crowds work out practically today? You often feel that you would like to have opportunity to get into touch with them.
J.T. In this chapter the Lord is leaving a reprobate system for His own system; and it involves a judicial element as to the crowd. The truth as spoken in parables to them is more or less concealed; there must be exercises with them, if they are to see through the parables. I
{474}
think the Lord gives us in the messages to the seven assemblies, instructions as to what to do. An analysis of what He says to each one, would help us as to what *we* should say. When there is a general turning away, the truth is presented in such a manner that only those genuinely affected can rightly understand it, otherwise it is taken up by the natural mind and brought down to the level of natural conscience, and so strengthens men in their unbelief.
J.H.T. The principle of overcoming apostate conditions would be set forth in the disciples following Him into the house.
J.T. That is it exactly.
F.W.J. Do the first four parables set forth what is presented to men in responsibility, and the last three, what is before God?
J.T. Yes, the last three indicate the positive result. This is a chapter which needs careful attention. The first four parables are tests, as to whether any in the crowd have sufficient discernment to see what is meant. If they have, they follow the Lord inside.
J.W. Do you mean that the truth is hid in the parable?
J.T. That is it; and if you are exercised before God you discern that there is something in it. It keeps out from the second house those who are exercised. There you will get the exposition of things. If you are at all exercised you get some light from the first four parables; but you see that there is something *more*, People are impressed that there is something in it; but they do not get the unfolding unless they come into the second house. If there is something in it, I want to get it, and so I go into the house in which the Lord is.
W.T. What answers to the second house?
J.T. I think the church is suggested, though it is not named. We are being led to it -- in chapter 16, it is formally introduced.
{475}
F.W.J. There is no remedy suggested in connection with the parable of the tares.
J.T. No, the disciples sought an exposition, and the Lord opened up what it meant. By following the Lord in, you get all needed light and instruction. The other things are spoken inside, and in principle at least, would be intelligible *there*. When the Lord says "Have ye understood all these things?" verse 51, they said, "Yea" -- they *did* understand, although all the parables were not explained.
Rem. It is only the initiated that do understand.
J.O.S. Is there not a danger of presuming to be in the house, and yet not having ears to hear? The three parables would be understood by those who had ears to hear.
F.S.M. Is the Lord fulfilling the promise: "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled"? It is not only giving them something to eat, *but filling* them.
J.T. Yes, you see how rich is the supply inside. How interesting it would be to have the parable of the tares expounded: and then to hear Him set forth another series! His resources are indeed great.
F.S.M. Inside, He seems to suggest thoughts of His love and His sacrifice of which He could not speak to the crowd.
J.T. Quite -- "for the joy of it", it says in relation to the treasure hid in the field.
T.W. Will those two things go on to the end?
J.T. I think so. Though the crowd (it has to be distinguished from the apostate mass) is getting smaller and smaller, the Lord will continue to speak to it.
F.W.J. The value is not in the field, but in the *treasure*.
J.T. That is what the Lord has in His mind.
F.W.J. What will become of the field?
J.T. He values the field because of what is in it. He will *make full* use of it later. The world is in reconciliation,
{476}
according to Romans, so that God might get the greatest possible result out of it now. God's overtures to men convey to them that He is favourable towards them. The time will come when it will be the opposite, @2 Thessalonians 2.
W.T. How is the treasure brought to light?
J.T. By the gospel. Paul tells us how he carried on as a "sacrificial service" the gospel, "that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit". What I think we may see in the second simile in the house, is an extension of the thought. The 'treasure' is something found, apparently the 'man' was not looking for it. The 'pearl' is something sought; the 'Merchant' was seeking goodly pearls. As you suggest, it is a very happy time inside the house, because in listening to the Lord speaking there, you would be affected by the joy He has in what He has found.
F.S.M. He seems to be emphasising the greatness of His love, and the manner of His sacrifice. He was prepared to yield all that He had!
J.T. Quite so. Whatever was there in the field was His. There was nothing very specific in the treasure. The church is not announced in the early part of the ministry of the twelve. The number of those that were converted is given, the treasure was coming into evidence. The numbering shows that the Lord was getting results from the purchase of the field, and He was taking care of it. @Acts 2:42 - 47, shews its value. We can understand "the joy of it" which the Lord had. He 'added' those that were to be saved to what is described in @Acts 2. (The word 'assembly' is left out in verse 47, by the most reliable authorities.) When you come to Paul, you do not get actual numbers, but as at Antioch, the assembly, and the quality of those in it. They ministered to the Lord and fasted and the Holy Spirit spoke there. The assembly is a complete thought or entity.
{477}
W.G. Is the thought of quality suggested in the pearl?
J.T. Yes, and it is a definite idea or whole.
F.S.M. Would that be Paul's ministry, that "Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it"?
J.T. That is it -- the peculiar joy the Lord Himself would have in it, as a thing He *sought*. The Lord's feelings are reflected in ministry that has the church in view.
J.O.S. "I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ", (@2 Corinthians 11:2); is that the idea?
J.T. Yes. John heard the Bridegroom's voice, but Paul heard His longings, and so sought out the church.
J.H.T. When the remnant were recovered from Babylon, they were entrusted with the holy vessels, and they had to keep them as to number, and cherish them as to weight. Would number suggest the quantity in the beginning of Acts, and weight the quality that Paul would insist on?
J.T. Quite. The numbers given suggest that the Lord gets all that is due as to quantity, and it was very much, for stress is laid on it: but when you come to Paul's ministry, you get more the quality and completeness of the thing.
Ques. Is that why joy is connected with the treasure, and value with the pearl?
J.T. No doubt. The joy is of something found that was not sought for; but the 'merchant', as *seeking goodly* pearls, knew how to value them, and so as he found one "of great value", he sold all he had and bought it.
F.W.J. Would the pearl set forth the church in its preciousness to Christ?
J.T. Yes. It is a simile to convey to us the way in which He regarded that which He was seeking. First you have the treasure, and then you get an extension of the idea in the pearl: that is, I believe, what we may call
{478}
'Paul's church'. In the church as seen in @Acts 11 and 13 we get the principle of giving, reflecting "Christ's glory", as we learn elsewhere. @Acts 20 is the acme of the thing. You have there the affections of the saints active towards Paul, who represented Christ. I have often thought of it in connection with the affections of the saints, which may be proved as we move about among them. How delightful they are as they express love to Christ and to one another! @Acts 20 read with the epistle to the Ephesians, enables us to understand the church as answering to the heart of Christ.
J.H.T. Is that going to be reflected in the city, every several gate one pearl?
J.T. Quite, the idea is there in a twelve-fold manner.
F.S.M. There is an intensive thought in that He bought *it*. In the other case He bought *the field*.
J.H.T. Paul gives the elders at Miletus some idea of the preciousness of it, when he says it was "purchased with the blood of his own".
G.V.S. The first two similes are not connected with our responsibility. Does the third one, verse 47, bring in the thought of our responsibility?
J.T. Yes, those engaged in the fishing are to distinguish the good fish from the bad. It tests you as to whether you can appraise things.
J.H.T. Paul at Tyre found disciples; he valued them. I always feel how drab a town or city is if there is no meeting there.
J.T. There is no place to retire to, to get a heavenly breath.
F.S.M. Why is the thought of the pearl connected with the gates of the city?
J.T. The gates of hades represent the seat of hades¬ power; so the gates of the heavenly city express what it is.
There is nothing that affects one more, than the beautiful spirit of Christ in the saints in any town. In the gates of the heavenly city, the saints will appear according to
{479}
their preciousness to Christ, but as seen under the number twelve, their being under His hand of administration is also seen. Any one of the gates will represent the whole, as it is *complete* ('one pearl') in itself.
F.S.M. The beauty and value of the pearl will be the great power and influence?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The net is a different line of thought, verses 47,48. They "gathered the good into vessels and cast the worthless out": this would govern our present position, as to whether we can determine between good and bad.
C.W.B. Does the fact that there are bad fish there, mean that there has been laxity?
J.T. There was, but it is not the point here; it simply states the fact of the good being put into vessels, and the worthless cast out.
C.W.B. How came the worthless there?
J.T. It is the public effect of the gospel. Those engaged in the service were seeking good fish only; they were not concerned about numbers but quality, and they could determine the good fish, and they 'gathered' them into vessels.
F.S.M. Would it mean the discernment between what is the work of God and what is merely profession?
J.T. Yes. It refers to the present time, so that it tests our discernment.
Ques. What are the vessels?
J.T. Practically, they involve the fellowship.
J.O.S. Paul at Ephesus "separated the disciples" at the end of three months. @Acts 19.
J.T. That is the thought.
F.S.M. Should it not raise exercises as to the results of service -- that there should be that which is good?
J.T. I am sure it should.
J.H.T. Peter and John laid their hands on Philip's converts, in view of the assembly. @Acts 8, but they rejected one bad fish.
{480}
J.T. Yes: Philip apparently failed in that.
J.H.T. How do you account for that?
J.T. I think we are apt to think too much of the results of our own labours. Simon was not discerned until Peter and John came down. Peter exhibited the discernment and energy of a doorkeeper.
J.H.T. Should that discernment and authority be found amongst the saints today?
J.T. They should. As counting your results by the poll, without weighing them, there would be a ganger that extraneous material might be admitted. The doorkeepers, under David, were very numerous, there were four thousand of them; there were as many doorkeepers, as there were singers.
F.S.M. If you count your results you are attaching credit to yourself, but in weighing them, and considering their quality, you are thinking of what they are to the heart of Christ.
Ques. Does the Lord bring the good to light in connection with Nathanael? @John 1.
J.T. Yes; He named him as He saw him coming to Him.
Ques. Is the preaching of the gospel the casting of the net into the sea?
J.T. Yes, in the primary introduction of it.
Ques. Will there always be good and bad?
J.T. Any general movement of God will affect unreal people, hence those in the service greatly need discernment so that such should be detected and refused.
Rem. In connection with the parable of "the sower", only one-fourth of the seed sown, brings forth fruit.
J.T. That explains somewhat the bad fish; and as the sower is the Lord Himself, it is not bad service that is the cause, but bad soil. At the same time bad service accounts largely for the extent and state of Christendom.
The Lord now, verse 52, speaks about a householder in connection with the understanding of these things:
{481}
that is in answer to their saying to Him that they had understood. In reaching the truth of the church we are to be householders. We do not come into the church otherwise. The order is the kingdom first, and then the church; so that in taking one's place in the assembly, one is a householder already; and as such one will understand that God has a house: one will have treasures, and so will enhance the position. 'Scribe' would mean that he is an accurate sort of man.
F.S.M. Could he write what he understands?
J.T. Yes. I believe many are slipshod in dealing with the things of God. We are apt to say, 'I did not understand', and then fail to enquire or to go the Lord, who gives understanding in all things. It matters very much that I should understand what God is saying. It is quite obvious that if you want to write, you must be accurate, and I believe that is implied here.
J.H.T. "Cutting in a straight line the word of truth", (@2 Timothy 2:15).
Ques. Do "things new and old" suggest all the wealth connected with the kingdom of the heavens?
J.T. I think that is what the Lord means. They had said they understood all these things. "Whence has this man this wisdom and these works of power?" "Is not this the son of the carpenter?" Verse 54. It is remarkable that after bringing out these precious things, the Lord was so regarded by the men of the world. They were offended at Him. They had no idea that divine things are available without going to the universities.
J.H.T. This takes place in "his own country". In a sense the safest sphere for a servant is in his own locality.
J.T. It tests you, does it not? They will not fail to bring forth anything that discredits you. If you are a preacher of the gospel and getting souls, you will not be dishonoured; but the truth of the church evokes the
{482}
opposition. The Lord brings out the truth of the church here, without naming it. The idea is there.
J.H.T. "In his house", verse 57, here, is additional to what is said in @Luke 4. Why is that?
J.T. Luke avoids (consistent with the truth) offending the Jews; Matthew does not and so he adds the house here. Matthew discredits the Jewish system so that Christians should leave it.
F.S.M. Though they rejected Him, they had to acknowledge His wisdom, and His works of power.
J.T. As we were saying, we have to distinguish between the crowds, who are ready to listen; and those who were offended in Him. These are in 'unbelief', verse 58.
{483}
SPIRITUAL ENERGY
@Genesis 22:13,14, @Matthew 5:1,2; @Matthew 15:29 - 39
In reading these scriptures I am thinking of *energy*. The present day is marked by energy. The forces of nature are harnessed as never before, so that we have a world of energy and a great stimulation of man's intellect: nothing seems to daunt the men of this world. The enemy of our souls has his part in this, and the pace would be greatly accelerated were it not for the government of God, which introduces checks, as at Shinar of old. Men then would move off on their own line, with the intention of doing great things; but a divine check was imposed. The matter was so important that God came down to see what the children of men did. He saw that they would not impose any check upon themselves: what they had imagined to do they would proceed with, whatever the folly in it. They were not wanting in enterprise and energy. But God came down, and, as I said, imposed an effective check, in confounding then language, which has continued ever since; and which increases, as men increase, and spread themselves abroad.
And so it is that today. God has imposed effective checks to current movements affecting His interests, and will do so; for the angelic ministry is a part of the divine provision, not only in regard to the needs of our bodies, but in regard to the government of the world -- in our favour. They are sent out, as we read, "for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation". Through them we have effective checks, so that men cannot do just what they wish to do. We see God coming in constantly to limit human enterprise and operations, so that there may be room for the people of God; that the testimony of God may move on. That, indeed. God may continue to have the gospel announced to men -- for He is very concerned that there should be no change in that;
{484}
that the dispensation should stand out in all its grandeur, as exhibiting the reign of His grace.
In Genesis God gives the line of Shem before the effort at Shinar; and then after He has broken up that effort, and scattered man abroad on the face of the whole earth. He returns to the line of Shem, the line of the testimony. It is as if God would say to His people, 'I will make a way for you', and that runs right down to the present moment. He would not have us occupied with current events in the world, save in the sense that God is moving in them. The line of the testimony is the important thing, the line of Shem. In this line appears Abraham, and in Abraham we have the great progenitor of the family of faith -- "the father of all them that believe". Something is introduced, on that principle, before which nothing can stand. "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed", the Lord says, "ye shall say unto this mountain. Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you", (@Matthew 17:20). A little dynamite breaks up a rock, and a little faith will cast a mountain into the sea. That is what God introduces. There was faith there before -- in Abel and others; but now there is a progenitor and a family; and through that family God will uproot, dissolve, and set aside all among men that is against Him.
So you can see, dear young believers here, what you come into -- what faith is: "this is the victory that over cometh the world, even our faith", (@1 John 5:4). It is not merely a future thing, it *has gotten* the victory over the world. And you come into that, as believers. It is well worth while coming into the family of faith. That is what Abraham represents; and I wanted to connect energy with him, in chapter 22 particularly, for it presents the zenith of his faith. What follows is his great concern about the church, typically.
He buries Sarah, chapter 23, on the principle of faith. All that Christ has in this earth at this moment is the
{485}
saints, and a burying-place for them! Genesis is full of the idea of the place where those who died in faith are buried. It speaks of victory. It is the spot where the victory is assured; "Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ", (@1 Corinthians 15:57): that is Machpelah. Then in chapter 24, typically he is concerned about the church, and faith, in us, corresponds with that. So he calls upon the servant to swear in regard to family relationships. That is, there should be nothing in the church which is not in keeping with Christ. It is the refined feature of faith in Abraham, the refined sense he has of what is suitable. I have no doubt it is faith as in Colossians and Ephesians; where all the saints are included in faith and love, in the light of the purpose of God: not simply those who are called out, as in Corinthians; but those who are foreknown; those of the same relationship and family as Christ. That is what Abraham had reached. Isaac must not be taken away from the position he had reached in resurrection, figuratively, and the church must be *brought to Him*. The present moment is the time when we are brought in spiritual power to our Isaac. It is not the rapture of the saints, when the Lord will come for us Himself; that is His own work, to come for us; the present service of the Spirit, is to bring us in faith and apprehension to Christ where He is. (@Ephesians 3:14 - 21).
In @Genesis 22 you get the full energy of faith. It is a very fine position, a unique kind of position; where God would test Abraham. A divine test is imposed: God would test the strength of Abraham's faith. He knew it well. We shall not be tempted above that we are able, but He will sometimes test us to the very limit, for He loves to demonstrate just what is effected in our souls. The process is very trying, and it is intended to be; for we are generally very light and superficial. God would bring us to a test, and show us just where we are. It is well to know just the strength you have got; but however great
{486}
it may be we arc not to credit ourselves with it. As Paul says, "By the grace of God I am *what* I am". That was the energy that was there. There was mighty power operating through the apostle: he says, "The signs of an apostle were wrought among you", (@2 Corinthians 12:12).
All the preceding history of Abraham was constructive, building up in his soul a power, and now God would test it. Would he offer up Isaac? As directed of God he took the journey to the land of Moriah with all the necessaries for the sacrifice of his son, rising early in the morning. It is most touching to hear the conversation between the patriarch and Isaac on that memorable occasion. Abraham moves on, there is the wood and the-altar, and the wood is piled on, Abraham was not feigning in what he was doing. He bound Isaac his son and laid him on the altar upon the wood. Then he took a knife and stretched forth his hand. Who but God could trust a man to that extent? God could halt that arm, and He did. But Abraham had proved equal to the test, and that delighted the heart of God. He called out of heaven "a second time", as if delighted with the faith shown. Abraham looks behind, and there is a ram, caught by its horns -- and this brings me to the gospel of Matthew, for the ram is, typically, Christ.
The ram is symbolical of energy; and there He was! In the gospel of .Matthew that is what is in view; to bring the line right down, for a thousand years is as a day to God. The gospel of Matthew is, as it were, linked on with @Genesis 22. It is "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham", (@Matthew 1:1). Who and whence is He? It is not an endless, genealogy, occupation with which is forbidden by the apostle, but a generation that ends in Christ, forty-two generations. "Son of David": that is to say. He is the King. But He is more than that: He is "Son of Abraham". I refer to that, because it makes the link with the thought of the ram. The ram was caught in the thicket by his horns;
{487}
Much might be said of that. I have no doubt it is Gethsemane; "Not as *I* will, but as *thou* wilt" -- One held absolutely for the will of God: "Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God". (@Hebrews 10:7).
The word 'book' is important in this gospel, for it reminds us of another book, of which the Lord spoke, referred to above. There was in it the testimony to His unqualified obedience; the foundation of all that is of any moral worth, is in that book. And this gospel begins with the word 'book'. The ram was caught by his horns behind Abraham; and Abraham availed himself of what there was. And then he names the place, having offered up the ram. He calls the place 'Jehovah-jireh', and then it says, "As it is said at the present day. On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". That enters into what I am speaking of. The power of the saying of a man who is in faith lives. As you find with Samuel, none of his words fell to the ground. How true that is of the Lord Jesus! Think of all the utterances of Christ! What we have *written*, is relatively small. We have enough to guide our faith; but the Lord said that the Father would send the Holy Spirit in His name, and He would bring to their remembrance, whatever He had said to them. And so here you have the continuance of this saying of Abraham. How it would come home to the heart of Moses, who in his great service had to do with the mount of the Lord! He could say with special force, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". Have we learnt to say it, to take up as from our hearts these words of faith? The young people are to be nourished on them, brought up on them! At times we may not see a resource anywhere, but it is "in the mount of the Lord". We need to get our souls into the current of faith. Things are all carried down as in a current; and as you get into the current, there is no despondency; you see the abundance of divine resources and where they
{488}
are. But I was speaking of the continued power of spiritual utterances. So the Lord, in instituting His supper, said words which are just as fresh today, as when they were first uttered. How living Christianity is! Everything is carried down as by a powerful current that brings Christ livingly into our souls, in His own words. His own breathings. The apostle, many years after, repeated the Lord's words to the Corinthians, and how full and fresh they are today!
So you can see how important the mount of the Lord is, and I take the gospel of Matthew to be representative of the idea; for it is a gospel marked by mountains, six of which are used by the Lord, in His relations with His own. Satan used one, but he took the Lord up there, so that you can connect the Lord with the seven of them: "As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people.", (@Psalm 125:2). Matthew is the mountain gospel; and that means it is a gospel of energy, for energy is needed to ascend elevations. And if I belong to the generation of Abraham, I have got that energy.
In chapter 5 we read that the Lord went up into the mountain and sat down. There is a good deal said about the Lord sitting down in Matthew, it suggests a position taken up definitely, in regard to the matter in hand. He is not in a hurry; He takes up a part of our education and goes through with it, so that it becomes finished. His disciples came to Him, which showed energy. It is an encouragement to one today, to see the energy of the saints in the way they gather together. The principle was set out in the types: all the males were to appear three times a year before the Lord in Jerusalem. In some instances the journey was long; considering the mode of travel in those days, it was very long. So that it required energy for one of the young men of Israel to set out from Dan and go to Jerusalem. And he was not to go empty-handed. God would keep His people
{489}
exercised. But what an incentive! -- every step of the way from Dan to Jerusalem took him nearer to Jehovah. To every lover of God, the journey would be shortened, for 'love enchants the spot where the loved one dwells'. God loves to have His people come to Him. Here they came to Jesus on the mountain. It was a test of heart strength. He did not ask them to come. That illustrates another feature of this gospel, that is moving in relation to Christ.
In connection with the last mountain in Matthew, after the Lord was risen. He directed the eleven disciples to meet Him there. It was a mountain in Galilee; He would (by the distance to be travelled) test our energy and our loyalty: for it is the King in Matthew. They "went into Galilee to the mountain which Jesus had appointed them", and the Lord "coming up spoke to". They got well repaid for their journey: they met the King, and they got a commission, the like of which you find nowhere else. It is the proposal of the King, "Make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you. And behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age". What energy is implied in this commission! In (@Revelation 19:16), He comes forth and on his thigh is a name written which means the power that He has to effect complete universal subjection -- "King of kings and Lord of lords".
So you see that in chapter 5 they come up to Him, and I want you to notice that He speaks with authority: "*I* say unto you". There are many voices in the world, one saying one thing and another something else but here is One who speaks with authority. Chapters 5, 6, and 7 give His disciples a clear moral perspective. It is well worth the trouble of ascending the mountain, to hear the Lord explain to you all the things, the general moral environment, that might puzzle you. This is a
{490}
most important matter, especially for young believers.
In chapter 15, the Lord, in pursuing His course of service, brings about a great movement of God. The effect of His service spreads, and so is reflected. The multitude came to Him on the mountain, and they carry up their sick ones. This shows excessive energy. I speak now to the brethren who are serving, and we ought to be serving! I have been reading a pamphlet lately which deals with personal evangelisation, putting this work within reach of all of us, brothers and sisters. I commend this book to you. The more you touch the work of evangelisation the more you feel it needs energy. Sometimes a little gospel book offered is refused, and you are under reproach. The service thus needs patience in our faith. Here we have a movement towards the Lord on the mountain which indicates purpose and strength. It was a service for those in need. This gospel brings us into accord with Christ, and what He is doing. He is the King, and you reverence Him, and see that whatever is to be done, must be done by Him. They cast their sick ones at His *feet*. He is exercising the mighty power of God. Every one is healed, every kind of disease is cured.
But the disciples are not to be left out of this work. The Lord says to them "I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days", verse 32. He is speaking well of the multitude: there is energy in them. Sometimes the Lord has to remind us that there is more going on 'outside', than there is 'inside'. These had continued with the Lord three days, but not a word is said about the disciples! What were *they* doing? What are *we* doing? If there be a movement of God, it is a humiliating thing to be out of it. You say, 'Well, we recognise the Spirit of God, and we come together in the light of the assembly'. Very good, but the Lord expects us to have what corresponds in practice, at least some food, not only for ourselves, but
{491}
for others; that is implied in this second feeding of the multitude. It is a question of what we profess to be here; and of what we have in practical correspondence. The multitude had stayed three days, a full testimony to their interest. I am not saying there is anything just like this today, but there *may* be, even in a small way; and you would not want to be out of it. The Lord asks what they have got. The disciples thought it was not at all possible to feed so many. And yet, a little while before, He had fed five thousand! They had seven loaves, but in their mind it was nothing as compared with the need. What have we? One may say of this locality, 'Well, we have so many in fellowship here, and so many weekly meetings, and the preaching'. And yet God may be working through others! The disciples had no idea of being able to meet this at all: they seemed to be in a sort of back water. The Lord calls them into the thing: evidently they were not actively in it before. They had, however, the seven loaves and the few fishes, which was important, but they did not in faith consider that the Lord could make what they had feed so many. They were unbelieving as to what He could do.
Seven is a spiritual number; and the Lord does not look up to heaven here, when giving thanks, for the Holy Spirit on earth is God on earth. God is here. The assembly is the habitation of God, by the Spirit. The apostle speaks of God being amongst the Corinthians; no less than that. So the Lord simply gives thanks and brake the loaves and fishes, giving them to the disciples, and they hand them to the multitude How gracious it was of the Lord, that He brought them into it! The mighty current is flowing, and we must be in it. As in it, we shall understand how these things can be met, and carried on. He would have us, while enjoying the light into which He has brought us, to be energetic in the diffusion of it.
That is all, except that the Lord dismisses the multitude
{492}
. He shows His moral power in that. He goes to the other side, to the coasts of Magdala. That is a very interesting place, undoubtedly the place of Mary. If it be her place, you can understand that while the Lord is occupied with the multitude, yet He thinks of what is excellent, for Mary of Magdala stands out at the sepulchre after He died, as no one else. She, it was, who was there on the morning of the resurrection, a trophy of His grace. She was a result. Whilst one would urge energy in service to the multitude, one would also urge what is most excellent, the result for God as in Mary of Magdala.
{493}
TREASURE
@Matthew 13:36,44 - 48,51,52
I am thinking particularly of treasure, and of each one of us possessing treasure, and of how it may be possessed. The divine thought for us is that we should be possessed of wealth; that we should not only have enough to live on, but *affluence*. What marks the world today economically, is living and making a show on the principle *of credit*. The idea of living on current income seems to have largely passed. The world has drifted into a position of dependence on the future; many are living on their capital: others, as I have said, living on future earnings on the principle of credit. This nation as a whole may be regarded in that light, as living on its capital and not on its immediate earnings; and of course there can be no accumulation of national wealth thus. God would not have it so with His people; He would have us to pay our debts (according to the type) with the oil as sold, and to live on the rest, @2 Kings 4. That, to say the least, there should be a means of livelihood without borrowing on the *possible* future. As I said. God would have us to live, spiritually, not only comfortably but in affluence; and to have enough for *treasuries*. And so I wish to speak of treasure, and that we all should be possessed of it, we may be and we *should* be. I would also shew, the Lord helping me, the way of the acquirement of wealth; so that there might be over against the principles of the world, the principles of God -- the economy of God, the resources of God; and the consequent manifested enrichment of His people.
Now, speaking of the thing from *the* divine side first, to confirm what I am saying, in the book of Proverbs we have the statement that wisdom walks in the path of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment: so as to cause those who love her to inherit substance, chapter 8:20,21. Then it adds: "and I will fill their treasuries".
{494}
The first source of wealth, I may say, is the inheritance, and the formation of income consequent on the inheritance *is our* side. In the Authorised Version, wisdom says: "I *lead* in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment", and the force of the passage is shewing the *way*, and that does not mean borrowing. It indicates, beloved brethren, the way wisdom took, with the end in view of those who love her inheriting substance. It cost wisdom something. Coming into this world the Lord had to face what was in it. There was only one way, and that was the way of righteousness, He *loved* righteousness. He did not institute the idea of borrowing; He restored that which He took not away. He did not evade anything in that sense. What was needful for the end in view He accepted; that is to say, the way of righteousness and the paths of judgment. One could enlarge on that, for it involves the death of Christ. As the apostle says most touchingly, "For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich". It is in his *second* letter to the Corinthians he says that. You see the way and at what a cost, possible riches, an inheritance, has I been secured and brought into evidence for us. It is that we should inherit *substance* and that our treasuries should become full.
The epistle to the Colossians speaks of "the treasures, of wisdom and knowledge", chapter 2:3, but these are hidden in the mystery, and that is not far away. The mystery is not merely theoretic; it refers (to be simple) to yourself and the brother next to you, or to myself and the brother next to me. It is in the use, so to speak, that we make thus of our neighbouring or local brethren that we find the way to this class of treasure, "the treasures of wisdom and knowledge". What the Greeks would have considered exclusive to a few, in their way of looking at it, is available, you see, in the mystery. I only touch on
{495}
that as indicating how the matter stands, what is *available* to us in the brethren as in the light of the mystery, according to Colossians. It is not so many brethren, of course, but it is a question of brethren in whom Christ is, "*Christ in you*", and the working of the mine of wealth is indicated in that love is in evidence among us, so that we arrive at "the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge". They are hidden there. I believe, dear brethren, that if Colossians is thus understood we should begin to work the thing, to work the mine, so to speak, for that is where the treasure is, and we shall soon have some of that class of treasure, "wisdom and knowledge". The Corinthians were not working that mine; they were working another; they were working as a philosopher would do, on the principle of wisdom of words, what poets work with, and other writers of this world. They make words, I may say, their working capital. But the treasures of wisdom and knowledge imply much more than this.
I only touch on Colossians, dear brethren, but I wanted to dwell on Ephesians, to view the matter from the divine side. Colossians brings the thing very near -- "Christ in you". Ephesians is on a wider basis where we have everything viewed in its fulness; so that there it is "the unsearchable riches of the Christ", @Ephesians 3:8, and these unsearchable riches are announced in the gospel. Ephesians guards this in bringing out the immensity of the things. They are beyond us, in Ephesians. The love of Christ is beyond us; we are to know it, but it "surpasses knowledge", and the riches of the Christ are "unsearchable".
Now the Lord is on this line in the chapter we have read in Matthew, and I wanted to confine myself to this chapter. One's desire is, as I said before, that there should not be poverty with us, but wealth. The Lord intends that we should be possessed of substance, of
{496}
treasure; "things new and old". To understand the chapter we must understand these two facts -- that the Lord had left one house and had entered into another. There may be some here who have never left the house which the Lord left; but if *He* has left a house I have to look around and see if it is the house *I* am in, and if so, I must leave it too. The Lord had left one house according to the beginning of chapter 13, and entered into another according to verse 36. In between He spoke in parables. He went out by the sea and *sat* by it first, meaning that He was not going back; He was taking up another position. Sitting means permanency in regard to the thing in hand. He is not going back to the house of chapter 12. He is not going back to those who sought to kill Him -- a "generation of vipers". Many, alas, have come out and gone back since; that is apostasy, in the principle of it.
The Lord sat by the sea, and then He entered into a boat in view of the crowd and sat in the boat -- that is another thing; and in that position He spoke four, parables -- formally called such. Now these four parables lie, so to speak, between the two houses. In them there is a process of disentanglement, in which I learn *what that* house means and what this house means; that whilst the Lord has left that house. He is still speaking to the public. In these last days the Lord has never given up speaking to christendom in general, but riot as recognising it as a house, for He has left the thing morally and has judged it by leaving it, but He turns back and speaks to certain of those who are in it. It is important to notice that, because it maintains us also in a right attitude towards those from whom we have had to separate. They are regarded as a crowd, and there is no order in a crowd; moreover, the Lord did not attempt to regulate them. He spoke to them and dismissed them, and then He enters into another house, and in this house you do not get Him speaking exactly in parables, verses 44, 45,
{497}
47. The word 'parables', is not used. I wish you, dear brethren, to come into this house, so to speak. The chapter defines our position at the present time; and it indicates how we reach substance unalloyed. Many have much truth, but they have it in the house, one might say, which the Lord has left; and I do not know of a doctrine they hold which is absolutely pure; there is always a twist or a colour to it which damages the truth, and hence the importance of judging the whole thing, the system indicated in the first house, and of coming into this second house. He entered into it. Before entering into it He dismissed the crowds. The public thing is left. It remains a crowd. There is no order according to God in a crowd, but He can keep the public position in hand, so that a way is made that we may come into the house with Him. It is not like the house of Lot. The Lord did not smite them with blindness as in the case of Lot, but simply dismisses them, and enters into the house.
The disciples come to Him and say: "Expound to us the parable of the darnel of the field", verse 36. Now you see them in the house with the Lord as the Expositor. In answer to our desire there is nothing which He will not expound to us. "Beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he *expounded* unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself", (@Luke 24:27). Anything that the Lord has to say to the *public* is parabolic now. The truth is there and places them under responsibility, but it is hidden. A parable hides the truth, but the truth is there, and is therefore the corresponding responsibility of the crowd. An exposition is not a parable; it is the unfolding in the Lord's own way, of whatever is to be known. "Beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto *them* ...";and later on He opened their understanding that they might understand the Scriptures, saying, "*Thus* it is written, and *thus* it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day", verse 46. That is going on all the
{498}
time for us who will avail ourselves of it. The apostle says, "Think of what I say" and "the Lord will give thee understanding in all things". Why, then, should we be in spiritual poverty or ignorance? "The *Lord* will give thee understanding in all things", (@2 Timothy 2:7).
Now what we see here is that having expounded unto them the parable of the tares, which I do not intend to go into, for I am only speaking about the exposition. He speaks of the righteous shining forth as the sun, and then though the Authorised Version of verse 44 begins with the word 'again', it is not really there, shewing therefore that the Lord is not continuing to link up His communications to us within, with the parabolic communications without: it is not the same thing. The kind of thing which we have had the last hundred years, dear brethren, is not what they have had before, it is not a continuation of what they had in a parabolic way. The Lord has been unfolding the truth in recent times inside the house, as it were.
In returning to the features of the kingdom in verse 44, the Lord does not begin with 'again' as if it were a resumption of His speaking to the crowds; it is a new thing. There are two 'agains' in regard of verses 45 and 47, to convey that there is sequence, but it is another series of instruction belonging to the house, and it is here that we begin to see something about treasure in the chapter; There was a treasure found, and it was valued. The Lord "sold all whatever he had". That is to say, it is a question of knowing how to value a thing, and whether what I have should be let go so that I may have this. That is the principle. "He sold all that he had" it says, and why? Because he valued this 'treasure' more than the other. It is a question, therefore, of valuing things, and the Lord leads in that way.
Then He is seeking something distinctive, and so we have an extension of thought in verse 45. I believe that the pearl is an allusion to the church in the *full* thought
{499}
according to Paul's ministry. The Lord was seeking that, the full thought of the assembly, not a partial thing as at Pentecost; it was there, but not fully in evidence, and His rights asserted in a most striking manner by Peter. The Lord had title to all that was there. Who that loves the Lord would deny Him every bit of treasure that shone out in that day? You take the whole of @Acts 2, after Peter finishes his address, and see the three thousand come in, and what marked the whole number. What a treasure that was to the heart of Christ! The Lord added to that. He could commit Himself entirely to it, and the heart yields to Him His rights -- all that precious treasure belongs to Him. He had acquired it at great cost; but then that is not *all* He was seeking. What He was seeking, @Matthew 13:45, is definite; we have the figure of a merchant, that is, a man qualified to judge of pearls, who was seeking goodly ones, and he found this one and would have it at all cost. I do not say that it was an afterthought; it was not an afterthought, but I speak of the order in which we find it here. There is the treasure, the character and value of which we are not told, verse 44, but the pearl is a *whole* thing you see, a thing to be understood in its entirety, and one that is valued by the Lord in the figure, as of great price. He secured it. That is what I would commend as the lead which the Lord gives as to valuing a thing, and of the surrender in order to get it.
Then the third figure of the kingdom which is communicated inside, comes very close to us. It is not a figure exactly of treasure, but to bring out ability to discriminate between what is good -- living things -- (because fish are peculiarly *living* creatures) and what is worthless. It is a feature of the kingdom which, I believe, applies very forcibly now, the determination by persons sitting down in deliberation, to make a selection of the good. We want only the *good* fish, and the others we cast away as worthless.
{500}
That is what the Lord finishes with inside; and then He asks the question "Have ye understood *all* these things?" Now that is the challenge, dear brethren. There are courses of instruction constantly coming up -- for no two ministries are alike, and if the Lord is pleased to bring any feature of the truth to our attention He challenges us: "Have ye understood all these things?" It is a searching question. Some say these things are too deep -- that they are involved, but then look at the Lord's parables here! There are four parables. Suppose they *are* a little obscure, they are intended to be so. As I said, parabolic ministry is intended to hide the truth. The truth is hidden, but it is there, and your state is tested by it. Do you say you do not understand it, and leave it at that? You will never thus get inside the second house here, verse 36. Suppose you do not understand it, why not turn to the Lord about it? It may be a question of your state, if you do not understand, and this is a matter of concern surely. If I do not see what others see, it means that my sight is bad, and I must see to that.
"Have ye understood all these things?" the Lord says, and they say "Yea, Lord!" They had been *inside the house*, you see. That is the point. And then the Lord says "for *this reason*" that is to say, for the reason that you understand, there is a possibility of a householder and of many householders! If *they* understood, why not we? The teaching here is understandable. And if I do understand I am a householder with treasure.
The Lord refers to the scribe, which I think is significant, "Every *scribe* discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old", verse 52. Now a scribe is a person who is accurate. You may say much more about him than that; but a man who writes, is an accurate man; writing makes one accurate. The effect of conference or taking counsel with people is to make a
{501}
person ready in his speech; but accuracy marks a scribe. One marvels in noting the accuracy of Scripture. How thousands of years before, a principle which God intended to come out later, is written down with accuracy. Should it not be a matter of concern with us to be accurate? I find it difficult myself, the mind is very treacherous, but the Lord helps us, even in that, so that we get things in their proper setting.
"Every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old". There are some people who live in the *old* things, but if I have new things, antiques lose their value. Understanding the new things, I come to value the old things aright and regard them as treasure. All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are in the mystery, and it represents what is new. The divine thoughts which the Holy Spirit brings into view, are all 'new' treasure brought down from heaven; but the same Spirit who brings these down, had, thousands of years before, brought in other things, and you see how beautiful they are. It is on that principle that the Lord is helping us in the Old Testament. In the possession of the new things which the Spirit has brought in, we can go back and look into the old and see it is all beautiful; it is all Christ! You see, the Lord expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself, everything spoke of Him, it was a precious antique, so to say, old but precious -- and the householder, the scribe, understands. "Yea, Lord", the disciples say. The householder brings the old and new things out, but he does not cast his pearls before swine; he does not, like Hezekiah, shew all to the Babylonians; he brings them out for the lovers of Christ, for those who value them.
One principle of the householder is industry. You get it in this chapter, and in chapter 20, and later in this gospel. The use of the word is generally attributable to
{502}
God in this gospel, shewing What God is in His activities here, in hiring labourers and fencing round his vineyards, etc. It is the carefulness of God which we are to imitate as householders, building up industriously a rich spiritual establishment; and in the measure in which we are thus enriched we enrich the church. That is the idea, and so in these last days the Lord would have us not to be wanting of substance -- treasure, so that we should not be dependent on others, but that we should be in affluence, that we should be able to bring out of our treasure "things new and old"!
{503}
THE BLESSING OF MOSES
@Deuteronomy 33:1 - 25
Reading the greater part of this chapter, I have no intention of enlarging on all the blessings; each of them would furnish sufficient substance for an address. My thought is that in reading this chapter. God may come before us and bathe our souls in the richness of His thoughts of us and for us, through the varied blessings indicated; for it has to be borne in mind that these blessings are for us all. It is not that you are to be blessed with one blessing and I with another: God's blessings are the outcome of His love, and He is not a respecter of persons in showering them upon us. We are all in His mind: indeed, as believers, we were in His mind before the world was, and the Spirit of God says that He has blessed us with "every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ", (@Ephesians 1:3). We have not only every spiritual blessing that any of the blest families shall have, but we have them, and more besides, where some of them will not have any, that is, "in the heavenlies".
Now that is what I have in mind, dear brethren, so that my hope is, not only that we may have a word from the Lord, but that there should be a sense of the richness of divine blessings; that our souls may be, as it were, touched and bathed, in them. I am encouraged to go as far as using the word 'bathed' because in the gospel of Luke, heaven came down in volume and encircled the shepherds who were keeping their sheep by night; they were evidently the objects of heaven's interest. It is said that "an angel of the Lord was there by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them"; they were thus honoured by a heavenly visitant, and encircled with the glory of the Lord. But as if that were not enough the Holy Spirit goes on to tell us that "suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host" -- heaven, as it were, brought down in volume to encircle
{504}
these honoured ones, and the heavenly visitants were saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". They were made to breathe the very atmosphere of heaven, and to hear what heaven was saying -- what angelic companies *were* saying: they were speaking about divine glory, and that that was now brought within man's range. It was there in One born unto them, not here born unto God, but unto *them* "a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord". That was the great fact; and the heavenly companies came down and surrounded these shepherds, speaking of this great event, that it might saturate their souls. That is what God will do for us, deal-brethren, for He is lavish; His thought is pouring out. As the apostle says "which he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ", (@Titus 3:6). Heaven's wealth comes down in a mediatorial way through our Lord Jesus Christ, so as to *fill* our souls, as it says in @Acts 2, "they were all filled with the Holy Spirit". It sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, for He fills every available vessel; and they "began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth".
Now this chapter is on that line. You will observe it opens with: "And this is *the* blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death. And he said ...". He does not begin with the children of Israel, he begins with God; as you might expect, for he was "the man of God". The more we know of God the more we love Him, and the more we love to hear about Him; not only of our own blessings but about Him, for our blessings are all bound up with the knowledge of God; all our blessings centre in the knowledge of God, and we would not have it otherwise. So Moses begins with God. "Jehovah came from Sinai, And rose up from their unto them; He shone forth from mount Paran, and he came from the myriads of the sanctuary". That is to say, we have God in His own
{505}
setting. We are all prone to bring Him into ours: our horizon is in all at best, but God's horizon is infinite, and He presents Himself, as revealed, in His own setting. It is a foreshadowing of God coming out in Christ; He "came from Sinai". It is not here a question of the demands or terrors of Sinai, but of God making selection of a group of positions from which He would shine out. "And rose up from Seir unto them"; Seir was His too. Whatever part Esau had in it, whatever the faithlessness of the brethren in it, it was God's possession, it had been given to Esau. Then it says, "He shone forth from mount Paran". I only refer to this, to call attention to the divine setting, how God would set Himself before stances in which He shines out. Let us not attempt to go beyond revelation; that is to say. God coming out according to His pleasure. He dwells "in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see", but He has come out in revelation; thus we are baptised "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". That is the setting; and it is in that setting all our blessings lie both for time and for eternity. So here in @Deuteronomy 33 you have the coming, and the rising, and the shining, and then the law of fire. There is Sinai, and Seir, and Paran and the sanctuary, with its 'myriads'. Whatever there may be in this world of wickedness there are the "holy myriads": God has got them. Enoch saw Him coming with them. Here He shines forth from them. Then there is "a Jaw of fire", doubtless alluding to the pillar of fire that guided them.
The love comes next. "He loveth the peoples, all his saints are in thy hand, and they sit down at thy feet; each receiveth of thy words". What a beautiful setting we have here both in regard of God and in regard of His people! He loves us -- that is the wilderness position. "He loveth the peoples", or the tribes, meaning, in type, the saints in assembly but in the wilderness, not yet in
{506}
the heavenlies. How God, as we learn in the Psalms, shone out upon them! How He would look out with affection on those tribes as they were set around His habitation, according to the directions of His wisdom! He would look east, or north, or west, or south, there they were, as Balaam saw them, in their tents, in all their spiritual perfection which God alone could rightly value. He loved the people, and they sat at His feet and heard His word. You can understand, dear brethren, that God is not now speaking of our fleshly conditions; He is looking at us in this blessing entirely from the standpoint of His own work in us. You are characteristically one that is loved as in your own local setting; standing in relation to your tribe; and God regards you thus as sitting at His feet, and hearing His words; for as Moses went out and spake the words of Jehovah, He is regarding them here, as listening.
Then the passage goes on to speak of the law, "the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob", verse 4. You see it is an inheritance; the law is not presented here as exacting, or as bringing the knowledge of sin, but with spiritual significance, as conveying the thoughts of God. It is "the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob". God is in His place and we worship Him there; we are reverential towards Him as He is there. We are in our place and He loves us there: that is. God is God, and man is man. God loves man and man loves God. That is the eternal setting of things. It is from this setting we have the blessing; and I wish to speak of these blessings as bearing on us all, each of them referring to us all.
The first blessing is life. It is not exactly what we speak of eternal life, but life as the power of movement, that which shews itself in our movements, so that instead of dying, instead of being irresponsive to God, we are alive -- "Let Reuben live, and not die". God loves life; He loves it in its fruits in its movements. Our Lord Jesus was said to "grow up before him as a tender
{507}
plant": that was what delighted Him. "Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted", says the Lord, "shall be rooted up". (@Matthew 15:13). We are identified with Jesus in the likeness of His death, as He was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so that we should walk in newness of life. Then "Let not his men be few" should read, "Let his men be few", which would appear to be inconsistent, but it is a question of Quality. In the creation there are "living things innumerable"; but "Let his men be few" alludes to quality and capability of being counted; that we are not to be a mass, an unordered crowd, but easily regulated, or as in assemblies that can be counted -- assemblies in which we know one another by the marks of life in each other. So that spiritually developed persons can be counted. One of the features of the wilderness is counting, hence the book of 'Numbers'.
The next blessing is for Judah, whose voice is to be heard. These meetings are very largely for young people, and the first thing, dear young people, is this movement of life, as seen in Reuben; not natural energy which goes in for sports and other pleasures of this world. Such evidences of natural life are not marks of the blessing of God; but belong to Esau's world, for he was "a man of the field". "Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents"; he was indeed spiritual, as his history shows. He did not develop sporting energy or skill, that was not his aim; he belonged to the spiritual family, the family of faith, and he dwelt in tents. There dwelt with him one of the most honoured men in the Old Testament, his grandfather Abraham who "dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob". You get no such company as that in the field, or on the tennis court the man of faith did not go there; that was Esau's place and he despised his birthright. "Let Reuben live, and not die"; the blessing here is life. The movements of the man of faith are delightful to God; he is in a place of obscurity in this world, not in a palace,
{508}
but dwelling in tents, in movable abodes. The men of faith were sojourners here, but they were heirs together of the same promise; the promise to Abraham was the promise to Isaac and to Jacob.
But I have got to Judah: "Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people", verse 7. This, no doubt, has a dispensational bearing, but I am not speaking of that, but that you, dear young people, should be brought to *your* people. The world does not afford your people. Ruth says: "Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God". That is the idea here. Then "may his hands strive for them", as it may read. Now, you see, you are brought amongst the saints. Is there anyone here who has confessed the Lord who has not put out his hands for fellowship with God's people? There may be some of such here. You have the movements of life maybe, for the Spirit of God is given to those who believe on the Lord Jesus, and there are the consequent movements of life, but the next thing is to be brought to your people. They will be ready, no doubt, to put their Hands upon you, as Ananias did upon Saul, as you seek to identify yourself with Him. "Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah"; that is those prayers in your closet to God for guidance, for spiritual companionship -- these are heard. You remember how Saul's praying was his commendation: the Lord said "Behold, he prayeth", and surely his voice was heard. He says, too, that Saul saw in a vision a man coming and laying his hands on him. The Lord knew all that was going on in Saul's heart, as well as his voice, and he was brought to his people. He got strength, having taken food, and was with the disciples certain days. They were his companions; great man though he had been in Jerusalem, he is now a companion of the lowly followers of Jesus, in Damascus; and he soon moves his hand to help them, for he begins to preach that is the next thing. The next blessing is that of Levi. We are led on in
{509}
this wonderful chapter from blessing to blessing, one blessing added to another, increasing as it goes; the next after Judah, is Levi. Levi is the spiritual side. You can understand that the blessings of Reuben and Judah, combined in one would make a man spiritual; he would think for God and help His people; of Judah it is said, "May his hands strive for them". We have no past history in Reuben nor in Judah here, but in Levi you have past history: there can be no levitical service without past history. The typical Levite is Aaron; he was eighty-three years old before we hear of him by name, and that implies past history with God. "Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy Holy one", God knows that you are holy now that you are beginning to think for Him, and becoming a priest; in your prayers you are priestly, you are thinking of the saints, of the honour of God in His people, and God says as it were 'I will trust him with my Thummim and my Urim' -- which is perfections and light. They were set in the breastplate of the high priest. Levi includes the priesthood. It is the priestly family. It says of him here "Whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah". He is proved, he has past history with God. As soon as you begin to make spiritual history. God loves to go over the ground you have covered. As soon as one repents he begins to make history in heaven, and surely history is begun in his own soul as well. The history of our souls is kept in heaven, and God loves to go over it; it reflects the operations of His grace in us.
Levi said to his father and his mother: "I have not seen him". You say, should not we honour our father and mother? But when you come into the fellowship of God's Son you stand in relation to God and His assembly; as in the assembly father and mother have to be left, outside -- all family links have to be set aside. Many a sorrow has been brought in because this history cannot
{510}
be recorded of us; we have sought to carry our family links and affections into the assembly of God. Judging these things you are as Levi, of whom it says, "They have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar". Now, you see, you are honoured. God is taking account of your spiritual history. He can trust you, and you have a place among the holy myriads; you put incense before God and whole burnt-offerings, that is to say, you are not half-hearted. You are like the widow in the gospels; she had two mites and she put them both into the treasury, she might have conveniently kept back one. "Whole burnt-offering" refers to wholehearted appreciation in the offerer. There is a complete thought of Christ.
The next is Benjamin. You can understand now the place you will have with God, you will be "the beloved of the Lord". How precious to be the beloved of the Lord who dwells in safety by Him! It says: "The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders". You come now into the enjoyment of the love of God. "The beloved of the Lord" you might say, was an expression that refers to Christ but the expressions that refer to Christ are very largely applicable to us as related to Him. We are blessed in Him; as He is the delight of God so we are the delight of God; as He is the beloved, so are we. "Accepted in the beloved" -- think of that! What an incentive, to go on on these lines, and come into the things that are open to you! And then the next thing is "He shall dwell between his shoulders". I have no doubt that this refers to the position of the temple in the territory of Benjamin, because the temple was literally built in his territory, Jerusalem being one of his cities at the outset. Much might be said about that, as to how it came into Judah's
{511}
hands but the point for us is that as we dwell in safety by Him, *He* dwells between our shoulders -- meaning that we support the dwelling place of God. Is it not indeed that we should be strengthened with might by the Father's Spirit in the inner man, so that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith? (@Ephesians 3:16). It is a question of strength; not only of life but strength, so that we can afford a dwelling place for Him. "That the Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height ... that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God".
Then next is Joseph; and now we come to the supreme position After Joseph it is a question of service or activity. Joseph and Levi have most notice, and you can understand that, for as we come to Joseph we come typically to Christ, and to the saints in Christ -- "the myriads of Ephraim" and the "thousands of Manasseh". That refers to us, to the saints viewed as in Christ. Joseph here is thus Christ; but the division of the tribe into two, makes way for the saints as viewed in Christ. It is an Ephesian position. We are blessed with every spiritual blessing, in the heavenlies in Christ -- that is the thousands of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh. Now you see, beloved, where you are brought to -- look at the range of the blessing! It says: "For the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath, and for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things put forth by the moon, and for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills, and for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush: let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren". You can see the position. The whole
{512}
range of the divine realm is brought into view, and every blessing is centred in Joseph, all must shower upon Joseph. Think of the wealth that was poured upon him! and, not the least, "the good will of him that dwelt in the bush". That is a touching reference. In commercial circles we hear of 'good will', sometimes it is sold at a high price; but there is nothing tangible, its tangibility is assumed to be realised later, and may not be. But think of the good will that fills this whole realm of blessing! It is wealth in itself -- for what will not accrue to us, as having the good will of Him that dwelt in the bush? God coming in in such lowly circumstances has proved His love. His good will is indeed the outcome of His love. Think of being here for that good will! It is everlasting, eternity, beloved, will prove its full results. We are already heirs to it in Christ, as it says here, "the ten thousands of Ephraim, and the ... thousands of Manasseh". We are all in that; it is the full height of the blessing for us; it typifies Ephesians, and all that it discloses, and the testimony that follows, in the remaining tribes, should be worthy of it. The testimony of a Roman Christian merely, is not the same as the testimony of an Ephesian Christian. Ephesians presents the full divine height, and so conveys the fulness of the blessing.
What follows corresponds with this: Zebulun is to rejoice in his going out, and Issachar in his tents. "They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand": you have invitation, sacrifice and abundance. They draw on the wealth of the seas, the allusion, doubtless, is to their position in the land; for these blessings anticipate that position. They were by the sea-shore, and they sucked the abundance of the seas, and hence their hospitality. What is mentioned is something like what we enjoy now, and like that which some of us have shared
{513}
elsewhere during the week: we have been invited to the mountain, and there it was that the wealth of God was poured out. All this comes in after Joseph, that is, after the Ephesian position.
The next after Zebulun and Issachar is Gad, which is the enlargement. You can understand, dear brethren, that enlargement on God's part is not simply adding numbers. Numbers of unspiritual people being added is not enlargement according to God. Enlargement according to God, is the outcome of our apprehension and entrance into what He is in Christ, and the domain of blessing opened up in Him. Gad is enlargement, following upon Zebulun and Issachar: those who suck the abundance of the seas, who call the people unto the mountain, and offer sacrifices righteousness. In connection with that you may be sure of enlargement. Where there is hospitality and sacrifice, and where wealth is collected, as it were, from the seas, then there is enlargement, which is Gad. There is one thing about him, that he had reserved a portion for the lawgiver -- that is that Moses was buried in his territory, meaning spiritually, that the lawgiver is valued. (@Psalm 119). In the enlargement we do not disregard the commandments of God; we are more concerned for the commandments of God than for increase of numbers.
And then there is Dan, who leaps from Bashan -- not, from his own territory but from territory that had been given to the two and a half tribes. It is like Romans. Romans implies the coring, that is, the Spirit in the believer; this is not only justification and peace with God, but the Spirit as the spring in the Christian. Dan is not here the historical apostate tribe as he is elsewhere; he is spiritual, and leaps from Bashan.
Naphtali comes next. "Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full of the blessing of Jehovah", verse 23. As I said. God would impress us and bathe our souls by the Spirit with these thoughts. Whatever was
{514}
written beforetime was written for our learning, and in Hebrews the Holy Spirit speaks to us by quotations from the Old Testament. And so here, saints are to be satisfied with favour and full of the blessing of the Lord.
After Naphtali you have Asher. Naphtali possesses the west and the south, and Asher is said to be blessed with children. That is to say, you have a spiritual generation now contemplated. "Let Asher be blessed with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil". He carries all the blessings, for the last, as it were, carries all the others. A spiritual generation is there contemplated, and his foot is to be dipped in oil.
Such, presented in a very brief way, are the rich thoughts contained in this wonderful chapter. May God help the young, and indeed all of us to get into these thoughts, and live in them, and bathe our souls in them, by the Spirit of God, so that we may come out here with our feet dipped in oil, walking in the grace of the Spirit, and acceptable to our brethren!
