{1}
Pages 1 - 65, "The System of Grace". Readings and Addresses, Britain, 1930 (Volume 106).
THE SYSTEM OF GRACE
@John 4:13,14; @Genesis 21:17 - 34
J.T. I thought a word on the Spirit would help us, and that we might look at the power and effect of the truth typically upon the woman of Samaria and on Hagar. Then I think we may see how the idea of the Spirit, or the well in Genesis, is carried through in Abraham. The idea of the well goes further than the Spirit personally, including, as it does, the system of grace in which the Spirit operates, and from that point of view it is introduced first in Scripture in connection with Hagar, as belonging to the household of faith, though she never fully availed herself of it. That is, it had no permanent effect, so that she goes to Egypt for a wife for her son, she being an Egyptian. But the woman of Samaria goes back to the men of the city, but they have no power over her. Hagar goes back to where she came from for a wife for her son, proving that she was not free from it; but the woman of Sychar went back to the city, to the men, and proved that she was completely delivered from them, and from the world, in that she invites them to a Man who is not of it at all, and her invitation is effective. That is, it has power, in that it is from one in deliverance. It is in that power of deliverance from the world that we may hope to attract persons out of it.
P.G.T. Is there any difference between the thought of the well, and the rivers in chapter 7?
J.T. In chapter 7 it is rivers, alluding to the superabundance of the effect of the Spirit. "This he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive" (@John 7:39), which I believe alludes
{2}
to Pentecost, where you see the full result of the Spirit come down. Rivers in scripture suggest sources of influence, bringing to light primarily what is of God -- gold and the like, (@Genesis 2:10 - 14). A well is a much smaller subdivision of water. An ocean may affect continents, for according to the size of the body of water, so is its influence; while a well, being the smallest subdivision of water, rather suggests what is applicable to one person at a time and also it suggests freshness and vigour, so that it becomes a well or spring in the believer.
E.W. Does the well link one with God Himself?
J.T. I think it does. It springs up into everlasting life; it has God in view. It springs up, and the action of it here shows that the result is for God. It is the smallest subdivision of water mentioned, and is first connected with Hagar. It comes to light here first, and the well is called "Beer-lahai-roi" (@Genesis 16:14), 'Well of the Living who was seen'. It is by the well that she is brought into direct touch with God. The moral effect was not there in Hagar's case, but it was evident in this woman of Samaria in @John 4.
W.T. You are not speaking of the Spirit as the Comforter, but as of service as in us individually.
J.T. The thought of the well is first connected with our state of soul, for that is the point the Lord makes; He says, "Go, call thy husband". The moral state has to be adjusted before we can come into it. Hagar did not answer to it, though it was the place where she came into touch with God. At first she left the house of faith in self-will, but in spite of that, God met her. She goes out, but God met her; showing what grace is, and how this type involves that God follows us up.
The woman of Samaria, on the other hand, was an outcast, and when she gets instruction as to the well, she seems to get the spiritual thought, for she says, "Give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to
{3}
draw"; but the Lord says, "Go, call thy husband". The moral question has to be gone into. She is able to go to the men of the city, and say, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did". She had already been exposed to herself; and evidently judged herself accordingly. This is the way it was meant to affect her; for the application of the well has to do with the self-acting organs in us. It has to do with the lower affections; they have to be operative, and that is by the word. Unless one is cleansed morally, there are no practical results, but then the self-acting organs are brought under the control of the Spirit, so that there is a "springing-up".
G.H.C. Is the gift of the Spirit intended to link us up with a living Person, whereas in Hagar's case it was just temporary relief?
J.T. It did not bring Hagar into a link with God. God showed wonderful grace in allowing her to find herself in these circumstances, for in them she would get the benefit of the system of grace; circumstances brought about by her own conduct. But it is added that she goes to Egypt for a wife for her son. She is responsible for her son: "lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand"; she was held to that. She made her son to drink, then she goes off to Egypt. The self-acting organs, so to speak, were not under the influence of the Spirit. The woman of Samaria goes back to the city and says, "Come, see a man". She is delivered; the men of the city have no power over her; she has power over them for good; she is completely delivered, being in possession, in principle, of the living water.
J.H.T. Isaac came from the same well as Rebekah drew nigh.
J.T. He valued the thing, though Hagar did not; but you had something more in your mind.
J.H.T. I was thinking of the contrast between Egypt and the well.
{4}
J.T. Rebekah knew how to use the well. She is seen coming to it with a pitcher at the time the maidens came to draw water. She is not like this woman; she had not to come when others were not there. She could lift up her head. She is one who is already morally right, and she knows what to do. It is there she comes to light as a type of the church. The remarks of the servant of Abraham about her are very beautiful: "And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder ... And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also", (@Genesis 24:45,46). Now when she reached Isaac he had just come from the well. He dwelt in the south country, and that is where the well Lahai-roi was. He is by the well; it is the means of sustenance. Moses (@Exodus 2:15) sat by the well, and Joseph is "a fruitful bough by a well", (@Genesis 49:22).
E.W. The Lord was waiting by this well in @John 4.
J.T. In the end of chapter 3 it says, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". This is the filling out of that. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". The gift of God is through a divine Person, "*who* it is that saith to thee".
W.T. On the other hand, would you say Rebekah made room for the Spirit?
J.T. She made room for Abraham's servant. One great idea with Rebekah is sufficiency, plenty of room, plenty of everything; but there is nothing of that about Hagar, only narrowness and worldliness. And yet God helped Ishmael; God was with him, and he became an archer, but his mother took him a wife out of Egypt. She is a type therefore of those who today participate in the Spirit (@Hebrews 6), but are worldly, and never come to anything spiritually.
{5}
J.W. Did the action of Rebekah show that she knew the wealth that was connected with the well?
J.T. Quite. If you take the thing typically, it is a question of the Spirit. We have to understand the types from the standpoint of the New Testament, so the well in these passages points to the energy of life and consequent power and wealth that lie in the Spirit.
F.W.B. What is involved in Ishmael becoming an archer?
J.T. It is rather a reproach in Genesis to be an archer; it is a man who fights at a distance. It is recorded of Joseph that he is "a fruitful bough by a well". That is Christ in the fulness of grace; "the archers ... shot at him ... but his bow abode in strength". That is what the Jews did to Him, and Ishmael and Hagar are the Jewish element. They were the persecutors of Christ.
W.T. The woman in @John 4 was needy.
J.T. You see the complete deliverance in @John 4 in this practical way, that she goes back to her old haunts and has power for good over the men, and she directs them to a Man she has found who told her all things she ever did. She valued and enjoyed the light, although it exposed her.
W.T. Is that connected with revelation?
J.T. Surely; the only-begotten Son was there, declaring God. Of Hagar it reads, "The Angel of Jehovah found her by a spring of water", as if it were God showing interest in her though she was self-willed, and then the well is named because she was conscious that God saw her. It would be like the revelation of God to her. In the next incident her eyes are opened and she is held responsible. "Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand". The lad drinks, but there is no moral effect, and his history shows that he corresponds with the Jews as hating Christ. Unless the inward members are morally cleansed through the purifying of the mind, there will be no outward effect in separation from the world. I think it is a
{6}
very poor thing if, while we may talk about having the Spirit, we are not delivered from the world. Unless the effects are seen practically, what is the use of talking about it?
W.T. Have we any antitype in the New Testament? I was wondering if there were any instances in the epistles to throw light upon it.
J.T. In the epistle to the Galatians it is brought in formally; they are said to be going back to the beggarly elements. There it is the world of religion, but at Corinth they were going back to the world of sensuality.
Ques. Do you think the woman in @John 4 appreciated the difference that existed between Samaria and Jerusalem?
J.T. I think you see how she overcomes the prejudices that existed between Samaria and Jerusalem. She had talked about the Jews and the Samaritans and their rival claims. The Lord asserted what God had set among the Jews, that salvation was of them, and His word evidently affected her. The result was that her testimony brings about an abiding-place for Christ among the Samaritans, for "he abode there two days". How can there be a state of things suitable for this in a local company save as they are unworldly? The result at Samaria would indicate deliverance from the world in a moral sense; they were not thinking nationally, for as they came to Him and heard Him themselves, they say, "We have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world" (verse 42). "He abode there two days"; the period is testimony.
J.H.T. I wondered if the result of Samaria would also be seen at Colosse, where the apostle speaks of their love in the Spirit? Then they would be walking in wisdom towards those without, redeeming opportunities.
J.T. Yes; "Christ in you" (@Colossians 1:27); suitable conditions were there.
{7}
Rem. Referring to Isaac, he comes from the well Lahai-roi, and then he dwells there. That is in contrast to Hagar going down to Egypt is it not?
J.T. @Genesis 21 taken together with this chapter helps immensely, showing the power of the divine system of grace. Hagar did not come into the good of the thing; but what about Abraham? He is a characteristic believer. It says Abimelech and Phichol the captain of his host come to Abraham. He had moral power, and the Philistine respected that. The Philistine will never respect you unless he has to, but if he has to, he will make the best terms he can, but he will make a show of what he has got. So here, he brings his military man and says, 'You are a man of distinction'. Every man delivered from the world is that; he is marked off; he has power, and the blessing of God is with him. The Philistine king wanted to make terms regarding himself, his son, and his grandson. The power and blessing of God marked Abraham, and so he was formidable. Abimelech recognises this, so he makes a show and brings his military man, indicating that he has an army. Abraham has no army, but when the need arises he is not behind. He had trained servants in his house, (@Genesis 14:14). But this is a question of those before whom you have to live; he took sheep and oxen and gave them to Abimelech, but he reproved him on account of the well. He shows he is a man of power, and you must be to stand up against a king. Abraham had no crown except a moral one, but Abimelech makes terms with him for three generations. Abraham says in effect, 'Here are seven ewe lambs; these are what I am thinking about; they represent the spirit which marks me. I do not think of being at war with you, I want to be a man of peace'. Ewe lambs are the opposite of being armed to the teeth.
Ques. What would that imply?
J.T. It is @Romans 12:20, "if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink". You are thinking of the
{8}
system of grace, and you want to gain people; you do not want to be quarrelling. It is peace.
J.H.T. Why seven *ewe* lambs?
J.T. They set forth the perfection of the subjective results of the Spirit. You are not aggressive. The Philistine had never thought of that. It was a new thing to him, but that is the kind of man he had to reckon with. It suggests the fruit of the Spirit. There are nine varieties of the fruit of the Spirit given in Galatians 5:22 - 23: "Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control". If that is the spirit of Abraham you can trust him. He has a wonderful influence for good. He says, "For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well". He commends the system of grace. The spirit of Christ, which marked Abraham, would thus be represented before Abimelech. The well which Abraham dug was the secret of this.
J.H.T. Why is this proposal in @John 4 made to the woman and not to Nicodemus in chapter 3?
J.T. It is very remarkable that this great truth should come out in such a woman as this. I suppose it is to illustrate the system of grace. That is just what the grace of God is; it takes up the worst kind of people and makes them vessels for the display of itself. For she left her waterpot. She was a better pupil than Nicodemus; she left her waterpot. She saw the benefits of living water and immediately put the thing into effect, and the effort was successful, for the men came and believed.
Ques. Would the waterpot signify all that she was engaged with in her past history?
J.T. Yes; leaving it she indicates spirituality, that her body was to be the vessel. She saw that her body was henceforth to be employed in the system of grace. Romans brings out that our bodies are to be used; our members are to be yielded as instruments of righteousness to God. Nicodemus is a man who never came out in
{9}
definite testimony in the Lord's lifetime. He was a secret disciple. This woman identified herself with Him and was a successful evangelist immediately. Nicodemus is a very poor disciple. The woman is immediately a witness, and, through her, room is made for Christ -- a very great result.
J.H.T. Is the gift of the Spirit intended to make Christ greater to us than any one else? In @John 4 He is greater than Jacob, in chapter 6 He is greater than Moses, and in chapter 7 He is greater than Abraham.
J.T. Very good. She says to the men, "Come, see a man". The Person was before her soul. That is the effect of the Holy Spirit; He engages our hearts with Christ. You feel that Hagar had never come into the assembly, typically, but this woman of Samaria had. Hagar represents the Jew with all his advantages. It has been mentioned that the effect of the Spirit is to bring testimony for Christ. Compare Nicodemus with this woman; although he came out at the end, this woman is immediately a fruitful witness, and room is made for Christ.
I think Abraham intended that these ewe lambs should be before Abimelech as representative of his spirit, and it was to maintain the well in its proper character. It would be safe in the hands of Abraham. It is very important to keep the system of grace clear, for it ought to produce the same spirit in any one. The Galatians were giving it up. Then in chapter 26, Abimelech discerning that God was also with Isaac, comes back to Isaac with Ahuzzath his friend, and Phichol the captain of his host. He comes back with an additional man, that is his friend -- three of them, which I suppose would be royalty, military power, and the social thing, the latter being based on *friendship*. That was a formidable array, and that is what we have to contend with. The social element is an added thing, but it did not overcome Isaac. *He sent them away*, and that same day his servants came and told him that the water gushed up. It is called a *city* in chapter
{10}
26; in chapter 21 it is called a *place*; there is advance in the instruction. The city implies that there is an order of things in which there is light and rule. We are to cherish assembly order. We have been speaking of people with whom the Lord can abide, but now it is a city (verse 33). You must have light and rule and authority; all that stands in relation to the well Beer-sheba. Beer-sheba also stands for the faithfulness of God. It is where God appears to Jacob as the God of his father *Isaac*, meaning that everything is secure in a risen Christ; it is Isaac, not Abraham.
E.W. What is the point in Abraham planting a tree by the well and calling on "the name of Jehovah, the Eternal God"?
J.T. He has gained a moral victory and entered into an engagement with Abimelech; this was in the knowledge of the eternal God. Moses alludes to the idea afterwards: "The eternal God is thy refuge" (@Deuteronomy 33:27), and "Thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations", (@Psalm 90:1).
W.D. Does making room for the Spirit enable us to magnify what is of Christ and then get rid of these things?
J.T. The use of the figure of the well is in view of being independent of the world. Moses sat by the well, that being the divine thought instead of the energy of the flesh. The great legislator and administrator sat by the well. The thing is set up in Genesis in Joseph, a fruitful bough by a well. Moses sat by the well as the administrator of it. @John 4 is really administrative, the Father having given all things into the hand of the Son.
Ques. Where does the well in Numbers link on with this subject?
J.T. The well in Numbers has a very great link. The administrative side is in view in "the lawgiver" and "the princes", but it is the power by which they go into Canaan. "Spring up, O well", (@Numbers 21:17). After that the people go from one point to another until they
{11}
reach the top of Pisgah, then they take a retrospective view of the journey and see all that God has been to them. You see the wilderness, and the point is to look over "the waste" to see what God has been to you there. The Spirit enables us to look back over our whole history and see how God has been working with us, what He has been to us.
{12}
DIVINE APPEARINGS
@Exodus 3:1 - 6; @Exodus 16:10; @Exodus 24:9 - 11; @Exodus 34:5 - 7
J.T. I thought we might look at the book of Exodus with regard to certain divine appearings there. Certain features of the truth come out in relation to these appearings in Exodus, which, it occurred to me, the Lord would help us in considering. The first divine appearing in scripture was to Abraham, and many followed, including what we get in this book; but I think we shall find sufficient matter in the scriptures we have read to occupy us this afternoon. The idea of divine appearing or manifestation runs right through scripture, and implies that God not only furnishes His people with light, but with *impressions of Himself*. In appearing to Abraham, God is spoken of as "the God of glory" (@Acts 7:2); but in this book we have the glory itself beginning to shine, and that in the wilderness. In chapter 16 they looked towards the wilderness, as if God would remind us at this juncture that that is where the glory lies. His glory is seen in the wilderness conditions as they are accepted. Israel were not accepting them; they were thinking of what they had in Egypt, and, in heart, were turning back; but God was reminding them by this first appearing of the glory that there would be no glory for them in Egypt. If you look back into the world, it means that you are turning from the glory. God took Moses in hand first, so that he might be impressed personally. If he were to give a lead to the people, he must be impressed personally with the manifestation of God. So that, in chapter 3, it is as if God approved the movements and attitude of Moses at that particular juncture. He had been content with the circumstances -- to dwell in Midian with Reuel, remaining with him forty years, keeping his flock unselfishly.
{13}
He led the flock to the backside of the desert, but it was to Horeb, the mount of God.
T.T. Do you mean that we have to come out of Egypt to behold His glory?
J.T. Yes, that is how chapter 16 stands. In chapter 3 Moses is in keeping with his circumstances in the wilderness. He is content "to dwell with the man", although the circumstances were very different from those to which he had been accustomed. We are reminded at the outset of the importance of *contentment with the circumstances into which we may be led under the government of God*.
J.L. Do you suggest that his turning aside to see the burning bush was a deliberate act?
J.T. That is what it says. Moses said, "I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt". We are not told to whom he spoke. He must have been taking counsel with himself; like Nehemiah. If we learn to do that, we shall avoid special friendships. It is right to take counsel with the brethren as we have opportunity, but it is well to take counsel with oneself. "I will now turn aside, and see this great sight". He did not turn aside as a casual observer, or a curious person. "I will now turn aside", he said, "to see this *great* sight". He already took in that it was a great matter; there was something very unusual.
W.S.S. It is very encouraging that the glory is to be seen in wilderness conditions.
J.T. It is; and then the resolving in oneself to turn aside to see it; there is something to be seen.
W.S.S. I was thinking of the loss to the saints if they do not get into the wilderness.
J.T. The Lord says of John the baptist, "What went ye out in the wilderness for to see?" (@Luke 7:24). The people of the world have no difficulty in giving an account of what they are going to see -- the races, or the theatre; but what conception have we got of what is to be seen in
{14}
a divine manifestation? And then question as to whether there is resolve of heart to turn aside. It is not simply to *look* aside, but to *turn*; the whole person is definitely occupied.
J.H.T. I was wondering if that would come in at the close of @Romans 8, the mind being set in that direction. And then collectively, as in the epistles to the Corinthians; Paul was bent upon getting the Corinthian saints to part with every Egyptian feature, and then he held out a ministry of glory for them.
J.T. Quite. I think that @Romans 8 fits in with the experience of Moses -- at the end certainly. He began thus -- turned aside to see; it was resolve of heart, and later on he asked to see the glory, which he could not, but he saw much, as we see in chapter 34, and at the end God takes him up, and he sees beyond anything that man could see naturally; he is shown the whole land. Then later he is brought into the mount of transfiguration. We begin as christians with resolve to see fully what God presents to us.
W.S.S. This resolve was reached after a long experience in the wilderness. I wondered if you had some application to make of that?
J.T. I think Moses sets out the principle of *accepting* the wilderness. In order to be a leader of the saints, you must accept the circumstances in which they are to be led. He was already leading; he "led the flock", we are told. He had begun by watering them, or rather he helped the daughters of Reuel to do so.
T.T. The people of God were in Egypt at this time, and yet the appearing seems to be connected with the people of God.
J.T. It had their deliverance in view; but at the moment it is not for them, but for the deliverer, for the leader.
I.R. What had you in mind with regard to the burning bush as affecting us today?
J.T. I think the burning bush is the presence of God
{15}
in these *lowly* circumstances. God intimates that He would be in the midst of His people, in the littleness of their circumstances in the wilderness. The divine appearing was in a *thorn* bush. It would set forth what was outwardly insignificant; but God was in it, and although the fire burned, the bush was not consumed. It was the presence of God in the midst of His people in their circumstances, intimating that in this world our outward circumstances are insignificant and despicable; but He is not ashamed to be with us nevertheless. Besides, His judgment is there.
Rem. You were speaking about the 'seeing'; is not that a great thought in John's gospel?
J.T. The appearing in the bush corresponds with the Word becoming flesh. The Lord, although God, came into these small circumstances. But although in lowliness as Man, the apostles "contemplated his glory", (@John 1:14).
E.L.M. Would the glory coming in in that way relate to the coming in of the beloved Son, as seen in @John 1? I wondered if it suggested the thought of God being in Christ, coming down into lowly circumstances.
J.T. It does. @John 1 presents the deity of Christ; that such an One should become flesh, should take that condition, is the marvellous fact stated. The Lord took a wonderful stoop in becoming flesh. It was no imaginary thing; he *became* flesh.
E.L.M. I was wondering whether the first scripture might suggest a vessel for that glory to be seen in; afterwards it is simply the glory itself that is mentioned.
J.T. I think this may be rightly taken with @John 1:14, "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us". It is God coming in; He says, "I am come down". Moses was to understand that although He was in such lowly circumstances, He was nevertheless the same Person. Moses was to be impressed with the deity of the Person before him; the name of the Person in the bush is "I AM", (@Exodus 3:14).
{16}
J.E. When Stephen refers to this he says, "as he went up to consider it", (@Acts 7:31). Is there anything in that?
J.T. It is the same idea; in turning aside to see, he was taking account of the thing in an *interested* way, just as the apostles *contemplated* the glory of the Word as become flesh.
Rem. The Lord said to the two disciples of John who followed Him, "Come and see", (@John 1:39).
J.T. Yes, that came in afterwards; they came and *saw* where He abode.
J.L. It says here that the Lord saw that Moses turned aside, and then He calls, the result being that Moses says, "Here am I".
J.T. The person who thus turns aside is taken account of by God. What runs through scripture in regard to service is personality. God intended a great personality to shine out in Moses, and this was to enhance it. Moses was to take on impressions. The first thing is, he is addressed: "Moses, Moses", showing how definitely he is now regarded; he was to be known personally. Later history shows how that came about, how the man Moses became very great, and God spoke with him "face to face, as a man speaks with his friend", (@Exodus 33:11).
T.T. Would you say what the appearing in the flame of fire teaches us today?
J.T. I think it is, "Our God is a consuming fire" (@Hebrews 12:29); that is what it would be for us; it is "*our* God". The fire would denote God's means of dealing with the flesh in His people, but with all He would be with them and bring them through. I think the Holy Spirit coming in the character of cloven tongues implies that, so that God is to be *feared* -- not in a slavish way, but He will not brook the flesh among us.
J.H.T. Would this experience be designed to give this servant or leader suitable sympathies to move with the people of God in any circumstances?
J.T. I think so. If you see how God has come in in
{17}
Christ in such lowly circumstances, it encourages you to be with the people of God, in whatever circumstances they may be. One does not select one's circumstances. Moses had already qualified in that he had accepted the circumstances which the government of God brought him into. "He sat by the well"; then "he was content to dwell with the man"; he consented to remain in Midian with Reuel, although the circumstances were very different from those to which he was accustomed. I believe that is a great point for all of us, especially for those who serve, to accept the circumstances which God brings us into. God is saying, as it were, to Moses, 'I am going to accept the circumstances of My people, I am going to be with them whatever these may be'.
E.L.M. Moses was ahead of the people; he accepted the circumstances, whereas they thought of Egypt.
J.T. God is saying virtually that He was to be in the wilderness with His people, and that the sphere of the glory was to be reached through the wilderness. Are we to accept what Egypt affords us, or what God proposes for us?
In chapter 16:10, when Aaron speaks to them, they look toward the wilderness, and *there* the glory is.
W.S.S. Would the teaching of this passage be connected with the truth of the epistle to the Corinthians, the apostle accepting the circumstances there as they affected himself?
J.T. That is what comes out. He had learned, in whatever circumstances he was, to be content, and that is what is said of Moses in chapter 12 -- he consented to dwell with the man. You might say it was because he was going to get a wife there, but there is nothing said about that until he consents to dwell with the *man*.
W.S.S. I was wondering if the apostle Paul's teaching in 1 and 2 Corinthians would have in view the gain of wilderness conditions?
J.T. I think that God is intimating that Moses is
{18}
qualified. He was content, not only to dwell with the man, but to look after his sheep. It was a menial occupation for a man like Moses. After forty years, he is still unselfishly engaged with the flock of his father-in-law -- not even his father, but his father-*in-law*. God comes in to show that He approves of Moses, who is not serving for wages. No one who serves for wages is qualified in the eyes of God. Not that he does not get wages; he does, far more than he could have bargained for; but God is not seeking service on that line. Moses qualified in that he was not serving for wages; he was looking after his father-in-law's sheep. That is the thing, that you are serving what belongs to Christ. "Ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake", (@2 Corinthians 4:5). God shows that He approves of Moses in that He appears to him in the thorn-bush, as if He intimated that He would come into like circumstances because of Israel. I think that is implied when He took Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and the seventy elders to the mount, that they might see His circumstances *above*, and then they would appreciate those into which He was coming in order to be with them.
E.B.G. Is the thought in appearing that there may be some divine impression given in view of service or leadership? I was thinking of what was said to the apostle Paul, "... a witness both of what thou hast seen, and of what I shall appear to thee in", (Acts 26:16).
J.T. I think that is the principle; every servant gets impressions peculiar to himself. No one else had this. It was for Moses, and it would be in his soul ever after, and would give character to his service.
E.B.G. Do you distinguish between light and impression? You might say a little more about that.
J.T. I think there is a very important distinction. An impression of God or of Christ implies that He is here livingly. Of course this can be maintained only by the Spirit. It is not a mere system of doctrine or precepts, but
{19}
that the Spirit is here, and those who are in the system take on impressions through Him. So the Lord said to Paul, "... of what I shall appear to thee in", not only at the beginning, but what he would get afterwards. So throughout Moses¬ history, God appeared to him from time to time; he was thus kept in freshness, and so representative of God.
Rem. Moses was kept in the sense of this all through his history with God; he loved the people, and was able to say how Jehovah loved them.
J.T. God so loved them that He would be with them in their circumstances. He had never asked them to build Him a house of cedars, He says to David.
W.L. Would the thorn bush teach Moses not to expect anything from the people, but the voice from the bush teach him to expect everything from Him?
J.T. That is so, I am sure. The after-history proved that Moses suffered from the people, but found abundant resources in God.
A.G. Would you say that the impressions of Pharaoh's court disqualified Moses, but that the impression he got at the burning bush qualified him as a leader?
J.T. Yes; the former would inflate him; the latter would reduce him, leading him to disallow the flesh.
J.L. Why, in chapter 16:10, do we get Aaron speaking, and not Moses?
J.T. The communication is to Moses, but Aaron is brought into it. It says in verse 9, "And Moses spoke to Aaron, Say to all the assembly of the children of Israel, Come near unto the presence of Jehovah, for he has heard your murmurings". At this stage of the people's history grace ruled, and this is conveyed peculiarly in the speaking of Aaron, that is, as through a brother. "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well". God had heard him speak -- perhaps in prayer, so that the speaking coming through Aaron would convey divine sympathy and consideration for the people at this
{20}
stage. Although they were murmuring, God would hold to His principle of grace ruling, and so what comes out in chapter 16 is the manna. As the people murmured Jehovah said, "Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you". The manna also speaks of littleness, but it is from *heaven* -- "a small round thing". It is Christ as Man; what He was down here in wilderness circumstances. That is what the manna is -- a heavenly Man here. The word 'manna' is from 'man', referring to the inquiry as to what it was (verse 15). We may well inquire what it is, and get the true answer. It is Christ as in this world, in which He had to do with all human circum stances, sin apart. It is Christ thus as food for us, as in the wilderness. They had spoken of sitting by the flesh-pot in Egypt and eating bread to the full. God says, I will give you bread from heaven. There was no reproof; it was accompanied by this tender, sympathetic, gracious consideration. Even if they "sat by the flesh-pots" in Egypt, it would not be for very long, the taskmasters would tell them to move; but God says in effect, 'I have a rest, a holy Sabbath for you' (verse 23); 'I want you to come into My sabbath, to sit for a whole day and do nothing but enjoy this bread that I am going to rain down for you from heaven'. All this is in keeping with Aaron's speaking, hearing which the people turned toward the wilderness, and the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud.
E.L.M. That would be another impression of "the goodwill of him that dwelt in the bush"?
J.T. Yes -- how beautiful that word is!
E.L.M. I was wondering whether there is ever a greater impression given than the initial one. In principle, God gives the best at the outset, though we may take a long time to learn what was involved in it.
J.T. In a sense, all that follows is the unfolding and enlarging of that, new features being added. The apostles contemplated the glory of Jesus as the glory of an only
{21}
begotten with the Father, full of grace and truth. The unfolding of that is seen throughout John's gospel.
E.S. Why did the glory appear in this way just at this point? Was it to attract towards the wilderness?
J.T. That is so. They looked in that direction. They *turned* towards the wilderness. It would look as if Aaron's ministry was affecting them. It is the principle of turning; they needed converting. Most of us need more than one conversion, like Peter.
E.S. Does Aaron being introduced suggest priestly support and help?
J.T. I think so, to make the position attractive. God makes the wilderness attractive, especially to young christians, so all is grace in His relations with His people up to chapter 19. After the law is given, having accepted it, they come under judgment on account of their conduct, but not at this stage; God makes the thing attractive; He is bearing them on eagles¬ wings *to Himself*. "The Man Christ Jesus" -- that is the suggestion in Aaron, so that they turn round and look toward the wilderness. God says, I will honour you in turning round, and the glory was there to be seen in the cloud in the wilderness.
E.L.M. Does Moses speak to Aaron in the power of the impression he had received in regard to the people of God?
J.T. Undoubtedly. We should all speak in the power of the impression that we receive, because the minister should always remember that he represents Christ. It is not only what I say, but what I am, so that it is recorded of the Lord that they "wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth", (@Luke 4:22).
W.A.S. Would the manna and the glory go together in Luke? Is that the principle here?
J.T. Yes. Some of us were speaking about the shepherds in @Luke 2; they were keeping watch over their flocks by night, when others were in the towns, the
{22}
census being taken. These were not; they were keeping their flocks by night, and it says the angel of the Lord appeared and the glory shone round about them. They are encircled by another world, we may say. That is what the glory implies; it is another world brought in -- that is the idea in Luke. There is the communication by the angel to them, then a multitude of the heavenly host is there; they are in the presence of a multitude of heavenly beings, who know what is in heaven, and what its mind is, and they are conveying it in what they are saying. These shepherds are honoured in that they are brought into such glory -- into heaven itself in a sense. In our chapter the people turn toward the wilderness and the glory is there to be seen.
J.H.T. It was there in view of the whole congregation.
J.T. I think so. Aaron speaks, and the people turn round to see. It is a spiritual matter. If people turn in this sense they will see something; God will show them something. The idea of ministry is to interest you, but you must turn toward the wilderness; then you will get a view of Christ, of the glory of the Lord.
T.T. God seems to meet the people in their present condition and gives them a sight of the glory?
J.T. Yes. It is entirely on the line of grace up to chapter 19. He had borne them on eagles¬ wings. But what is suggested in this chapter is, Am I ready to listen to Aaron (Christ) speaking? They turn round, and there the glory was; and then we have all this beautiful instruction about the manna and the sabbath; it is one of the most interesting chapters in the Old Testament. We have in it the first mention of the sabbath since @Genesis 2. As young christians turn aside and talk about what they had in the world, God says, Look at what I am going to give you. I am going to rain bread from heaven for you. Here the manna tastes like honey; in Numbers, like oil. It is less tasteful in Numbers, but here it is for the young
{23}
believer. It is like honey -- very different from garlic! The taste of it is not what I have been accustomed to, but I am different; I am converted.
A.G. In the wilderness this food is to build up a spiritual constitution.
J.T. Yes; it enables you to be like Christ here. In @Romans 6 you are to walk in newness of life. For that we need this food.
W.L. It would make us like what it is itself -- small, sweet, and round.
T.T. Quails were not God's thought for the people?
J.T. They were not, but I suppose they would represent the consideration of God here. There is not so much made of them here; He would emphasise His grace at this juncture. Later on He brings in judgment with the quails. God's own thought is the manna; it is "the corn of heaven", "the bread of the mighty". If I do not like it, there is something wrong with me. If heavenly dignitaries live on it, and I do not like it, there must be something wrong with my taste.
W.L. The manna was given to prove them. In what way was it a test?
J.T. With other things in the wilderness, it was to 'humble' and 'prove' them (@Deuteronomy 8) -- that they should not be inflated and independent of God. If one does not care for the manna, he is exposed; his *natural* taste remains in him, like Moab, (@Jeremiah 48:11). People in the world are very concerned that they should be in line with current customs as to the food they eat and the clothes they wear. If God sends food from heaven, food that angels eat, and I do not like it, I am in a fleshly condition. Why is my taste different from that of heavenly beings? I will never get the flesh-pots of Egypt up there! I must acquire the heavenly taste down here.
T.T. It is being given daily. Is it not a test really whether one has a taste for what the Lord is giving now?
{24}
J.T. That is right. "No one having drunk old wine straightway wishes for new, for he says, The old is better", (@Luke 5:39).
W.S.S. Would that bring us to the next scripture, that the acquiring we have spoken of would qualify us to go on to the mount?
J.T. That is the next thing. You have what is little down here -- God in the bush, and the small round thing lying on the dew, to be gathered up daily, showing the wonderful humiliation of Christ. Now the next thing is, What is Christ on high?
W.S.S. I was wondering if you had in mind that if we are not appropriating the manna we are not qualified to enter into that side of things?
J.T. I have -- manna prepares us for heaven. The experience of the disciples before the transfiguration corresponds. "There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom". That challenges me as to whether I have been building up a heavenly constitution. How am I to be up there? The question of eating enters into it. In chapter 24:11 they were taken up, they saw the God of Israel and did eat and drink. What did they eat and drink up there? No flesh-pots up there! So that if they did not have a taste for what is heavenly, they would at best be *pretending* to enjoy the thing. Many people come to a meeting, then they go home and read a novel or a magazine. Your taste is really in the novel, the paper, or the magazine. That is where I am tested. Those who ascended the mountain were ready for what was up there -- spiritual food. Note how "they saw God, and did eat and drink". They were "nobles of the children of Israel". God did not lay His hands on them; they represent spiritual persons. God delights to have us up there, but if we have not a taste for the food that is there, what pleasure has He in us?
E.B.G. Is this on the line of @2 Corinthians 11, learning
{25}
what it was to go *down*, and then in chapter 12 learning what it is to go *up*?
J.T. Yes; very good.
J.L. This would be the connection between @Luke 9 and 10 -- the transfiguration in chapter 9 and the sending out of the seventy in chapter 10.
J.T. Yes, and the Lord declaring that their names are written in heaven. I think in Luke the principle is that heaven comes down in testimony. Heaven comes down in the multitude of the heavenly host; then in chapter 10 I am given to understand that I have a footing in heaven personally, so that if I go there I am not unknown; I am not a stranger.
T.T. What is the thought of the paved work of sapphire?
J.T. It would indicate the kind of circumstances in which God was -- His own sphere. He was going to walk with them in the desert -- on the desert sand, so to speak. There is nothing said of *flooring* in the instructions for the tabernacle, given later.
T.T. Was that in relation to God revealed in Christ?
J.T. I think we are limited in apprehending the circumstances of Christ in heaven, what belongs to Himself in His own right; in grace He has come down to our circumstances. I think they were led up to see so that they might understand His grace in coming down. He was coming down to dwell in the tabernacle. As to the inside material of the tabernacle, its furniture and compartments, it was a figurative representation of things in the heavens; but the floor, where He was going to walk, was the desert sand.
T.T. It was a paved 'work' of sapphire stone. Does that suggest that something had been done?
J.T. Yes; God is seen in relation to made or created things.
W.L. Would the pavement suggest the counsels of God, the way God has put things together?
{26}
J.T. It is "transparent sapphire". What is conveyed is a work of white or transparent material of the most precious quality. It is what is under His feet. We may compare it with what was under the feet of Jesus coming into this world. The woman in @Luke 7 would consider that His feet were not on a pavement of sapphire, but in the thorny way.
A.G. Why is He called the God of Israel?
J.T. The God of the Hebrews is what He is down here with us; up there all is dignity and glory. It is the spiritual realm, so that you have 'nobles' here, the nobles of Israel.
Chapter 33 brings that out -- how God stands by Moses; it is another appearing, God honouring his servant. He comes down and stands with him at the tent door, honouring Moses down here in his faithfulness as taking the tabernacle and pitching it outside the camp. But in chapter 34 He honours him in his desire, in his personal desire to see the glory; it is an ascending line in this appearing. It is "on the top of the mountain". Moses goes up, and God comes down "and stood beside him there", and proclaims before Moses the name of the Lord; He is now to be known typically in the new covenant. We have now a divine impression in Moses, a reflection of the glory; he shines as he comes down. The saints are to reflect what God is. We are changed, by beholding the glory of the Lord, into the same image from glory to glory.
Ques. Is the glory of the Lord the display of the Person?
J.T. It is the display of what God is. The glory of the Lord in 2 Corinthians refers to His mediatorial service in making effective in our hearts the love of God. Chapter 3 is His mediatorial service; in chapter 4 the glory of God is seen in the face of Jesus. It shines there, and it shines into our hearts. That corresponds with this chapter. The glory is reflected in the saints down here.
{27}
J.H.T. Paul was an able minister of the new covenant, to reflect what he saw.
J.T. Exactly. He was the personification of what he had seen, in that sense.
{28}
LEADING OUT AND IN
@Luke 24:50 - 53; @Acts 1:9 - 14
J.T. I was thinking of the *leading* that is furnished to the saints. The Lord led here in Luke; the leading of the Spirit, I believe, is illustrated in the passage in the Acts.
J.W. Is the leading of the Spirit suggested by the mount of Olives in the Acts?
J.T. Yes. The passage read involves our understanding the way into heaven, so that emphasis is laid upon the fact that He was taken up, *they beholding* Him. It is not only the fact that He was taken up, but that they beheld Him. In Luke it is as He blesses them that He is carried up; mention is not made of their seeing Him, but in the Acts note is taken of the fact that they beheld Him. Then again the two men say, "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven". So that the instruction here, I believe, includes our knowledge of the manner of going into heaven and of coming out of heaven. The Lord must lead in everything. They beholding Him would get the impression of how He went in, and then that He would come out as they beheld Him go in.
The principle of divine leading is most essential now -- as at all times, but now because of the extraordinary difficulties that souls have in finding their way, and then as having found it, in being brought to the point of understanding the leading of the Spirit. The leading of the Spirit has to be taken up itself. It is said in @Romans 8:14, "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God". It implies what is more advanced in our experience than the leading of the Lord. There is also angelic leading, which the book of Acts indicates, and which has to be noted; but I thought we might confine
{29}
ourselves to the Lord's leading and where He leads to, and then the Spirit's leading. Many, I think, stop with the Lord's leading. It is well, of course, that they should understand that, but the Spirit's leading takes us *all* the way. In the types, the leading of the Lord is implied in the cloud over the tent of the tabernacle. The leading of the Spirit comes in after @Numbers 21, where the springing well is mentioned, and from that point they go into Canaan. It is the sons of God who go into Canaan, and as led by the Spirit they prove themselves sons of God.
S.B. The leading of the Spirit can only come in after the Lord has been received up, hence it is more advanced.
J.T. Yes. We have the leading of the Lord after we learn in subjection how to follow the Lord. The Corinthians were defective; they were not even proving the leadership of the Lord in their position at Corinth, greatly as they needed that leading; they were occupied with men as leaders. One said he was of Paul, another of Apollos, another of Cephas, and another of Christ -- not Christ in the proper sense, but Christ as connected with a party, which He could never be. We can never connect Christ with a party, but these men were endeavouring to do it for the sake of appearance. It was on partisan lines; it was not the leading of the Lord at all. Hence @1 Corinthians 1 shows how to get rid of the natural man who has become distinguished and influential among christians and seeks to be a leader; the first chapter shows how the saints should get rid of him. Chapter 2 makes room for the Spirit, so that the Spirit has His place amongst us.
T.T. Is there a definite end reached in Luke's gospel?
J.T. That is what I thought we might note. He led them to a *point*. There is no definite point reached in the Spirit's leading, because He leads to eternity, so to speak. He leads us into the land, and we cannot limit that; but the Lord leads us to a point, to the place where love is known to reside. There is that on earth at the present time, a place where love is resident, and known to be
{30}
resident. Love is a quality or thing that the Lord speaks of: "Have love amongst yourselves", (@John 13:35). He leads to where love is; Bethany represents this.
Ques. What corresponds with Bethany today?
J.T. The features of Bethany appear in the assembly. The exercise which leads to Bethany in John's gospel is in chapter 9, where the man has his eyes opened, and his *neighbours* inquire as to it and he is able to give an account. It has a *local* bearing. In his confession of Christ he is outside the camp; he is cast out, and the Lord finds him and reveals Himself to him as the Son of God, and he worships Him. That is the beginning of what terminates in Bethany, a local setting where there are those who, as loved of Christ, love Christ and know what to do.
T.T. Is it like the two last songs of degrees -- we are led to a certain point?
J.T. Very much like that. The songs of degrees begin in @Psalm 120 after @Psalm 119, meaning that I am thoroughly adjusted as to the word of God, the law of God, the testimony of God, the precepts of God; all these are cherished in a believer's heart, and that is the man that goes up. Unity is reached in @Psalm 133; that state among the saints is reached and so the blessing is commanded -- "*there* the Lord commanded the blessing".
J.L. Would you say, in connection with the Lord's leading, that Luke would lead you out of wrong circumstances, and John would lead you in to what is of God?
J.T. That is right. Luke leads us out; he leads us outside the camp -- not simply negatively, but in a positive way. That is what young christians ought to see; there is a positive thing outside, and that is what Bethany represents. It is a place where love resides; it is known to be there.
W.S.S. Would the point reached in @Acts 1, where these various ones are named, represent the basis of the leading of the Spirit?
{31}
J.T. Yes, I think so. The Spirit leads upward, but you begin with Bethany, I think. The Holy Spirit operates where love is; here there is room, so to speak, and there you begin to see the movements of the sons. It is one thing to see the movements of the subjects of the Lord, but the movements of sons are in relation to heaven and indicative of what heaven is.
W.S.S. Do these two characters of leading run concurrently?
J.T. Yes, they do; hence while we are down here we are always under the Lord's direction, so that the Spirit s leading enters more into assembly relations.
W.S.S. I was thinking in that connection of the overcomer, with whom the hearing of the voice of the Spirit is so closely connected in Revelation.
R.R. It says in @Matthew 21:17, "He went forth out of the city to Bethany, and there he passed the night". That would be shortly before leading them out to Bethany.
J.T. It was a retreat that He had, because it was a place of love; it was a place where He was honoured. He knew it well. The Lord knows the spot where love is. If any young christian is being led by the Lord, He is leading him there. He has Bethany here today, and He has been there Himself. The Lord ever comes to where love resides.
Rem. It says, "Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus", (@John 11:5) and they returned it; there was a sphere where love was, as thus shown.
J.T. No one knew it better than the Lord. When He went there at first, Bethany was a chilly place. Martha did well in inviting Him into her house, but she criticised Him afterwards. Being invited into a house is not everything; sometimes you would rather go elsewhere. The invitation is not all; what is found in the house indicates the state of the host or hostess. @Luke 7 shows that while Simon invited the Lord he had no love for Him.
S.B. The great testimony is rendered to love.
{32}
J.T. Martha received Him into her house. It was evidently her house, and she did well in receiving Him, but ill in her treatment of Him afterwards. The after-treatment indicated the state she was in.
T.T. It would seem that what we have at the end of Luke is preparing us for the leading of the Spirit. They were to remain in the city until they were endued with power from on high. This would prepare for that?
J.T. Yes, they went back into the city from that point. It is well to note the beginnings of Bethany, because it describes the beginnings of most of our meetings; the initial history of most of the meetings may be described in that way. The Lord is owned and received, but He does not afterwards obtain the attention and the respect that is due. Martha complains to Him: "Carest thou not ..". (@Luke 10:40). She complained about her sister, but about Him really, that He was involved in what she considered the inertness of her sister, and therefore she created a very unhappy state of things. So that all that subsequently came about in Bethany was His own doing. He knew their history well; He laid the foundation of love in that place; and Mary was the link, for she sat at His feet hearing His word. The Lord is obliged to defend one disciple against the attacks of another. That is how things work out in many gatherings; He does it, and never fails to do it, so that no one needs to defend himself against personal attacks. Where there is dissension, as at Corinth, there is a chilliness in the place, and the Lord, instead of finding a congenial spot, has to be occupied with putting things right. That is what marked the beginning of Bethany, but He did put things right in a most effective way, so that His last visit there was evidently delightful to Him. He came at a definite time -- six days before the Passover -- because in John He is never governed by religious custom. He respects certain Jewish customs according to the other evangelists, but not in John; here He takes His own time; He is the Maker of time, He that
{33}
set the sun in the heavens. He is not governed in John by anything that is here. He is making His own time, and we have to be prepared for that. He comes six days before the Passover. But they were ready evidently; He did not take them by surprise. They knew the Lord; they knew what to do as He came to them. They knew well that He would not come as a Pharisee would come; He would come in His *own* way; they had things ready; "there therefore they made him a supper". It will he noticed that 'therefore' is used several times in the first few verses of @John 12; it is to emphasise that they were acting on the principle of *sequence*.
J.E. Under the leading of the Lord in that way, do we get to know as well as the Lord that love is resident there?
J.T. Yes, we do. "Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead. There therefore they made him a supper". That is, He being there, it was no question of their invitation, it is a question of what the Lord does. In John He is acting of Himself.
J.W. You would read what happens here in the light of John?
J.T. Yes; it has allusion to what was in Bethany. John gives you more than anyone as to what was at Bethany, because he would bring out from the facts relative to Bethany what a locality should be. He is concerned about what a locality should be for Christ, that is, it is the residence of love, and the Lord can come at His own time -- not when we expect Him, but at His own time; if love exists He can always freely come.
J.W. What is the force then of His leading as far as to Bethany in @Luke 24?
J.T. He knew exactly what was there; He knew the history of Bethany. No one else knew as He did, and He led them there in view of ascension. Lazarus was there.
{34}
In @John 12 He comes in relation to Lazarus, but here *all* that marked Bethany would be in view.
T.T. This was really a place of His own making. The Lord has to prepare a place really; He has to adjust us.
J.T. Yes, it is His own making. He found a chilly place there at first, but He did not leave it like that. It was a place of love according to John's gospel; that is to say, from John's point of view, local conditions are so affected by love through the Lord's teaching and influence that He can come at His own time.
W.S.F. Do you get the family circle in Bethany, and the Supper as following on?
J.T. The point at Bethany is not the Lord's supper; they provide Him a supper. It is what *they* make for Him.
Ques. How does that apply at the present day? How do we provide for the Lord?
J.T. What He provides for us is His supper; that is, on the first day of the week. It is connected with a day and an hour in scripture; but when the Lord came to Bethany, it was at no set time. In John, set times are set aside, because love is not governed by set times. Heaven is not regulated by set times.
-- R. In the Song of Songs the bride found herself unprepared. We might not be ready for the visit of the Lord.
J.T. Yes. If I go to a house to which I am not invited, I may be received in, but perhaps I am made to feel that I am not there by invitation; or even if I have been invited, I may feel that I have come too soon. John is on the line of liberty, the liberty of love, that if the Lord comes He finds things ready -- and there is no intimation, as far as scripture goes, that He was coming to Bethany. He had waited two days in chapter 11; it was necessary that He should wait before He came to raise Lazarus; but in chapter 12 there is no intimation that He was coming.
J.E. When He came, suitable conditions were there.
J.T. That is the point. If love resides in a place, the
{35}
Lord can come any time and find something for Himself.
Ques. Had you something further to suggest in His lifting up His hands and blessing them?
J.T. Well, that is where the blessing takes place. It is not only that He blesses them, but He blesses them *there*.
T.T. This would raise a very serious exercise in regard to our local conditions.
J.T. That is what I had in mind.
I.R. Had you in mind that the Lord should be free to come in on any occasion we come together, whatever may be the character of the occasion?
J.T. Yes, and even if we are not together. The point in @John 12 is not that He came to a company, but He came to the *place*; we are to notice that. The Lord may come to this place any time. The place may have two, three, or a dozen companies; all would be in view in His coming. If He comes to a place, what does He find in it? Suppose there are two or three companies as in Birkenhead: it is a question what conditions exist. Are the relations right between the companies? The *place* involves all that; or has He to come to set things right? If He has to come to set things right, they cannot make Him a supper; they are not free for that on account of their state.
A.F.G. Would you say this readiness should be normal -- readiness for the Lord?
J.T. Yes; love makes you ready. As has been remarked, the bride in Canticles was not ready when her Beloved came; she does not at first open the door.
Ques. Is there any reason why it is only in John you get the mention of Lazarus?
J.T. Yes, a very good reason. He is a risen man. He does not speak, but he is a testimony to Christ nevertheless. That is an element that you would expect in John, because a living man influences people without *saying* anything; his very breathing, the way he sits down, the
{36}
way he stands up, the way he moves about, everything in that man is effective; there is testimony in it.
Rem. It would seem that it was really the result of the operations of God in Lazarus that the conditions were formed at Bethany.
J.T. Yes; there was not a man like him in the whole world, and yet he is never *said* to have spoken.
R.R. Does he in that way become the special attack of the enemy -- they sought to kill Lazarus?
J.T. Yes, that shows what a testimony he was. And then there is what he was to the Lord. "Jesus ... came to Bethany where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead".
T.T. Do you think the Lord sometimes puts one or two brothers or sisters through discipline to help the whole gathering to this end?
J.T. I am sure He does. That is how gatherings are helped by the principle of leadership. Chapter 11 is that one man dies for the people; that is the principle, so that this condition existed through Lazarus¬ death.
W.S.F. Would you say a word as to how the principle of Lazarus would apply today?
J.T. It refers to the power of life. It may be in a brother or in a sister; it is an element in the gathering. It may be very widespread or it may be only one in the gathering; but whether it be one or many, it is an element. Sisters do not speak in the meetings -- they are obliged to keep silent; but that does not mean that they have not an influence, but the very opposite. They have a profound influence if they are spiritual; God provides for us in this way.
W.S.S. All this has to do with the Lord's leading?
J.T. Yes. The Lord, knowing these conditions at Bethany, led His disciples to that spot. That is a pattern. He led them to that spot, and that is what He has been doing ever since -- leading His people to where love is known to be. A risen man represents spiritual nobility,
{37}
the nobility of the sons. "Lazarus was *one* of those" -- he is a type.
Ques. Did you say nobility? We sometimes sing, 'Poor and feeble though we be'.
J.T. That will not do for heaven or for the assembly. It is quite right to feel that personally, but "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", (@Romans 8:14). Those who went up to the mount with Moses (@Exodus 24) are called "nobles". That, I think, is what Lazarus represents.
T.T. Do you think that these conditions which are pleasing to the Lord would be supplied by one or two, if one or two were in the good of these things?
J.T. Yes, they could; but the idea is that the place is characterised by love; that is the idea of the local assembly, and that is what Bethany was. You have the kind of people that sat at table, the service in Martha, but Mary is the one the Holy Spirit had specially in mind, because it is mentioned that "it was the Mary who anointed the Lord", and so you have the three features -- dignity, service, and worship -- in the company at Bethany.
J.I. Do you think we must be risen with Christ to appreciate these Bethany conditions?
J.T. Yes; it is Colossians. The Lord knew the history of the place, and hence He led them out *as far* as Bethany; and then He lifted up His hands and blessed them. He might have blessed them in Jerusalem, but He blessed them in *that* place.
J.E. Is the blessing connected with the Spirit in that way?
J.T. The fulness of it would mean the gift of the Spirit. But the point here is that the blessing is given in that place, and that then, as He is blessing them, He is carried up into heaven. You are impressed with what heaven thinks of Christ, because after all heaven must have the last word; it has the best judgment, and so what heaven thinks of Christ comes into view.
{38}
Ques. Does not Bethany form a link with heaven in that way?
J.T. Yes; heaven now comes into view. We are not told what agency is employed to do that, but the fact is stated that He "was carried up into heaven"; so that you are impressed with what is done. It is part of the education of the assembly that it should be a reflection of what is in heaven, and you begin by seeing what heaven thinks of Christ.
J.L. I was thinking that perhaps the conditions of John's gospel would come in after the conditions of Luke's gospel, that is, that in Luke the Lord would lead *out* of certain circumstances, but in John He would lead by the Spirit *into* other circumstances?
J.T. Yes, in John we reach association with Christ in heavenly relationships.
A.G. What is in your mind as regards the leading of the Spirit?
J.T. The leading of the Spirit has reference to "the land", as I said, in the types. It opens out in @Romans 8:14, "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God". The Spirit of God is now in your movements. It is not simply that I am alive, but I am moving in relationship with God. A son moves in the sense of his relationship with God, and in relation to God as his Father, so that the evidence of the Spirit in a believer is that he cries, Abba, Father. That is a son. My voice, my words, indicate that I have the Spirit of God. I speak to the Father; I speak to God as *Father*.
T.T. What is the thought of the Spirit coming at Jerusalem and not at Bethany? They returned to Jerusalem, and it was there that the Spirit was given.
J.T. In Acts the disciples returned from the mount of Olives -- the suggestion is that they were already moving in a spiritual way; they go, not to the temple, as in the end of Luke, but to the *upper room*. They return to the city, but go to the upper room, which is, I think, an indication
{39}
that they were, so to speak, led by the Spirit, because in that upper room you have, in principle, the assembly. The idea of the upper room is moral elevation, and the Holy Spirit leads in that direction. They did not go to the temple; they went to the upper room. They knew what to do instinctively, and then the mention of the people that are there has its own meaning. The Holy Spirit leads us in connection with persons who have a known reputation as loving Christ. Bethany was a place of love, known to be that; now heaven is a question of persons; the assembly is a question of persons -- persons of spiritual nobility.
J.I. Would the upper room answer to Bethany?
J.T. It goes beyond Bethany; it goes more into Ephesians, the great spiritual area opened up for us and into which the Spirit leads us.
J.I. Would you say that they take Bethany impressions with them?
J.T. Yes, they do; Bethany and Olivet are closely connected geographically and spiritually.
J.I. Why is Bethany omitted in Acts?
J.T. According to Luke, they went into the city from Bethany and were daily in the temple; they were governed there by *remnant* instincts, and they were a contribution to the nation in grace. It was a wonderful thing that the true Aaronic priesthood was there in those men, and available to Israel if they were ready to receive them; but Acts has the assembly in view, hence Bethany is not mentioned, but the mount of Olives is, because that is the Spirit, and that is what the assembly needs. The recognition of the Spirit takes one away altogether from Jerusalem and the temple, from the Jewish system, to the upper room. It leads away from all accredited religion on earth into an inconspicuous place, but into a place of moral elevation, where heaven is represented.
A.G. Would the result of the leading of the Spirit be that we learn the full liberty of sonship?
{40}
J.T. Yes, and as sons we are outside of the realm of accredited religion on earth.
J.W. They were beholding Him, and as they were gazing into heaven He is spoken of by the "two men" as "this same Jesus".
J.T. Yes; stress is laid on what they *saw*; it is educative, so that we may understand from this passage how He went up. His being carried up into heaven is a tribute to His person; in this passage it is how He went up -- "the manner" of it.
J.W. That would secure personality in them.
J.T. It would, and show them the way into heaven. If I am to be led by the Holy Spirit I must have some idea of the way into heaven. I am not only living, like Lazarus, but I am heavenly; I know the way in, I have seen Him going in, and He is coming out just in that way, showing that it is heaven's way.
A.G. What is the manner?
J.T. It is a spiritual manner. If I could have conversed with those disciples, they would have told me what they saw. Christianity is largely the result of *impressions*, and the impressions that were conveyed by Christ when here, and conveyed as He went up, are retained. The Holy Spirit retains them, so that christianity is a heavenly thing, impregnated with these impressions. If I saw the Lord go up I would be impressed, and I would pass on the impression. The assembly becomes enriched by these impressions. You have got something if you have an impression; it is something that is there. You may not perhaps be able to put it into words, but the impression itself is wealth. We have here the secret of going into heaven. "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven". That impression remains here; it is part of the wealth of the assembly.
Ques. Is there any special thought in "this same Jesus"?
{41}
J.T. There is not another, and there will be no change in Him. It makes everything so real to you. The Lord is acting Himself. Luke makes much of that -- "I myself".
Rem. I was thinking of Paul speaking of the rapture; he says "the Lord Himself", (@1 Thessalonians 4:16).
J.T. What a thing it is to have impressions of Christ! What the three disciples got on the mount of transfiguration was for the church. Peter says, "Having been eyewitnesses of *his* majesty" (2 Peter 1:16), he never lost that impression. It was for the church, and so every spiritual impression one receives is for the wealth of the church.
S.B. We need not that any man teach us, we are taught by the Spirit. It is exceedingly precious that we are taught by "the unction", (@1 John 2:27).
J.T. When they came into the upper room, they came into a gathering of people of spiritual history; these all had impressions of Christ.
Ques. Is that why the names are given?
J.T. Yes. Take Mary herself, "the mother of Jesus"; that is how she is mentioned here; she had impressions of Jesus in *that* relation. Who could speak of Jesus like Mary? She could speak of Jesus as a Babe, and as in His youth -- before He came out in public ministry. You can see the wealth that lay in that woman as she sat in that upper room. "His brethren" were present also. Latent wealth was there, and when the Holy Spirit came it was distributed. Paul would converse with Peter as to Peter's impressions; how much Peter could tell him! "I remained with him fifteen days", (@Galatians 1:18). He went up to Jerusalem specially to see Peter; he knew that Peter had impressions of Jesus that no one else had. These impressions are all carried forward in the assembly. Acts is a book of impressions that were to be distributed and retained here in the church as wealth.
Ques. Is the beholding the same as comprehending with all saints what is the breadth and length and height?
{42}
J.T. Just so; you cannot take it all in, but you get a view of the thing, and an impression.
E.R. Did the queen of Sheba get an impression when she saw the ascent of Solomon?
J.T. Yes; she would never forget what she thus saw.
Ques. This acted upon in a city would make room for the Holy Spirit in a wonderful way?
J.T. Yes, it would. The leading of the Spirit is of the sons. The Sons have relation to the Father; brethren have relation to Christ. That is what should characterise us when we are properly in assembly; it is the place of sons, and how the sons move; they are led by the Spirit. It is a question of the promptings of the Spirit in us, and our movements are indicative of that.
A.G. In addition to the personalities you mention, it also states "and the women". Why does it specially mention the women?
J.T. I think they would be the reserve in spirituality. I do not believe you could properly have an assembly in the Corinthian sense without women; the divine thought is that women should be there. @Luke 8 brings in the composition of the assembly; that is, the man who had the demons is sitting and clothed and in his right mind; that is the intelligence that belongs to the assembly. And then the woman who was healed by the Lord; she has to own everything outwardly; there is transparency. Spirituality in the assembly is marked by transparency. The Lord makes her tell everything openly. She would have secreted the thing, but the assembly is not to be marked by secrets as regards those who compose it. The mystery is as regards the world, but within everything is to be open and transparent, so that she has to tell out "all the truth". Then the girl of twelve, Jairus's daughter, represents the freshness of life -- the new man. We have these three essential features of the assembly -- intelligence and spiritual power; transparency; and fresh young life.
{43}
Ques. Would you say that it is the privilege of every member of the company to receive impressions of the Lord?
J.T. It is, and I think that is the reason why 1 Corinthians brings in so many appearings of Christ, because that is where they were defective at Corinth; they were not rich subjectively. They were rich in gift and knowledge and all that, but they were not rich subjectively; they were not furnished with a wealth of impressions of Christ. In chapter 15 the apostle brings in that the Lord appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve, and then to above five hundred brethren as the result of that wonderful occasion when the Lord was seen of them at one time! Paul says, "of whom the most remain until now, but some also have fallen asleep", (verse 6). I gather from that that he knew where they were. Paul also had his own appearings and consequent impressions. A glorified Christ had appeared to him. Besides, he had been in the third heaven.
Ques. Would you say that whatever impressions of Christ there are in a locality, unless there are the Bethany conditions they cannot be set forth?
J.T. No; you have perhaps to keep them to yourself. The impressions are there. Paul specially represents the ability to keep an impression. What he saw "fourteen years" (@2 Corinthians 12:2) before he had apparently never spoken of -- as far as we know from scripture, but it was there in his soul, and we may depend upon it that Paul's ministry during those fourteen years was affected by that impression.
W.S.S. All that he had to say at Corinth in regard to assembly order had the spiritual side of things in view, and their entering into it.
J.T. Yes; and his heart was full, but he could not go beyond Christ and Him crucified, for they could not take in "the hidden wisdom", (@1 Corinthians 2:7).
I.R. If every hard question was answered in His presence, we should be able to enjoy Bethany conditions?
J.T. The answering of enigmas makes room for impressions; thus the queen of Sheba was affected by what she saw.
{44}
R.E. And the impressions are what are of value to the assembly.
J.T. Yes. Each one of those you get in @Acts 1 is relative one to the other; they are separate individuals, but they are put together, fitted in. What a delightful thing it would have been to go there and have a little talk with Peter! How much he could tell you! And then each of the apostles had his own distinctive impression of Christ. Then women are there, and the Lord's mother, and His brethren, as we said. The brethren of the Lord could tell you things even that Mary could not.
W.S.S. It would correspond in the spirit of it to @Psalm 133 -- "there the Lord commanded the blessing".
T.T. They were 'staying' there. Would that suggest that this is the proper place for impressions?
J.T. It means that they were not transitory. It is the idea of a local company; they stayed in the place. This thought of the Spirit's leading takes the sons outside the realm of accredited religion and what is accepted in this world. The sons of God are outside of all that, outside in obscurity.
Ques. In the first scripture they continued in the temple, and in Acts they were in the upper room, continuing with one accord in prayer and supplication with the women and Mary and His brethren?
J.T. Yes, in the upper room. The passage in the gospel presents *grace*, what God would do for *Israel*, "beginning at Jerusalem". The preaching has to begin there; it is God's contribution to the city and the temple, but Israel was not ready for it. But Acts has the assembly in view, as I said.
Ques. Why is it that at the end of chapter 2 they are continuing in the temple again?
J.T. That comes back to what we have in Luke; God is graciously waiting on Israel, placing in Jerusalem this wonderful testimony, the presence of the Spirit in manifest power.
{45}
CONDITIONS FOR A DIVINE VISITATION
@Mark 6:48, @Genesis 17:22 - 27; @Genesis 18:1 - 5,33
These scriptures treat of divine movement having a certain end in view, and I refer to them not exactly because of that end, or indeed because they speak of divine movement in itself, but rather of the possibility alluded to in the first passage, of the Lord passing us by. That is a touch in Mark's record of this occurrence. It is also recorded by others, but he alone mentions that the Lord in walking on the water "would have passed by them". No doubt in the history of the assembly, or of the testimony on earth, there has been much of this passing by. We have but an indication here of all that has now become history. It is therefore a warning to us, while incidentally indicating that the Lord is not at all stopped because of the necessity of passing any of us by: He goes on. It comes out very prominently in the history of the gospels, that He goes on -- no circumstance can hinder Him. "*He* passing through the midst of them", we are told in one case, "went his way", (@Luke 4:30). So that He goes on, but He takes with Him certain according to His choice. This evangelist makes much of the selection He made; but the selection is not all, nor is the training all, for prior to this He had had them on the mountain "that they might be with him, and that he might send them to preach", (@Mark 3:14). There was much instruction by way of word and example. They had themselves proved their efficiency as ministers, and yet He would have passed them by; not that He in result intended to do so, for the sequel shows that they were not to be passed by. The Lord will not pass by any of us without exercising every possible means of help and recovery, for no one is as gracious as He. The fact
{46}
that He did not pass them by involves other things, but that He would have done so is the warning.
The passage goes on to tell us that their hearts were hardened (verse 52). They were toiling in rowing, but toiling is not everything. I might journey from here to the Antipodes and toil for months or years, but it would not be everything; it might not be anything; it might not be sufficient to attract the Lord's attention. So here, they were toiling in rowing, and the wind was contrary to them. But then we are told that "their heart was hardened", in spite of the fact that they were working hard. They had not seen the point in the feeding of the five thousand; they had not taken into their souls the import of that marvellous service of Christ. They had some five loaves and a few fishes, but He had even to put it to them to go and see what they had; "Go and see", He says, as if they did not know. Well, this is how matters stood, and He would have passed them by. Was it for nothing? Not at all. The most honoured of servants were in that boat, the most effective ones; how much we owe them who can say? But He would have passed them by.
What a lesson for them! Mark understood what the Lord meant by this incident when he wrote this account; he understood how servants, or saints, may be in such a state, notwithstanding that they are, so to speak, toiling in rowing, that they may be passed by -- for the Lord knows what is going on *underneath*. In the book of Judges it is said that God raised up judges. It is a book of decline. The underlying state of the people is disclosed in the last few chapters. The interventions of God are in the early chapters. It says when God raised up a judge He was with the judge, but when the judge was removed the people sinned, and sinned "more than their fathers" (@Judges 2:19), so that it was continual decline. After each judge died, things became worse than ever; it is very solemn. So that the Lord is not looking on the outward thing, but at the inner state of things, at what is
{47}
going on underneath. There may be full meetings and fresh ministry, but that is not all; the Lord is looking at what is below. So here, He knew that in that boatful of men there was a hardened state; that they had not been affected by the most marvellous expression of grace, for look at what had happened. As the Lord takes up a few loaves and fishes, He lifts His eyes to heaven, blesses them, hands them to His disciples to give to the five thousand people, and they are filled. We never had anything like that! I am not despising what God is doing today; but though the most marvellous thing had happened; yet their hearts were hardened, when they should have been most softened and impressionable. With hardened hearts they were toiling in rowing and the wind was contrary to them, and He would have passed them by.
Now, in brief, I want to show the contrast to this. I do not go into the detail of the chapter; I wish to show the contrast, from these other scriptures, in Abraham. What you observe in the first passage in @Genesis 17 is that God went *up* from Abraham. We talk much about going to heaven, and we ought to, for we are going there, but one wonders how much conception we have of going up. The point made in @Acts 1 is that they beheld the Lord as He went up. That is not mentioned for nothing. Attention is called to what they beheld. So it reads, "they beholding him". Then the two men say to them, "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven", (@Acts 1:11). Did you ever stop to picture in your mind, spiritually, what that movement was? It is a sort of pattern of what is going to happen -- the idea of going up. "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven"; not "as he went up", but '*as ye have seen him* go up', that is the point which is to be impressed upon us. So here you see God went up from Abraham. Think of the importance
{48}
of Abraham to heaven as it looked on at that transaction! What a man Abraham was in the eyes of the heavenly companies!
But what I want to point out is that God "left off talking to him". When you break off a conversation, it does not necessarily mean that you have finished, but often that you intend to resume it, and that is how the thing is put here. God had commanded Abraham that he and his house should be circumcised, which implies that the flesh profits nothing; and God made a covenant with him on these lines, and He left off talking to him. But that is not the end of the matter; there is something to follow. Now what is Abraham to do? What has he in his mind? Jehovah went up, as if He were to say to Abraham, 'I am leaving you to yourself; I am going up and you are to be here'. Now that is the position today. Christ is in heaven; He has been seen going into heaven and He is coming back, and the interval in which we are is a marvellous period of time, in which the church is called out. How called out? On the principle of obedience, for what is the church if it cannot be faithful in the absence of Christ? Of the virtuous woman in @Proverbs 31:11 it is said, "The heart of her husband confideth in her". It is therefore a question of obedience and trustworthiness, and so those who heard the two men speak in @Acts 1, who saw Him go up, went back into the city; they went to the upper room. That shows that they are in accord in their walk here with what they had seen. It would convey to us that there is not to be any outward religious show, for it is a faith period. He went up into heaven, but He was received in a cloud out of their sight. "A cloud received him out of their sight", and so it is now a question of faith. It is a time of obscurity, and not of Babylonish show. The whole fabric of modern christendom is show; it has been Babylonish from the first century. But faith is the principle today, and that involves that one is out of sight of men as to one's glory,
{49}
as to one's place with God. Of course there is testimony, but the principle of faith is the negation of outward show, so they went to the upper room.
And then throughout the Acts one great feature is *obedience*. God gives the Spirit to those who obey Christ. Let no one talk about having part in the church apart from obedience. No one has the Holy Spirit apart from obedience; "if ye love me, keep my commandments", the Lord says, (@John 14:15). The Spirit is given on the principle of obedience, for God does not offer His gift to unappreciative people. A principle underlying the gift is that you appreciate it, and this marks the church. Thus here, God has gone up, and Abraham is left, and what does he do? He circumcises to the *fullest* extent, according to the commandment of God, in complete disregard of age: Ishmael was thirteen years old, and Abraham ninety-nine. The thing has to be applied without modification. God loves obedience. You can understand, therefore, why He "left off". He would give His servant an opportunity of proving his love, and he proved it fully, and hence the detail of circumcision here, which you can scarcely find anywhere else on this subject.
Well, now he is sitting at the tent door by the oaks of Mamre, in the heat of the day. He is not governed by the flesh; if he were, he would not be in the tent door when it was hot, he would be seeking repose in a "cool" place, like Eglon, king of Moab; but he is alert, he is, so to speak, walking "not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", for that is the spiritual counterpart of circumcision. Circumcision is the negation of the flesh, and the Holy Spirit is power in the believer to do the will of God. Abraham is found alert, sitting in the heat of the day at the tent door, and three men stood by him. It is not the Lord now by Himself; He has got company; it is heaven, as I might say, brought down within Abraham's range; a most touching scene; three men, and they are "standing near him". They are not passing him by; they are
{50}
standing there. It is beautiful, as God's recognition of the believer's obedience to His word, our obedience when He is not looking at us, so to speak. He has gone up, and we are here. The test is, what am I doing when I am alone, or not under surveillance; what I do, not only publicly, but secretly? God greatly values obedience in such circumstances. He was pleased as He saw Abraham carrying out His commandment to the letter. The same day he was circumcised, Ishmael was circumcised, and all in his house, from the eldest to the youngest. What a day for heaven! We have to look at things from God's point of view as to secret obedience, what I do as the outcome of love to the Lord. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him", (@John 14:21). That is the point here, in these three men standing there. Now you can understand that the previous conversation was only broken off. It was to be resumed in the most favourable circumstances for Abraham. There are no commandments now. Abraham takes all the initiative, and God allows him to do so. He is not passing him by. Abraham says, in effect, 'You are passing on, but you have not passed me by; after you are refreshed you will pass on'. That was the fact; God was going on, but He stopped on the way and stood near to Abraham. I do not know how long it took Abraham to get the kid and kill it and prepare it and the thick milk, but it must have been a considerable time, and God stood there all that time; the three men stood there under the tree. It is most affecting. It is written to show us, beloved brethren, that divine love recognises in us a response in the way of obedience. Morally, I suppose, the greatest thing in man is obedience; it is the evidence of love in a contrary scene.
Well now, this is, as we can see, a wonderful time; it was not simply that the three men came and took a
{51}
repast and were refreshed, but God is pleased with what happened. And now He says, "Where is Sarah thy wife?" as if that were an outcome of the visit; ostensibly it was not part of the programme, for God was on another errand altogether; He was going down to Sodom, for He says He had come down to see what was going on in that place -- but He did not pass Abraham. Thus God treats as 'friends' those who, as loving Him, keep His commandments. It looks as if it were incidentally, but He would not pass by Abraham. He says, 'You have passed on to your servant; I want to send you forward refreshed'. It is wonderful that God accepts from His people *such* a service. As they were going on, Abraham conducted them -- it says "them" -- that is, all three of them. God allows Himself to be conducted on His way by the obedient man here: it is wonderful. Now they say, "Where is Sarah thy wife?" Jehovah has something of importance to say about Sarah: Isaac is to come; this all comes out. We speak about the meetings and of having blessed times -- note this example, for it is as if all this comes out impromptu. He was going somewhere else, but all this comes out. He inquires, "Where is Sarah thy wife?" Well, she is there, but she makes a poor show; nevertheless the purpose of God towards her must come out at this time. It had already been told to Abraham, but now it is emphasised at this meeting. The outcome of the occasion is that Isaac is announced, but Sarah laughs. She denies it, but God says, "but thou didst laugh"; He corrected her.
But this is not all; it says, "Abraham remained yet standing before Jehovah". The men went on to Sodom, but Abraham stood yet before Jehovah, and the two men went on, and a further thing came out, for the Lord said, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" as if the heart of the blessed God is drawn out towards us as we answer to His mind. This is simply a suggestion of what meetings may be, of what the assembly may be as
{52}
conditions warrant it, of what God is, what Christ is to it. We should have some idea, from Jesus, what God is like -- His manner, His feelings, His affections -- what He can be amongst us. So here He says, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" Now we are going to have a disclosure, a word, as we speak of it. Some people rather disparage a word in the assembly. I have known places where they did not even take their Bibles to the assembly meetings. It is God's assembly, and He speaks in it. "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" God was going to destroy Sodom. He had told Abraham about Isaac coming -- the incoming of Christ typically. The world is to be replaced by Christ; the world has to go in order to make room for Christ in the assembly. So Christ is announced typically, and the world has to go. Abraham will command his children and his household after him; he is not only obedient himself, he will be concerned that his children are obedient; as he passes away he wants his place occupied by those who are obedient. How important is this principle, as the older brethren go, and for those of us who have children, that we are to command our children and our houses after us! Sodom is to be destroyed, but Abraham has the wonderful privilege of knowing what God was going to do, and of intercession for the doomed city. What a man he was! He *drew near* to Jehovah: that is the idea; he is a priest. "Let us draw near" -- that is the point in @Hebrews 10. It is right to talk about the holiest, but the point is to draw near to God; that is what Abraham did, he drew near to God, and God heard him, and says, "I will spare". Abraham begins with the possibility of fifty righteous in Sodom, and went to ten; but God would spare the city "for ten's sake". God thus owned him as a priest. You see, beloved, how things are in the assembly and how simple we should be. The more spiritual we are, the freer and easier we are in the assembly; there is no legality, but no fleshly licence; there is the freedom which
{53}
the Spirit gives, so that what appears here is seen. Abraham intercedes, and then it says that God left Abraham. He does not go *up* this time; verse 33 says, "And Jehovah went away when he had ended speaking to Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place". Now you see He waits until the conversation is *finished*. He did not leave off this time; that is to say, it gives what you might call the *end* of the meeting. He had finished talking with Abraham, and He did not finish until Abraham finished. That is the mutuality of things; it is the very essence of simplicity here. Abraham is speaking with God as a friend, for he is called God's friend, and *we* are friends. The Lord says, "I call you not servants ... but I have called you friends" (@John 15:15), and so God listens to all he has to say, and He went on His way when He had finished. The destruction of Sodom was the end of that way; He had come for that. We may be thankful for the thought of the judgment of this world, for the Lord says, "Now is the judgment of this world", (@John 12:31). The world stands athwart the purpose of God, but God is on His way to deal with it effectively. The smoke went up as the smoke of a furnace, but He remembered Abraham. Abraham went to the very spot where God had spoken to him, and he saw the city in flames. God remembered Abraham, and the intercession of Abraham saved Lot, but the city was destroyed. And so it is that God is on His way, and presently He will cease talking with us; not that I would be fanciful at all, but what I am saying is involved in the truth of the assembly. The time is coming when He will cease talking with us on earth, when the assembly will be taken up, and the world will be destroyed. Its doom is fixed. The godly truly will be delivered out of it, as the godly Jew will be by and by, when the speaking has ceased, but thank God the speaking has not yet ceased.
I have sought, beloved brethren, to dwell on these scriptures so that there may be that underlying state with
{54}
us in our localities, which God can see and which delights His eye, and which He honours by standing near us on the occasions which He selects, when He communicates with us and gives us the opportunity of ministering to Him. Thus He does not pass by us. It is very beautiful to see the mutuality here, the mutuality of the *three men* coming to Abraham, and the mutuality in which they speak to him and open the way for him to serve them, and then the further communications and revelations from God to the patriarch as to a friend.
{55}
YOUTHFUL MATURITY
@1 John 2:14 - 17; @Exodus 33:4, @1 Samuel 25:1 - 9, 14 - 17
In reading these scriptures I had the thought of youthfulness, or more correctly, of youthful maturity, in the continuance of the service of God. God intends to continue. He has gotten the victory in Christ over all that which is opposed, and He gives it to His workmen so that the work should go on -- that we should not do as little as is necessary, but *all* that is necessary, and more -- that, as said in @1 Corinthians 15:58, we should he "abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord".
Now God moves on on these lines, and for this the principle of youthful maturity is stressed throughout the scriptures. He intends to go on, as I said, and I believe John's ministry is that which at the end underlies continuance. The Lord said of him in a somewhat mysterious way, "If I will that he abide until I come". Peter had said, "Lord, and what of this man?" (@John 21:21,22) The Lord's answer implied that there was to be continuance -- continuance in the freshness of life. One would rather continue in freshness than be removed. The presence here of one christian such as John is a testimony to the mind of God in so far that He would have what is living.
And so, in this epistle, John emphasises substance -- substance in the way of life. Hence he begins with "that", referring to Christ. Instead of speaking of *Him* who was from the beginning, he begins with what implies substance, a *thing*, and what is to be seen particularly in the young men. They would represent man at his best, and so in this chapter we have the children of the testimony -- not exactly the children of God -- these are dealt with in chapter 3 -- but the children of the testimony, that is to
{56}
say, what has been effected by the testimony of God, but presented in a *graded* way.
In the temple reared up by Solomon there were two pillars; these stood out before the temple so as to be visible to all who approached, as if God would remind those who drew near of what He could do. They are but figures. The height is given of both, as if God would present what He can effect collectively. God impressed any who approached with what He could effect, as if to say, 'If I can do this with one or two or more, I can do it with you', God would thus indicate a sort of standard; He would have this standard in the minds of those who drew near, and if any one did not come up to it, it was not because He had not the means by Him to effect it. He had the means, in the altar, the layer, etc., standing by.
In this epistle we have Christ presented as eternal life: "That which was from the beginning ... which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated ... concerning the word of life ..". God was in this way indicating the standard. The standard He had from the beginning is the standard He has now, and the means of bringing us to it now are what they were then, and so this second chapter presents to us what the testimony could effect in such a person as John the apostle. His thought in writing was that the saints should have fellowship with him, saying, "Our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ". Then he proceeds to speak about "the message", and in this chapter, as I said, he speaks of *his* children, which would be in result the children of his testimony, what his testimony had effected; but they are graded, and the Holy Spirit through the apostle touches specially on the young men.
It is under this head that I desire to speak at this time, not simply to the young men, but to all, so that there should be what God would produce, that is, a living, energetic, mature, and yet youthful testimony until the
{57}
end. John elsewhere (@Revelation 10) shows us the principle on which this ministry is to be continued; he speaks of eating the little book and digesting it. Here he speaks about the word of God *abiding in* the young men, which is akin to that. In Revelation, the word as entering into the inner parts causes bitterness; that is to say, the person who appropriates the word of God digests it, and feels the effect of it. Now it is on that ground that one is to continue; for the angel says to John, "Thou must prophesy *again* as to peoples", etc., (@Revelation 10:11). No one who serves the Lord in any way would wish his conversion to be the last, and so the way is indicated, that if one *feels* things with God, if one has spiritual feelings and sympathies, one is qualified to minister 'again'.
Now I want to show, beloved brethren, from the Old Testament how this principle of youthful maturity is developed in the service of God. It first shows itself in instinct, and when I speak of instinct in the types I go to the book of Genesis; it is the great book of instincts. What you find in the book of Genesis is that things are done generally without any specification, and yet what is done conforms to the divine specification when it is given; that is to say, it is on the principle of John's ministry: "I have not written to you because ye do not know the truth, but because ye know it". It is a question of knowing the thing in a spiritually instinctive way, and then knowing it in detail, so that what you know by spiritual instinct is found to agree with what is presented to you in spiritual ministry, so that there can be no disparity between them. There is the principle of reception with intelligence. The "good ground" is one who hears and *understands* the word, (@Matthew 13:23). No teacher can teach a child save the child has the power of reception in an intelligent way, and so it is spiritually. I speak of that because of the importance of cultivating instincts.
{58}
And so, in the book of Genesis, you find youthfulness in service. The book is to be regarded generally as a book of old men; Genesis abounds in references to old people. In this world old people grow rather uninteresting, but it is not so with God. You find in the inspired word that age continues in the service of God; age adds to interest rather than takes from it. So in the millennial times, we read of men and women who are very aged, but they are not uninteresting. Nor are they uninterested; they are contemplated as sitting there, and then over against them there are the boys and girls playing in the streets, (@Zechariah 8:4,5). It is as if God would set down together the extremes of human life. An old man of that day could tell me something about the Lord Jesus coming out of heaven; he could tell me about the great preparatory work of God in the millennial day; he has been through it; he is full of the most precious things. He is an eyewitness; he is better than a written record. Peter says, as an old man about to put off his tabernacle, "Having been eyewitnesses of *his* majesty", (@2 Peter 1:16). Look at that; he is about to put off his tabernacle, and he is occupied with the majesty of Christ. Who can tell me as much as Peter of the wonders of Christ's ministry on earth?
So in the book of Genesis we have the old men, and they die; but in the midst of a book of old men you have a very young man -- Joseph, seventeen years of age. He is a type in view of what I am saying. Some of you young people here may think it is not for you to take up any responsibility in connection with the things of the Lord. It may be that you have come here to meet other young people, which is quite legitimate, and yet not legitimate if it be merely natural. This meeting is not for natural instincts; it is not a place of natural feelings. It is intended to minister to you spiritually. In Joseph you find a young man of seventeen years feeding the flock, and he is doing it with his brethren. They were not very congenial
{59}
companions; they were the sons of Jacob's wives -- the maidservants -- mothers that would not convey a good character to their children, and therefore their company would tend to corrupt this young man, but they did not; he represents the *incorruptible* element; what is born of God is incorruptible. John says "He that has been begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one does not touch him". That is Joseph; the others were related to him, his half-brothers; but their conversation was bad, and instead of being corrupted by it he reported it to his father; he knew where to place information of evil, that it might be dealt with, like "those of the house of Chloe", (@1 Corinthians 1:11). That is a very fine trait. Right through, Joseph is presented as incorruptible. We read of the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit; what a fine ornament that is in sisters! "In the sight of God" it is "of great price", (@1 Peter 3:4). Joseph developed that; he stood for it, and so in the book of Genesis you get this youthful feature in this respect, that it is incorruptible. Without it I can never hope to serve God, but with it I shall stand before Pharaoh. Like Jeremiah, "If thou return, then will I bring thee again, thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth", (@Jeremiah 15:19). That is the principle of Joseph. He stood before Pharaoh. How old was he? Thirty years. There he is seen as a model of the incorruptible. You say, he was a man of like passions with ourselves, but he represents what a christian is as viewed in the light of the first epistle of John.
Now I proceed to Joshua. Exodus is also a book of old men -- not as old as those in Genesis, but it is a book that emphasises old men in the service, and an old woman too. When Moses and Aaron stood before Pharaoh, Moses is said to have been eighty years of age, and Aaron eighty-three, and Miriam was evidently older. Now these were the three whom God sent 'before' Israel. They were old in divine principles, old in divine attainments; they represent what service requires from the
{60}
standpoint of divine culture and preparation; these two things must run together. Joshua in Exodus corresponds with Joseph in Genesis; he is with Moses on the mount. God would thus keep in view this element of youthfulness. In chapter 17 he first appears, and it corresponds with the passage in John. He is a young man; he is in conflict with Amalek. It was a question of the Spirit coming in -- that is to say, of the time in which young believers get the Spirit. The rock was smitten and the waters flowed, and then Amalek came up. Satan attacks you through the flesh at this juncture. I want to show you briefly the circumstances in which Joshua overcame. Moses says to him, "Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the staff of God in my hand". Young people do not like their elders to direct them, to advise them; but Moses says, I am going up the hill with the staff of God, and you are to be down here; "choose us men, and go out, fight with Amalek". Choose out men for us -- not for yourself; you are not going to be a leader of a party. Able young men often assume that unconsciously. We make special friends, and we do this and that; but Moses does not say, Choose for yourself; he says, Choose for us. You are going to fight for the people of God. We must not be on the line of special friendships; it is destructive of the service of God. "Choose us men", and Joshua did so, but he had to be entirely dependent upon intercession above. He could never overcome one Amalekite without Moses¬ hands uplifted. It is Moses¬ hands, not Aaron's, representing the authority of God, but now in priestly intercession. Without this there could be no victory over the Amalekites; but with it a complete victory. Moses is directed to write the occurrence in a book and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua. Typically he was to be established in the fact that the power of Satan in the flesh should be utterly overthrown.
You see in Joshua the first conflict of a young man who was subsequently to become a great leader of Jehovah's
{61}
hosts. You see how it began. He began in the recognition of authority, in the recognition of dependence upon another, namely, on Christ. You can never do anything without that.
In the passage I read Joshua is in the midst of extraordinary circumstances; he has had to go "without the camp". We do not like to be in a small meeting; we like big meetings; it is *natural*. Moses took the tent and pitched it without the camp. Moses was prepared to be in a minority, and Joshua is with him in it. It is a very fine resolve to accept the consequences of faithfulness to the truth. Here it is as if Joshua said, 'I must be with Moses, the man of God, the man who stands for God against the whole camp of Israel. I am going to be with him, and not only am I going to be with him, but I am going to be inside that tent that Moses has pitched outside'. It is an educative time; Joshua is in the making. There are great advantages within; he is learning. There is the camp of Israel in the distance; Moses had pitched the tent outside that, and Joshua was in the tent, identified with the minority. Those who follow the Lord are there. The faithful believer says, 'Be they few or many, these are my society'. "Joshua, ... a young man, departed not from within the tent", we read. As there he would see the glory, for it is said that the pillar of cloud descended and stood at the entrance of the tent. Many of us are very neglectful about meetings; we often miss the very greatest things. We cannot afford to miss divine happenings. Anna "departed not from the temple ... night and day", (@Luke 2:37) and she did not miss the greatest event that ever happened there: she was present when "the child Jesus" (verse 27) was brought in by His parents and was in the arms of Simeon. Here Moses entered into the tent, and Jehovah came down to the door and talked with him. Joshua sees Moses thus honoured, Jehovah speaking to him "face to face, as a man speaks with his friend". What a wonderful education for a young man! He gets a
{62}
little glimpse of heaven. That is how things ought to be; they are going to be very simple. Moses and Elias were speaking *with Jesus* on the mount of transfiguration. The great antitype of what is presented in the Pentateuch is Jesus, and there He was, speaking with Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend; that is what Joshua could see, a little bit of heaven brought down to the door of the tent in which he dwelt. You see thus how a young man is privileged and formed divinely as he is true to the light vouchsafed even at the cost of outward smallness and reproach. I could say more about Joshua, but I only touch on these two points.
I go on now to Samuel. I wish to speak of David's ten young men. I believe you will admit there is a certain constructive line in what I am bringing before you. We have a man overcoming the wicked one; we have the young man in the tent, the place of privilege; now we have ten young men carrying a message. The last is a question of preaching, and preaching to a man who represents a very uninterested audience. You have to learn to preach to such people. I have no difficulty in preaching the gospel to saints; generally they are the most interested of all. But here is a man who represents a very hostile element; and what are these young men doing? There are ten of them, as I said; they are designated, "David's young men". They are told the tenor of what they should say to Nabal. The gospel may be presented in a million ways, it is such a marvellous subject. How are these young men going to act? Does one of them assert leadership or priority on the way? No; there is not the slightest sign of rivalry in these young men, and yet they are charged with an important message, and it is from David to such a man as Nabal. On the other hand, we cannot think that these young men spoke one by one to him. In scripture a feature of ministry is compression; that is to say, you always convey in what you say that you could say very much more. You cannot exhaust the things of
{63}
God -- they are too great. That I can present what I have to say in the smallest compass, and yet leave nothing out that I should say, is what should mark me. The minister of Christ is not merely concerned about words; he is concerned about substance. Here the question is, What is David's mind? "And David's young men came, and spake to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, *and ceased*". Now that is what I want to dwell upon -- the ability to stop when you have finished, when you have conveyed your message. As serving in this way, no one should appear before men without the assurance that he has a message. "This is the message that we have heard from him", (@1 John 1:5). You have your message, you deliver it, and then stop. That is the principle marking these ten young men. If all of us who serve were to observe that principle in our service, the saints of God would be saved from considerable occasion of trial. The scriptures provide against the saints being wearied either by long addresses or by long prayers. Undue length either in the ministry of the word or prayer is not according to the mind of God. The principle is compression. Of course prayer in an individual way may be unlimited; the Lord spent a night in prayer. As to ministry, the prophets are to speak by two or three, (@1 Corinthians 14). These young men speak, and then *cease*. Surely they are set down here as models.
Now I want to speak about the young man in verse 14. Some adverse thing happens among the people of God; what am I going to do about it? This young man was a keeper of the sheep; he had the advantage of keeping them in the neighbourhood of David and his men. He had been in proximity to David. He hears what Nabal has said, and, in recording it, does not minimise the evil character of Nabal his master. He says, "And he is such a son of Belial, that one cannot speak to him". He has a true judgment of his master, and evidently he is not governed by natural or selfish considerations. He is a
{64}
man of courage. That is what is needed in crises amongst us. How am I going to act in a crisis? You say, That is for the old brothers; but this is a young man; it is not a question of gift or experience; it is a question of uprightness, of meeting an impending danger. The matter is serious and must be faced at once, I hear something of this kind; what am I going to do about it? Have a talk with some brother or sister and let it go the round in 'confidence'? No, that is not the way. He goes and places the information where it can be dealt with effectually, and where it was dealt with effectually -- with Abigail, a type of the church. She is a type of the church *militant*; she becomes allied to David in his military position, and in our localities we have to be militant. We must learn how to act wisely, so as to defeat the constant attacks of Satan. Thus you place information such as we are speaking of where it belongs -- before the brethren, those who are gathering and acting in the light and recognition of Christ and the assembly. We want to know where to place information that is calculated to ward off disaster; this is imperative. This young man places his information with Abigail, who was responsible to act; she takes it up immediately; the crisis is met and dealt with, and the position is saved, God's part in it being secured.
You will see, dear brethren, a constructive line in all this. The apostle John had it in mind when he wrote to the young men, "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one", (@1 John 1:14). They are men of the testimony. In view of what we have had before us it is as if he said, 'Be on your guard. You have overcome Amalek; you have been inside the tent; you have delivered your message; now beware of the world; see that you do not hanker after it'. Many a man has refused the world for himself and adapted his children for it, and he has lost them. The young have to be on their guard against the world. "Love not the world, nor the things
{65}
in the world. If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him ... but he that does the will of God abides for eternity", (verses 15,17). The testimony goes on and you abide for ever; that is the position.
May God help us to keep this clearly in view. If we are not going on, God is going on, and He is going on with those who as in youthful maturity are free from the world and subject to His will.
{66}
Pages 66 - 104, "Spiritual Refinement", Readings and Addresses, Lincoln and Oldham, 1939 (Volume 107).
THE IRON DID SWIM
@2 Kings 6:1 - 23
J.T. We have important testimony connected with the Jordan in this book; in this chapter we have a collective *move towards it*. I link this with 2 Corinthians, in the beginning of which the apostle speaks of a great death that he was delivered from; and, in chapter 4, of "always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus", (verse 10) and "knowing that he who has raised the Lord Jesus shall raise us also with Jesus", (verse 14). Whatever discipline and ministry come to us, unless they incline our hearts in this direction, the effect will soon slip away from us.
In @2 Kings 2:6 we have, in Elijah, the idea of being *sent*. "Jehovah has sent me to the Jordan", he says, and Elisha would go with him. Then, in chapter 5, we have one being sent there for *cleansing*. And in chapter 6:1 - 2 the sons of the prophets say to Elisha, "Behold now, the place where we dwell before thee is too strait for us. Let us go, we pray thee, to the Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make a place there, where we may dwell".
J.McM. Is that the force of the words "We had the sentence of death in ourselves"? (@2 Corinthians 1:9).
J.T. Exactly. That marked the apostle in writing the second time to the Corinthians, as if he would incline their hearts, after the ministry of the first letter, towards Jordan. If they are otherwise inclined, the ministry may remain with us for a little while, but it will soon fade.
Rem. The first epistle to the Corinthians suggests cleansing and separating, and the second epistle the truth of this chapter of Kings.
J.T. That is right. If the first epistle were not submitted
{67}
to, there could be no further light or progress. This incident properly comes in after Naaman's submission, the second epistle is consequent on their submission to the first. Chapter 7 treats of the effect of the first letter, and in chapter 2:9 he puts them "to the test, if as to everything ye are obedient".
W.S.S. This desire for a larger place would be right.
J.T. Yes. The Holy Spirit shows us how the teaching of the book is becoming effective. Enlargement at Jordan would be spiritual, not worldly.
W.S.S. I was thinking that the apostle desires the enlargement of the Corinthians in the second epistle.
J.T. Yes; "for an answering recompense ... let *your* heart also expand itself", (chapter 6:13).
H.L. Does the line we have in @2 Kings 5 correspond with the first epistle to the Corinthians and produce this general movement among the saints?
J.T. I think so. Obedience to the first letter laid the basis for the second. The apostle is clearly leading on towards Jordan in the latter.
E.L.M. Would the ministry of the man at the end of @2 Kings 4 awaken desires to know another sphere, so that the cleansing of chapter 5 is felt to be a moral necessity?
J.T. That is a very good suggestion. You allude to the "man from Baal-shalisha". So that chapter 5 opens with a man who, although he was a great man with his master, and had been used of the Lord, was a leper. It is almost like the Corinthians. There were distinguished men among them, but they needed cleansing, (@2 Corinthians 7:1). "A great man with his master" and even used of God, as Naaman was, is not necessarily great spiritually, and may need cleansing.
E.L.M. All that has to be faced in our histories.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. There may be certain greatness in service; we may be even used of God, and
{68}
yet be leprous, It was the state of things at Corinth. They were boasting in men -- "I am of Paul, and ... I of Apollos", They were reigning as kings, but they were reigning without Paul. We do not want to reign without Paul.
J.McM. Would the acceptance of the truth of the Jordan deliver us from that? Elisha went over with Elijah; and afterwards by himself; and so I may learn to go over Jordan myself.
J.T. I think what we get at the outset is the principle of attraction. Elisha would not leave Elijah. I do not suppose we should ever go over Jordan of ourselves. It is as I apprehend Christ as having annulled death that I accept it. Not only do I know that He has disposed of it, but He attracts me, and I go over Jordan. "If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?" (@Jeremiah 12:5). We see here how one is to do in the swelling of Jordan, and we learn it from Elijah. Elijah is a type of Christ going over. The book of Joshua teaches us that, in going over, we are to remain two thousand cubits behind the ark. There is a clear objective. Two thousand cubits is a considerable distance, about three-fifths of a mile. That would mean that there is a clear view -- provided one has good eyesight. If one is short-sighted he may not see it. Peter speaks of those who "cannot see afar off", (@2 Peter 1:9).
H.L. What would ensure long sight?
J.T. You get the idea of vision from the men of faith. Take a man like Abraham: "Lift up now thine eyes ..". (@Genesis 13:14). There is the idea of looking; that is the power of his vision. "Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it" (@John 8:56); and again, "He looked for a city", (@Hebrews 11:10). He had great power of vision. It is an element of faith, so that Paul says, "We look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen" (@2 Corinthians 4:18) -- eternal things.
{69}
J.McM. Is it connected with the Spirit -- "your young men shall see visions" (@Acts 2:17)?
J.T. It is the power of the Spirit. I think that is what is meant in @Mark 8, where the Lord gives the blind man the *second* touch. After the first touch, it says he saw men as trees walking. That is not good sight. If you see men as trees, they appear unduly conspicuous. Then the Lord touched the man again, and he saw *all* things clearly -- the whole landscape, so to speak. It is not only that I see the brethren; I see the things of God, and see them clearly. Thus we see how to go over Jordan. When the feet of the priests that bare the ark touched the brim of Jordan, the waters were driven back. There was no struggle in the death of Christ. Jordan was driven back as He touched it, (@Psalm 114). There is no death like that. That has to be understood; thus Jordan is crossed.
J.T.S. Is the principle of attraction seen in the epistle to the Colossians in the expression "with Christ"?
J.T. That is the thought before us now. Crossing the Jordan is by the power of Christ alone; then it is our death with Him. As to this a clear vision is most important for us. As we reach the article of death, unless we maintain a clear vision, we shall be disturbed. It is the greatest test of faith, whether God will raise the dead. Our hearts are prone to be sceptical as to this. But we face death triumphantly as we have seen the Lord go over. Peter and the disciple whom Jesus loved entered the sepulchre and saw the linen clothes lie. The linen clothes lay as they had been wrapped round the Lord's body, and the napkin was folded in a distinct place by itself. There had been no struggle at all. "The other disciple ... saw and believed" (@John 20:8); they would understand later by these facts what the passage of Jordan means. John would never have any fear as to death after having seen how Jesus came out of it.
J.McM. "Prepare you victuals", etc., (@Joshua 1:11). Is this ministry to prepare?
{70}
J.T. Yes. They were to be prepared. They were to be strengthened by food. It is a question of a spiritual state to face death. They had not gone that way before. Jesus goes first, and goes alone. We have to see how He went through.
W.S.S. I suppose the question of state comes out in the beginning of 2 Corinthians. The apostle and others had the sentence of death in themselves.
J.T. Yes, the apostle had been in the presence of death in a very real way, so that he could speak to the Corinthians as one familiar with it. He could also speak of "God which raiseth the dead: who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver", (@2 Corinthians 1:9,10). Now he is bearing about in his body the dying of Jesus, and looking at things not seen.
W.S.S. In the passage we read, there is the desire to dwell at the Jordan?
J.T. I think the teaching of the earlier chapters of this book enables us to desire to move in that direction. What we remarked about Naaman is a very practical thing. He was a great man with his master. Why is it put in that way? In chapter 4:8 you have "a great woman". What marked her was that she housed the prophet. Later she said she dwelt among her own people, having no desire to be spoken of to the king. She wished for no distinction in the world. Following on the woman who sold the oil and paid her debts, living on the rest, this "great woman" is a believer who has come typically to the understanding and appropriation of the Spirit of God as seen in @Romans 8. Her greatness would allude to the wealth she had acquired.
But Naaman was great in another sense. He was great with his master on account of military service rendered, Jehovah having given deliverance to Syria through him. Exploits are sure to be found with a man who has gifts. So that chapter 5 refers to a man whom God uses, but he is a leper notwithstanding. No doubt his conscious
{71}
greatness somewhat accounted for this, or at least fed the leprosy. Hence he comes to the prophet with his horses and his chariot, and stands at the door of the house of Elisha; he is there in his fancied greatness. What underlies all that is leprosy -- the working of sin, not in gross actions, but in pride.
Rem. Naaman thought he would have support in *that* position; he thought the prophet should have come out to him (verse 11).
J.T. He is self-occupied. He does not understand that the prophet represents God, and He will not minister to human pride, especially when in one of His people. Naaman was ignorant in his pride, but after his cleansing in Jordan he returned *to the man of God* -- not now simply to his house, expecting Elisha to come out to him; he stood before *him*. And now nothing is said of the horses and chariot!
W.S.S. Evidently Naaman would have had no desire to dip in Jordan when he was thinking of himself as a great man.
J.T. Then you will observe how he compares Abana and Pharpar with Jordan. The Holy Spirit doubtless brings that in here to precede chapter 6, that is, to call attention to the meaning of Jordan. There is no river like it.
E.L.M. The man discovered his impotence in the presence of Jordan; he could not hold the axe head. Is there in it a lesson for us of reduction, learning one's smallness and inability?
J.T. I am sure there is. Very little is really learned until death is accepted. Whilst the desire was right to go to Jordan, because there was more room, there was evidently a good deal to be learned. I think the end reached is *resurrection*. After the axe-head incident you get nothing more about building. When you get the axe head back, you arrive tangibly at resurrection. I think it corresponds with Jacob; he set out from Beer-sheba, but he came back
{72}
to Hebron -- typical of "that world, and the resurrection", (@Luke 20:35).
J.McM. Does the teaching of the axe head mean recovery in Christ?
J.T. That is the thought, but apprehended by the believer. The iron *swims*; it is the believer in superiority to death. The man "put out his hand and took it". This is the end reached in the type. We may say it is the believer or servant in the realisation of the power of resurrection.
J.McM. Do we begin to move collectively now?
J.T. I think all that follows in the chapter is to show the sequel to all this -- how the enemy is completely outwitted. It is a question of divinely given intelligence as to the enemy's movements. The Syrians did not come back any more. It is a matter of spiritual warfare, how the man of God can conquer in secret conflict with the enemy. All is based on resurrection.
J.H.T. That is what Paul has in mind when he says, "We are not ignorant of his" (Satan's) "devices", (@2 Corinthians 2:11). In the presence of what was in Corinth, the apostle sent Timothy as one who would bring to their remembrance Paul's ways which were in Christ.
J.T. Thus they had Paul's ways which were in Christ in their very midst in Timothy. The idea of going to Jordan is shown, because it really comes to this, that one has to die for one's brethren. A spiritual man is journeying in that direction. So that they had at Corinth in Timothy one who would remind them of Paul's ways as they *are* in Christ. It was a living representation in a "beloved and faithful child", (@1 Corinthians 4:17). Look again at the early part of chapter 6: "The place where we dwell before thee is too strait for us". It is well if the young brethren are dwelling 'before' those who have the mind of God. Here the sons of the prophets were dwelling before Elisha. They wanted a larger place. It is to their credit that they make the suggestion to go to Jordan. A meeting like this
{73}
ought to afford something prophetic. That God might speak to us is in view. We enjoy these meetings, but then what do we say afterwards? Do we feel limited spiritually, and seek more room? Here they go on, "Let us go, we pray thee, to the Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell". They are not putting any obligation on the prophet. Very often in a meeting all the obligation is put on the leading brothers, but they are not putting any obligation on him, save that they want his permission to go and his presence with them. There is no idea of an undertaking in independence of their elder and teacher. Each one of them accepts responsibility. Taking a beam implies something onerous.
H.L. There seems to be a difference between the sons of the prophets spoken of earlier, and these.
J.T. Yes, they are very different. These have evidently come under the influence of Elisha and his ministry.
E.L.M. I should like to hear something about carrying the beam.
J.T. It is material for building. Let every one take heed how he builds -- what kind of material he uses.
E.L.M. Does it set forth the moment when you are not content merely with light?
J.T. That is what it means. You want to build, and build at the Jordan. One has no worldly aspirations at all.
J.McM. If we apply it to the church, it is that Christ may be exalted. You want a place for sons to dwell.
J.T. The sons of the prophets say, "Where we may dwell. And he answered, Go ye. And one said, Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants". There is no independency of thought. They are dwelling in the presence of the prophet, but they want enlargement, and are ready to take on obligations.
F.B. Was that David's thought, when he said he would not give sleep to his eyelids till he found a habitation for the Lord?
{74}
J.T. Yes, only here it is a place for ourselves to dwell. There it is a place for the Lord. But these sons of the prophets want the prophet with them. We want the Lord's company in this movement.
E.L.M. Might the losing of the axe head suggest that we are not to use borrowed tools? Is there not the idea underlying it that we should appropriate the truth for ourselves?
J.T. The movement brings out the defect. The suggestion of such a movement was evidently the work of God. There may be that, but there may be a defect that has to be called attention to. Perhaps if they had moved into the world, the axe head would never have been known to be borrowed. But at Jordan the thing is exposed. It is like a brother giving out what he has been reading. He is doing it uprightly, but he has to learn that he has to get the truth through the acceptance of death. As having taken the axe head out of Jordan, he has it on this principle. The Lord had His eye on this man. He is doing something with a right motive, and He wants to make him a better servant.
R.R. I was wondering about the fact that he confessed that it was borrowed.
J.T. Making the acknowledgement involved his gain. There is permanent gain from an experience like this. The instrument is defective, and it is like the Lord's love to call attention to this. He wants to make us better servants. He uses an exclamation: "Alas, master, *and* it was borrowed!" It is well to notice these exclamations; they denote feeling.
J.H.T. Do you think a young brother like that would profit by subjection to others who are approved in the service?
J.T. Yes. The household of Stephanas had devoted themselves to the saints for service, and the Corinthians were to be subject to them, (@1 Corinthians 16:15). It would seem as if this scripture is intended to lead the younger
{75}
men forward and perfect them in their ministry. It says in @Mark 7:37, "He hath done all things well". What is in view is to stimulate those in the ministry to good workmanship.
J.H.T. That would be Paul's desire for Timothy: "Till I come, give thyself to reading, to exhortation, to teaching", (@1 Timothy 4:13). He was to perfect himself as a workman, and not have a bad instrument.
E.L.M. It was a good thing the axe head did not alight on a fellow-workman. He would have had to flee to the city of refuge.
J.T. That suggests another serious objection to the use of borrowed instruments.
Ques. May we not borrow and make the thing our own, so as to use it? It is not that we should not use what we have heard.
J.T. Surely not, but God has our perfecting in view, and allows things to happen so as to expose to us what hinders us. This builder has an excellent motive, but he has a borrowed axe, and if he does not acknowledge that, he will not be a good workman hereafter. He says, "*and* it was borrowed!" There are two things -- the axe head fell into the water, and it was borrowed.
E.L.M. The young man would be in a spiritual state at the end of the incident. He put out his hand and took it.
J.T. If this axe had been in the hands of the man to whom it belonged, he would no doubt have known its defect and guarded against what happened. The borrower did not know the instrument. You might say something that was effective; I might say it, and it might *not* be effective. It is the spiritual setting of the thing that counts. The point is whether I have the thing in my soul in its proper setting.
H.L. Do the words "Alas, master" convey that he was not working according to the truth?
J.T. It is as if he said, Why should this happen to me?
{76}
He *felt* the occurrence. "And the man of God said, Where did it fall? And he showed him the place". That is something to notice -- where it fell.
J.H.T. I was wondering whether that is set right in 2 Corinthians. The apostle speaks of some comparing themselves with themselves, and not being wise; then he says, We do not boast in another man's line of things; and again, that it is not a question of the one who commends himself but whom the Lord commends, (@2 Corinthians 10:12 - 18).
J.T. That corresponds with what we are saying.
J.McM. Do we get help from the Lord as we thus own the truth? He says, "Alas, *master*!" We become thus more efficient. Is the thought that, in learning our lesson, we should go on in the work?
J.T. That is how the matter stands. We arrive at resurrection in this setting. "And he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did swim". It is not a beam that is cut down, but a stick. The iron swims; it is not simply floating. That it comes up proves the power of resurrection, but the iron swimming is a stronger thought. It is energy from within. The believer has propulsion from within; he can move in superiority to the power of death; he can go against the stream.
J.H.T. "The life which I now live ... I live by the faith of the Son of God", (@Galatians 2:20).
A.D.D. What does the cutting down of the stick and casting it in refer to?
J.T. It refers to the death of Christ.
J.McM. In the account of Paul's shipwreck it speaks of those who were able to swim.
J.T. If I do not know how to swim, I sink. Floating will not last me long. In floating I am inactive, but swimming I am in power.
E.B.G. Why a stick, and not a beam?
J.T. It is a smaller idea. It would convey what could be conveniently used. It points to Christ as in subjection
{77}
here, and so available to God. The stick was cast into the water by Elisha where the iron fell.
E.B.G. Do you connect it with the cross?
J.T. I think it is rather Christ Himself. He went into death as doing the will of God. The stick is diminutive as compared with a "beam" -- wood for construction, and points to the outward smallness in which Christ went into death, but also to the power that was there.
W.L. What does the iron signify?
J.T. The iron suggests the actual condition of man. There was no hope for him unless Christ went into death.
W.S.S. I wondered if you had anything to say as to the manner in which the hosts of the king of Syria were defeated.
J.T. It is a very fine sequel to all this. It shows how the servant of God carried on without any great show. It is a question of spiritual understanding. Another world is opened up in resurrection, and the powers of it are round about those who have the light of God. "The mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha".
W.S.S. It is very helpful to look at it in this way. The king of Syria did not know how he was being defeated.
J.T. We are not to rest in visible numbers, although elsewhere the thousands of Israel are mentioned; it is a question of the power of God. It is overwhelming. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world", (@1 John 4:4). Powers invisible to the world are all round the man of God. We are not looking at seen things, but at unseen things; at the same time we are not ignorant of Satan's thoughts, (@2 Corinthians 2:11).
J.H.T. We get the same idea in verse 32 of our chapter. Elisha knows the murderous intention of the king. Do you think that, while we should not be ignorant of the enemy's devices, we must be going on with what is positive?
{78}
J.T. I think that is the setting of this passage. You are never in any other spirit, you know that you are bound to be successful. What consternation was in the heart of the king of Syria! He warred against Israel, but he did not understand the power he had to do with. The king of Assyria warred against Israel in Hezekiah's day, but the virgin, the daughter of Zion, laughed him to scorn. She understood the principles she was operating on; she was unconquerable.
J.H.T. Her power lay in her virginity.
J.T. The Corinthians were in danger of being conquered because they were not maintaining virgin affections for Christ (compare @2 Corinthians 11:1 - 3).
E.L.M. The spiritual discerns all things, (@1 Corinthians 2:15).
J.T. That is what is seen here. The man of God discerns the counsels of the king of Syria. He says, "Beware that thou pass not such a place, for thither the Syrians are come down". It is the man of God that shines in the testimony for Christ. The king of Israel benefits by this. Those who have the light of God now are a benefit to the whole of christendom.
J.McM. Are there the two things, the prophetic ministry and the man of God?
J.T. Yes. The man of God considers wholly for God, and God is with him and imparts His mind to him.
J.McM. Would we be preserved in these days in apprehending this?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. And it is imperative to apprehend resurrection. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, neither are they borrowed.
Then we have how the wonderful triumph of good over evil is seen. The prophet says, "Set bread and water before them", but the king of Israel goes further, and "prepared a great repast for them". You see how complete the triumph is. The army of the king of Syria is at the command of the king of Israel, and instead of slaying them, he sets a great repast before them, and
{79}
sends them away. God gives us the victory; it is the triumph of good over evil.
Rem. It is so different from the first chapter of this book, where the captains of the fifties are consumed. Elisha's ministry was quite different from this.
J.T. The Syrians never came back in bands. It is a great thing to save all the brethren in a party.
Rem. If you can feed them and refresh them, that is the way you secure this.
J.T. "And the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel". That is the break-up of *that* party!
Ques. Have you any thought about the necessity of the young man's eyes being opened to see the chariots of the Lord?
J.T. That is in keeping with what we are saying; it is a lesson for the young men. It is a very good prayer, to ask the Lord to open the eyes of the young men to see the unseen. The young man says, "Alas, my master! how shall we do?" He uses an exclamation, like the man who lost the axe head; he had feelings, but they are feelings of unbelief. He is looking at the enemy.
E.B.G. Reference was made to the elders who sat with the prophets. Would the elders be the cumulative outcome of the series of exercises which have been before us?
J.T. That is no doubt true. They are first mentioned in the book in verse 32, and they are sitting with Elisha in his house.
J.T.S. Would the results of this great victory be seen in the words "Salute one another with a holy kiss" (@1 Corinthians 16:20)? There seems in it the suggestion of all the brethren being secured. Not one is lost; we secure one another in affection.
J.T. Just so. Saluting one another would mean that we have mutual respect for each other's dignity. A *holy* kiss would imply the absence of natural preference.
{80}
PROCEDURE IN THE ASSEMBLY
@Luke 24:36; @John 20:19
J.T. These verses serve by comparison to set out the assembly as seen in 1 Corinthians and in Ephesians. The first scripture says that the Lord stood in *their* midst; in @John 20 it is in *the* midst. We may perhaps be helped in speaking together of this great subject in its two parts, as indicated in these verses.
H.L. Would the first scripture imply that the Lord came into *their* circumstances?
J.T. Yes; what *they* are saying is mentioned. In *the* midst is unlimited, and would imply the Lord giving effect, by His presence, to the message that He had sent by Mary. The Lord would give effect to the light. As we apprehend Him in the midst, we get the full import of the message -- "Go to my brethren", etc. This is in keeping with Ephesians, and is universal. It involves the spiritual state of the assembly; in the power of the Spirit we are led from what is local to what is universal and eternal.
J.McM. They thought they beheld a spirit, in Luke. There is nothing of that in John.
J.T. That plainly indicates the difference between the two positions. What they were saying would indicate in a general way that they were qualifying to be the assembly in a *public* way. The two from Emmaus found the eleven and those that were with them *gathered together*. You do not get that in John, nor do you get what they were saying. Here you do: "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon". Then the two that had been restored told "what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of bread". The Lord having appeared to Simon was an expression of *grace*.
{81}
E.L.M. The breaking of bread stands in relation to the public position?
J.T. That is quite obvious. Grace was to mark it. "Hath appeared to Simon" is grace -- the Lord appearing to one who had sinned so flagrantly. They could not be the assembly of God save as grace is expressed there. The assembly must be the reflection of what God is. There was variety in unity. They found the eleven, which would mean those that were representative; there was authority. The features of Gad (@Deuteronomy 33:20,21) would be in the eleven; there would thus be a basis for enlargement. And they were gathered together; that is another feature of the assembly. In @John 20 it is "where the disciples *were*".
J.C. They *found* the eleven?
J.T. Yes, and the number would mean that there is a *broken* state of things, but that did not disqualify them; they could go on in spite of it. The basis of their position was moral, which also applies to our own time. The mention of the broken number of the apostles, Peter and the two from Emmaus, points to the dominance of restoring grace. This marks the recovery in these last days. Evidently those, noted in @Luke 24, who had erred, are so completely restored that there is no feeling of distance. They are talking about the worst of them; there was not one as bad as Peter. If 'unlearned' or 'unbelievers' came in, they would observe this, and would ask, no doubt, Who is he? What has he done? Why do you say the Lord appeared to him? If Simon were interrogated, he would tell the whole truth; and so an exercised person would say, If the Lord is so gracious to that man, He will be gracious to me. Luke, as emphasising grace, records these facts; thus the public assembly begins as descriptive of the dispensation -- what God is. In Luke the Lord is presented as "the Christ of God", (@Luke 9:20). It would encourage anybody that is needing grace. "They returned the same hour". If we had more spiritual vigour, we
{82}
should have more readings on Lord's day afternoons. The Lord's day afternoon is the most auspicious time for a Bible reading. We have the advantage of all that enters into the day. If He is made known to us in the breaking of bread, we shall be energetic. At the end of our chapter it is said the disciples "were *continually* in the temple".
J.McM. Would each one have something to say?
J.T. Each brother ought to be able to contribute something. The eleven and those that were with them were evidently freely engaged in talking about the things of Christ, and those from Emmaus spoke about what had happened in the way. What way? That on which they were going astray. Well, any person who came in under exercise -- who too had been going astray -- would be interested and helped. The grace in Christ that restored them could restore him. I speak in this way because of the importance now of maintaining the principle of *grace* in our meetings.
H.L. It makes all the difference to our spiritual energy to have known the Lord in the breaking of bread.
J.T. That is how it is put here. Many 'addresses' could not exhaust what "happened on the way". "He expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". How much enters into that!
E.L.M. Does the breaking of bread open the door for the Lord to manifest Himself?
J.T. That is what is seen here. "He was made known to them in the breaking of bread". That happened in the house, but the Lord had the assembly in mind, and intended to qualify them to have part in it.
E.L.M. He vanished out of their sight. Do we not know something of that?
J.T. That indicates that what He is to us in our houses is to prepare us for the assembly; indeed, His service to us is in view of the assembly. It is a question here of the restoring grace of the Lord, and how that culminates in
{83}
our having part in the assembly. It is a question whether I have learned the lesson; if I have, I can take part in the assembly. The assembly is the place of knowledge, where the things of God are known. The glory came in (@Exodus 40) when everything was in its place; "as the Lord commanded Moses" appears seven times in verses 19 - 32. This corresponds with the first part of the assembly meeting. It is a question of everything being regulated by the will of the *Lord*. Then room is made for Him as Head, and as Minister of the sanctuary.
H.L. You were speaking of Exodus as corresponding with this in @Luke 24?
J.T. I was speaking of the order that is proper to the assembly. Very much is made in Exodus of the parts of the tabernacle, and that the material itself for the tabernacle was from the *people*. Every Israelite must be considered. In 1 Chronicles the contributions are almost entirely from David and Solomon. Thus in this book it is what comes in typically through Christ.
Ques. Would you connect Luke with the first part, and John with the second?
J.T. Yes.
E.L.M. The second part is Christ speaking to us.
J.T. Yes; He will impress us with His "unsearchable riches", (@Ephesians 3:8). The first part relates to what we have; "have *ye here* any meat?" (verse 41). Then He ministers what *He* has. In Chronicles it is the wealth that David provided -- a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver -- it is the *immensity* of the wealth that is in view. That is Ephesians -- what Christ brings in. But first it is, Have you here anything? That is Luke; that is the local position. This passage indicates how we acquire wealth in this respect. Peter would gain by the Lord appearing to him, and the Lord spoke to 'the two' of *all* the scriptures. Think of the Lord opening out Exodus to them! What a view they would have! Every
{84}
experience we have of the Lord in our daily path ought to involve a fresh apprehension of Him; you know Him in a new way, and that is material for the assembly when we come together. There is thus something the Lord can take part in, in our meetings; then He brings in His part. There is the immense wealth of what He brings in. His priestly grace and service appear here also. They needed adjustment. It is almost a certainty in every local meeting that we need adjustment. It is 'Himself'; He is not there representatively. He comes in fully to confirm them in what they had already attained to. The full bearing of what was of God there would become apparent as His presence is rightly apprehended. It is the presence of the Lord that shows you the bearing of the ministry He gives through His servants.
F.I. Is it "I ... will sup with him, and he with me" (@Revelation 3:20)?
J.T. Exactly. He came to them, and then they came into His circumstances. He brings us into accord with Himself. Everything is seen in its true bearing when Christ is known in the midst. Coming together in assembly is thus essential for formation and testimony. "These are the words which I spake unto you" (verse 44). He had already spoken these things, but they were not understood. "Then opened he their understanding". All this service enters into the assembly.
In what follows we see that this chapter bears on the whole testimony of the gospel: "That repentance and remission of sin should be preached in his name among all nations", (verse 47). That was in view, so that the local assembly is to be in keeping with the dispensation; it is behind the preaching.
John is more what is inward -- towards God, towards heaven, towards eternity. As already said, in John it is not "in *their* midst", but "in *the* midst". The bearing of this is wider -- infinite indeed. It is like the stronghold of Zion, which David took, and built *inward*. Zion
{85}
is the saints taken up in the light of God's sovereign rights.
E.L.M. In Luke you have His hands and feet, in John His hands and side?
J.T. The latter has in view a state of things that is outside the sin question altogether. The hands and feet are quite in keeping with Luke, but you do not have any travelling in heaven; the ark is at rest. Hands will be active there; they are useful for the display of affection, (@Song of Songs 2:6). The Lord's side points to the origin of the church, as Eve was taken out of Adam. His death, thus indicated, testifies to His love for the church. One had observed in moving about that there is great disregard of the light that governs the assembly in this twofold way. What belongs to the first part is often carried too far into the second part. Brethren speak to the Lord instead of the Father unduly after the breaking of bread; and often there is speaking to the Father and then to the Lord. There is evidenced in this a want of spiritual intelligence and steadiness. The saints should become accustomed to the heavenly side of the assembly, the side on which headship is known and the wealth of heaven is brought in. The Lord leads towards the Father in the assembly. There we learn how He is with the Father, the bearing of the message sent to the disciples through Mary. Thus if we speak to the Lord as Head, we have the Father before us. After the breaking of bread, the bearing of the assembly is towards heaven. Our place is there. We are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ. The One for whom are all things and by whom are all things is bringing many sons to glory. The Father is before us in the assembly. The Son is the Minister of the sanctuary, in which all is for the Father's glory. In 1 Chronicles David provides the material in abundance, but it is the son that is to build. It is "the Son of the Father's love". It is no longer the Lord as such; authority, although never
{86}
absent, is not in evidence. The priests could not stand to serve, according to Chronicles, as the glory of Jehovah had filled the house of God. Jehovah (for us the Father) could *fill* the whole scene. But the saints, as sons, are not shut out. If the Father fills all, it is according to what He is to Christ and to us. He is in the assembly according to His eternal love and counsel. The type fails as to this. The *sons* are in the glory -- brought to it. We are in the assembly in the relation of sons to the Father, and of brethren to Christ. The ideas of lordship and priesthood would be what is needed because of actual conditions down here. These terms have reference to our position as still down here. If we abstract ourselves from flesh and blood, it is a question of sonship. David built *inward* -- that means that you reach the eternal thought of God, which is sonship. If we are able to abstract ourselves from all that is of this creation, then the idea of lordship and priesthood drops. David built inward; that is John's line. If you address the *Lord* after addressing the Father, you are dropping down. And if a word of ministry is given, it is not the end of the meeting. As coming from God in the midst of worship, it should stimulate us to deeper notes. What is needed is the intelligence that accompanies sonship. God is bringing many *sons* to glory, not priests. We are governed by the light that governs the position.
Rem. The holiest is more in the wilderness and is more individual; you see things there as they are before God. One who goes into the holiest knows how to be before God in the assembly.
J.T. The second part of the assembly is not local at all; it is a spiritual matter, and has the whole assembly in view. It is a question of spiritual power. "The *doors* being shut". 'The door' would be in keeping with Luke, but in John it is a question of the state of our souls. There is thus room for the Lord to act, and He gives its full bearing to the message through Mary. A meeting is
{87}
damaged through a door being left open. After the Supper they sang a hymn and went to the mount of Olives. That would agree with the procedure in the assembly, of which we have been speaking. The mount of Olives is a link with heaven.
{88}
SPIRITUAL REFINEMENT
@Malachi 3:3,4; @Genesis 47:1 - 10; @Genesis 48:15 - 20
I am thinking, dear brethren, of refinement. The idea runs through the Scriptures, involving what is "more excellent". There is in natural and spiritual things a great variety in quality, and it is evident that, as in natural things, so in spiritual, quality is of great importance. So we are enjoined "to judge of and approve the things that are *more* excellent", (@Philippians 1:10). Of course we can never hope to do that, save as we begin by the exercise of our senses in discerning between good and evil. One is not fit for christian fellowship unless able to discern between good and evil; but to be able to judge of what is "more excellent" is in advance of this. As in the fellowship of God's Son, we ought to be set for great things, and so we are enjoined to judge of and approve the things that are more excellent. The idea of refinement, as cognate with that of excellency, is prevalent throughout scripture, and we cannot disregard it, or speak ironically about persons of spiritual refinement, because there is such a thing. Indeed, what you get in the house into which the Lord went, according to @Matthew 13 is this very thing. He spoke of a 'treasure'. That would mean money, or things of value. But then He speaks also of a 'pearl'. Persons of affluence are not always refined -- sometimes painfully the opposite; but spiritually, wealth and refinement go together.
So the Lord proceeds from the idea of treasure, to what is refined -- that is, a pearl, which would require certain skill and taste to value. Now that conveys exactly the thought of refinement. It alludes to the church, not as appearing in the early chapters of the Acts, but as under Paul. It is Paul's church, as we call it, that the Lord had in His mind in regard to the pearl. It is Paul
{89}
who really brings in fully the thought of refinement; he speaks of what is "more excellent"; not that the quality is foreign to Peter or the others, for they were all spiritually refined. Peter indeed speaks of the "excellent glory", (@2 Peter 1:17). Think of glory being graded! So that there is excellent glory. Peter is able to use superlatives in this sense, as much as Paul; but as I said, Paul gives us the full thought. The church is that in which you get the full idea of spiritual refinement; and we should not, dear brethren, think of it as something away in the distance, but as within our reach. We read in @Isaiah 60:15 of Israel being made "an eternal excellency" -- think of the richness of that expression! And then of such an utterance as the apostle Paul uses in @Ephesians 3:21: "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". There is to be glory in that vessel "unto all generations of the age of ages".
Now that is not to be regarded as something in the distance, but as brought near to us. That was the idea on the mount of transfiguration; the excellent glory was brought down within the range of Peter, James, and John, and there were persons in it who were perfectly at home there. The disciples were not at home within it then, they feared; but at a later date Peter would not fear to enter into that cloud. Moses and Elijah were there, and they were without fear, they were equal to it; and, beloved, God intends to make every one of us equal to the glory. He is going to present us "faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy" -- with exultation, (@Jude 24). That is what is before Him, to present us there faultless.
I want to show how that thought was in the mind of Joseph. But in Malachi, you have the process which is involved. If we see the thing possible, then the next thing is to accept the process, for God has His way. He sits "as a refiner and purifier of silver", we are told, chapter 3:3. It
{90}
suggests a close watch, not something left for indifferent persons to do, or to be done by machinery -- He does the work Himself. It is a process in regard to one person; He deals with us one by one -- that is God's way. The result, in His mind, is too important to admit of any less attention. He sits Himself as the refiner, and He has a definite end in view. I have no doubt it is that His image should appear in us, for His thought is that we are all to be "conformed to the image of his Son", (@Romans 8:29). A moral likeness to God is necessary here, for testimony; but the point in the mind of God is the image of His Son. All excellency is there. This process, therefore, in Malachi, although very exercising, has to be faced. "He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he will purify the children of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver; and they shall offer unto Jehovah an oblation in righteousness. Then shall the oblation of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto Jehovah", (@Malachi 3:3,4).
That is what He has in His mind, and I venture to trace this process of refining in Jacob, because it is *in him*, of the three great patriarchs, that God intended to show what He could work out. What you see in Abraham is God's call and purpose. They all went through their education as saints and will appear in the future accordingly, but Isaac is typically Christ risen. The whole mind of God is secured infallibly in Christ in resurrection. The purpose of God goes right through to resurrection and glory, in the person of Christ. Added to that is the idea of God working out His thoughts in a practical way down here. This appears in Jacob, and particularly in connection with the number "twelve". God proposed to work out love in this man's posterity. Light is a means to an end; government is a means to an end; but the end itself is *love* -- that God is love.
So that if there is to be the demonstration of that, the vessels must be entirely subservient to the divine hand, so that they can be manipulated according to the wisdom
{91}
of love. God selects for this purpose a man who had four wives, two of them maidservants; there were four mothers of the twelve sons. You may inquire, why should He take up persons in such circumstances? God loves to show what *He* can do -- *His* handiwork. I say that as a matter of great importance. However crooked I may be, or whatever my history, God can make something out of me, *in spite of it*. Thus no one need falter or give up, for God, as beginning a work in us, is not going to give up; He goes on to a finish. So you get the working out of this number twelve in @Genesis 29, 30, and 31. We may wonder why the Spirit should have written down what is recorded there, but every line is perfect. God shows there that He can work out His thoughts, in spite of the greatest incongruities arising from the flesh, and Jacob himself is to be the first learner. In fact, he is intended to represent what I am speaking about, and according to the Spirit's record in @Hebrews 11:21, he comes out best. "By faith Jacob when dying blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and worshipped on the top of his staff". That is what I apprehend as the result of this process of refining, and I want to show you how it was worked out.
The record is given, so that among many other things we might see this one thought of superiority in Jacob. He is not the one *we* would have picked out, but God's thoughts are not ours. Leading up to all this, Joseph is born, a very simple incident, if it were merely a matter of recording a birth. But this birth was of moment, and perhaps nobody understood this except Jacob. As soon as Joseph was born he said to Laban, "Send me away, that I may go to my place and to my country", (@Genesis 30:25). What he saw in it, the Spirit of God does not say, but evidently he saw something spiritually. Spiritual history is hidden, but the effects are public. The thing itself, the golden thread of divine workmanship, is hidden -- "curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
{92}
earth", (@Psalm 139:15). Jacob went, though he waited a while, showing the incubus that would hold him back. Is it not so with many of us? We get a spiritual touch, and other things hinder for the moment, but we come back to it, and move. It is a great matter to come back to it. He left Padan -- a sort of beginning of this history. He saw Christ, in some sense, in Joseph. The confirmation of that is, that here he becomes more and more spiritual. So that when he comes back to Peniel there is a wonderful transaction. It is not an experience singular to Jacob; it is recorded there that we might *all* understand that God intends to make us more spiritual, because the spiritual touch was added to there. It really began when he became a *supplanter*. At Peniel he is named Israel -- a spiritual title. Then, as he crossed over to meet his brother, he sends the maidservants and their children on ahead, then Leah and her children, and finally, Joseph and Rachel. Joseph is first now. You say, That is a mere accident. But no, it is a spiritual matter. It means that in some little way you show you have the idea of Christ as being above the natural; and so Jacob put Joseph before Joseph's mother, although he loved Rachel. It is the spiritual superseding the natural: "afterward, that which is spiritual", (@1 Corinthians 15:46). He was on a *journey* from the time he left Beer-sheba, twenty years before -- that was the principle. He met God at Bethel -- a wonderful meeting! God came and stood by him; He was no longer at a distance. Then he resumes his journey; Rachel dies, and he sets up a pillar on her grave. But he is on the way to Hebron; that is the terminus, the end of the spiritual journey. It is a chapter of events -- of deaths and shame; but Isaac is there. The Spirit dwells on the name of the place, as if to instruct us in the spiritual surroundings he reached. The *twelve* sons are named there. Then you get the generations of Esau, and then of Jacob, but Jacob's generation stops with Joseph; it only names Joseph. It is now a question typically of Christ. Joseph was only
{93}
seventeen years old as yet, but he was to become thirty years old, which is another thing. At seventeen years of age, Jacob loved him more than all his sons, because he was the son of his old age. I want you to take note of this old age, not as something jaded, but something valuable, *because it is old*. That is the thought we should get of Jacob here. Some of us are apt to discredit what is old. This sort of old age is not merely a question of years, but refers to quality: "such an one as Paul the aged" (@Philemon 1:9) -- such an one as Jacob. The child of *that* man in his old age is something.
Before coming to the passages I read, I want you to bear in mind these remarks, because they help if you are to see how God brings us on to refinement, to that which is more excellent. So Joseph, in chapter 47, goes in to Pharaoh. He had already tutored his brothers as to how they were to speak to him. That is another important thing. If we are to be presented, we must be tutored, in order to know what to say, because we must remember it is now, in type, a question of appearing before God. The Lord is concerned that we should appear acceptably. So Joseph instructed them what to say, and then says to Pharaoh, "My father and my brethren, and their sheep and their cattle, and all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and behold, they are in the land of Goshen" (verse 1). It is a question of Joseph identifying himself with his father and eleven brothers and all that was in Goshen. It says Joseph selected five men. It was not *any* five of the eleven; it was five from the whole -- that is to say, he took account of every one from Reuben down. Shall I take Reuben? That is how he would consider. We are not told the names of those chosen; it was a question of excellency, of the best that was there. The ministry of John is to that end, to bring in the very best. You do not want to be of the six that are left. Not that they are not typically saints -- of course they are, but they are not presented. We do not want to miss the presentation
{94}
by the Lord. Joseph selected five out of the whole. They did not hide their occupation, for it was their glory. It was an abomination to the Egyptians to be a shepherd, but Joseph's brethren say, "Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also our fathers". One of the highest recommendations you can get is to be one who cares for the saints. One might stand up and speak of things that are food, but how to shepherd the saints is another matter. Grace and power are required to shepherd the saints, for in order to shepherd them, you might have to tell them things that might irritate them. It is the sheep that are to be shepherded, not the lambs (compare @John 21:15 - 17). If you can keep the sheep right, the lambs will go right. Of course young ones may stray, but I am speaking generally of the saints as a flock. Pharaoh granted the five brethren their request, allowing them to live in Goshen, and if there were active men among them, "make them", he says, "rulers over my cattle". There was something there that was "more excellent" in the judgment of Joseph.
Then the scripture says, "Joseph brought Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh". It is presentation to a sovereign. "And Jacob blessed Pharaoh". There is a change here -- *Jacob* takes the initiative; he does not wait for Pharaoh to do anything, he blesses Pharaoh. He blesses the greatest monarch on earth at that time; officially Pharaoh was greater than Jacob. He was the king, the supreme -- and here is one with no outward greatness, and the first thing he does as before him is to bless the monarch. Think of the moral worth, the moral power, in that old man! All the colleges in the world could not make him what he was. Where did his superiority come from? It came from God, through the process of refining. I do not suppose he presented any great appearance to the court of Pharaoh. One can imagine the courtiers saying, 'Who is that old man?' That would be how the matter stood, but the patriarch
{95}
blessed Pharaoh. Think of the greatness acquired as having been in the refining school of God! Pharaoh does not ask Jacob what his occupation was, which indicates a recognition of the greatness that was there. It was the result of his experience with God. He humbly acknowledges he was not like his fathers in respect of age: "The days of the years of my sojourning are a hundred and thirty years ... And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh". There was no hiding of any discrepancies, but admitting them all, he is greater than Pharaoh.
Now all that is very valuable as spiritual instruction, but what about Joseph? In the life of Pharaoh there were doubtless many blemishes, in keeping with the lives of monarchs. But here is a man -- Joseph -- with not a record against him, not a blot on his character. As far as scripture goes, he is incorruptible, as we may say; there is no discrepancy in his conduct anywhere; he is unassailable in every respect. Now how will Jacob measure up with him? What will come out when they are brought face to face? In chapter 47 he sends for Joseph; he was not sick yet, he was in a certain vigour, and he instructed Joseph to bury him in Canaan. But in the beginning of chapter 48 it says he was sick, and Joseph comes of himself. So we have Joseph, as you might say, with every advantage; he had with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. You can understand the father's legitimate pleasure in them. But with all this, is he greater than Jacob? He fails here for the first time. Joseph says, "Not so, my father" -- that was a voice of authority, and, you may depend, every ear in Egypt paid attention when hearing that voice; all save the king bowed to that voice. But here was one who did not; of course he should not, being Joseph's father. I am not referring to this, but to the moral greatness of Jacob, of what was there spiritually. "Not so, my father". If that had been said outside, how all would have paid attention
{96}
to it! But Jacob represents spiritual power, and in virtue of this he was greater than Pharaoh, greater than Joseph. According to @Hebrews 11, he blessed both the sons of Joseph; he blessed them spiritually, and against the current of the natural feeling in the greatest man on earth next to himself. That is spiritual power. "I know, my son, I know", he says. It were well for Joseph to take *that* in. He was greater than Joseph as his father, but he was also greater in spiritual power and intelligence.
That is what I had in mind. We come to the full result of refinement in Jacob, and the Spirit of God says he "worshipped on the top of his staff", (@Hebrews 11:21). This evidently refers to the experience Jacob had with God -- his staff symbolising it. I have no doubt the quotation of @Genesis 47:31 in @Hebrews 11 is a spiritual one: Jacob worshipped in the power of the result of his experience with God, when he was about to die. There was power in the man to worship God.
That is the great end in view in all this process in Malachi: "they shall offer unto Jehovah an oblation in righteousness" -- a pleasant oblation. God sits as a refiner of silver, and this is the result He has in view.
{97}
ENLARGEMENT
@2 Corinthians 6:11 - 18; @Deuteronomy 33:20,21
The epistles to the Corinthians are greatly stressed in current ministry, indicating that what is needed chiefly among the people of God is obedience and order. What is needed by us severally is what is found in Romans; that epistle and the two to the Corinthians run together, although the former is not corrective, whereas the latter two are. In the Corinthian epistles, prominence is given to the paternal idea, as over against that of the mother in Galatians. In the former, the apostle says, "Though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel", (@1 Corinthians 4:15). To the Galatians he says: "My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you", (@Galatians 4:19). Galatians is intended to deliver the people of God from religious bondage and darkness, Corinthians being rather to deliver us from worldliness. It is obvious that the authority of the father is greater than that of the mother, although the mother may have more influence over the children. Galatians contemplates the kind of person that the people of God may be associated with religiously -- Ishmael. @Genesis 21 contemplates that Isaac and Ishmael were in the same house -- so far it was the household of faith, the house of Abraham. This marked the Galatians. But unless the bondwoman and her son were cast out, faith would cease. So the apostle, referring to himself from the maternal point of view, urges what scripture says, "Cast out the bondwoman and her son", (@Galatians 4:30). This scripture, although primarily a word of Sarah, refers to religious association, which is governed by such a woman as Hagar, i.e. "Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children", (chapter 4:25). All that comes
{98}
under the beggarly elements of the world is Hagar, but Sarah is the free woman, corresponding with "Jerusalem above", which is our mother. "Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman", (verse 30). Abraham was to hearken to this word of Sarah. So the apostle proceeds to say that we -- all true believers -- are children of the freewoman, that is, the church viewed as Jerusalem *above*. The church is morally above the current level of religion, and she is free.
But the letters to Corinth emphasise the paternal side of the truth, as I said. The Corinthians were disorderly children, doing as they would, corresponding with general conditions today among the people of God; independency, strife, and partisanship prevail. For this condition the word of authority, which a father can give, is needed. Of old, God called the attention of His people to Abraham: "Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bore you", (@Isaiah 51:2). As in natural things, so in spiritual, paternal and maternal features run together. The Corinthian letters present the former authority. The Corinthians were Paul's children, and so he writes with authority, threatening a rod. But he calls them 'Corinthians'; he is not addressing the saints as in heavenly places, or in a universal way; they are viewed locally. It is well to be reminded of our local setting; as a name of a locality is mentioned, I have to think of its peculiarities, and in view of correction, these have to be kept in mind. The Corinthians were amenable to correction. And so the apostle says, "O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged"; his affections are no longer restrained, and so he can speak to them more freely. Those who minister among the people of God know what this means. His first letter had done its work, and he says, "I speak as unto my children, be ye also enlarged". What can be of more value to young believers than a true father? There are not many fathers. The
{99}
apostle took advantage of his peculiar position as the instrument through whom they were converted. But it was not this only; he loved them, as he says: "Though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved", (@2 Corinthians 12:15). He was only waiting for their hearts to be opened, so that his affections might flow towards them as before. "Now for a recompense in the same (I speak as unto my children,) be ye also enlarged". How few there are among the people of God that are being ministered to, who have any sense of recompensing! I am not speaking of what is monetary -- that is a small matter -- but of the sense of obligation. At the outset of his stay in Padan, Jacob served Laban in family affection; afterwards his service was purely mercenary. When he saw Rachel, the daughter of Laban his mother's brother, he went near, and watered the flock. There were other flocks there; he told the owners what to do, but he did not do it; but when he saw Rachel, he served by love. Then he remained a whole month in Laban's house. He is carrying on his service, and Laban says, "Shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy wages be?" (@Genesis 29:15). It was only righteous that he should get something for his service. In the same sense, the apostle had a right as a minister to recompense. But it was a question of response to his love. He says, "I seek not yours, but you" (@2 Corinthians 12:14); he was putting on them the obligations of love. How many of you young people feel obligations? I do not mean in a monetary sense, as I said, but spiritually. Do you come to recognise those through whom ministry comes as worthy in this way to be esteemed "very highly in love for their work's sake" (@1 Thessalonians 5:12 - 13)? "Be ye also enlarged". He says, "Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your own bowels". As soon as you begin to recognise spiritual obligations towards those through whom the ministry comes, you will become enlarged. There will thus be definite committal to the Lord, so that it can be said that you are "married to
{100}
another, even to him who is raised from the dead", (@Romans 7:4). Laban recognises his obligations to Jacob, and what follows upon that is the marriage of the latter to his daughters.
Worldliness worked at Corinth, as our chapter indicates; I note this, because it creeps in so insidiously. So that, as soon as the apostle speaks of their being enlarged, he says, "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers". There is nothing whatever in common between the two, and your spiritual prosperity hinges on the maintenance of separation. There is to be no fellowship with unbelievers, or with unrighteousness, whatever form it may take. "Wherefore come out from among them". God said that He would walk among His people, and dwell among them. This is not only when we are together, but also in our everyday relations. He goes into our houses, our businesses; He is *walking* among us. So He says, "Come out from among them, and be ye separate ... and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters". It is the Fatherhood of God in relation to our ordinary circumstances. He takes up our cause in times of distress; indeed He is a Father to us in every way, considering for us in every circumstance. God provides for a separated people; they are at certain disadvantages because of their separation from the world, but God's care more than balances this; thus we are maintained in the enjoyment of what is spiritual, and not damaged by the cares of this life. To this end He says, "I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters". He takes up this relation to us, so that we are protected and cared for as we could not be otherwise.
In the passage in Deuteronomy, Moses takes account of the sons of Jacob in their different features, beginning with Reuben, down to Asher. We have the different features of the blessing, and amongst them that of Gad.
{101}
It is of this I wish to speak. Gad answers to 1 and 2 Corinthians, and on this account, among other things, there is the enlargement of Gad, although his name does not signify enlargement. Japheth's name signifies enlargement. You will all remember how the Spirit of God refers to the enlargement of Japheth. When Ham exposed his father, Japheth and Shem took a garment and went backward and covered the nakedness of their father, and then we have the blessing of Noah on his sons. It enters very forcibly into what I am saying. It was a question of respect due to a father. Ham mocked his father; he exposed him. That is, in principle, what the Corinthians were doing. Some of them said of Paul, "His bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible", (@2 Corinthians 10:10). There was a Canaanitish element among them, and it was on Canaan the curse fell, (@Genesis 9:25). Thus the apostle says, "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha" (@1 Corinthians 16:22), which means that he will be cursed when the Lord comes. How solemn that this should be said to a company of christians! The curse of Noah is not a question of black people in Africa; it is Canaan, the son of Ham. Canaan does not mean black; "Ham" means black, but it cannot be shown that all his posterity were so characterised. The curse would refer to the seven nations in the land of Canaan. Five of their kings were hanged upon a tree; the curse of God was upon them. We have Canaan mentioned before we get the curse at all. But I am referring to Japheth; of him Noah says, "God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant", (@Genesis 9:27). It was that principle of which the apostle was speaking at Corinth. Enlargement marked the blessing of Japheth. It is the outcome of his respect for his father. The enlargement of Japheth, in the ordering of God, prepared beforehand for the setting up of the church; in the main it is drawn from his family.
I come back to Gad; like Japheth, the instruction
{102}
connected with him in this passage enters into the letters to Corinth. "Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad". Why should he be enlarged? Because he bore the feature of regard for authority. "He dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head". That would mean spiritually that he had the courage and strength of a lion. This marks Christ, who is "the lion of the tribe of Judah", (@Revelation 5:5). It is a question of government, of power in government, of courage in government; and so he tears the arm with the crown of the head. That is what came out in 1 Corinthians -- the opposing arm and head were dealt with. These have often to be dealt with among the saints. The head refers to natural, mental ability, and the arm the power by which it would prevail. We are apt to rely upon natural ability, but it will fail us in the things of God, and in time will turn to opposition, and this brings in the judgment seen here in Gad.
Then the scripture goes on to say, "And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the Lord, and his judgments with Israel". The New Translation reads, "There was reserved the portion of the lawgiver". Gad reserves a portion for the lawgiver. In spite of Paul's severity, those of the spirit of Gad in Corinth would love him. And is it not so? Where there is love for Christ in keeping His commandments, a portion is reserved for the lawgiver. It is a question of the lawgiver, so to speak, in Corinthians, "the law of the house", (@Ezekiel 43:12). We need not shrink from it; to those who love Christ it is the perfect law of liberty as governing the assembly down here. If there is no room for the lawgiver in a meeting, it is not honoured of God. People talk about being gathered to the Lord's name, but what about the lawgiver? There is no moral value attached to any meeting in which there is not a portion reserved for the lawgiver. In this way "he provided the first part for himself". It is in considering for
{103}
Christ that we serve our own interests best, and if I impose something on others, I must impose it on myself. How can I have weight with my brethren if I am not governed myself by the commandments I seek to enforce? Deborah dwelt under her *own* palm tree; that is victory over herself. It is thus she had power with her brethren; they came to her for judgment. If one does not rule himself, he is of no value at all in the house of God. As soon as a brother is seen ruling his own spirit, the brethren give him room. It is the enlargement of Gad.
"He came with the heads of the people". He is not a king; he is not like Adonijah; he comes with the heads of the people; he recognises others who are exercising rule. If God has graciously been pleased to give ability to another, it is a matter of community; the wealth of one is the wealth of all; the wisdom and love of one are the wisdom and love of all. He is not envious of the other heads; he is marked by the features of a brother.
Then "He executed the justice of the Lord". How much that is needed! It enters into the care meeting -- that is, where the heads are together. Young brethren may come to this, to learn how to reach a true judgment, which in the assembly is executed. The apostle speaks about the least in the church settling secular matters, showing what any christian may do; as having the Spirit of God, he has, potentially at least, more judicial ability than the Lord Chancellor! Gad comes with the heads of the people; that is the care meeting; they execute justice and judgment in Israel. I am speaking of principles; it is a question of how things are done, and whether justice and judgment in Israel shall prevail, or whether there is to be wrangling, and things are left without anything being accomplished. It is the principle of the thing -- that is to say, whether justice and judgment are executed. The brethren come together, they investigate, they weigh facts, and present things impartially to the assembly, where, according to the wisdom from above,
{104}
that is first pure, without partiality and hypocrisy, justice and judgment are executed. What is thus shown in Gad is the ground of the enlargement that is needed, as indicated by the apostle in his letters to the Corinthians.
May God bless His word.
{105}
Pages 105 - 197, "The Spirit of Judgment", Readings and an Address, Rochester, U.S.A. 1931. (Volume 108).
THE SPIRIT OF JUDGMENT (1)
@Judges 1:1 - 15; @Judges 2:1 - 5
W.M. The book of Judges begins with the death of Joshua and ends with the expressed need of a king.
J.T. In this book the best elements available are introduced at the beginning; but chapter 2 shows that Israel grew worse and worse throughout the long period of the rule of the judges. Grace on God's part raised up deliverers from time to time, leading on to the king and therefore to finality, typically, as represented in David. Samuel is the last of the judges, although his service does not come into this book. The New Testament connects the ministry of the judges with him, it says, "till Samuel the prophet", (@Acts 13:20). His ministry was prophetic, introducing the king. But he "judged Israel all the days of his life" (@1 Samuel 7:15), and was the link between the judges and royalty.
A.F.M. Would you tell us what is in your mind in suggesting this book?
J.T. That we might acquire more of the *spirit of judgment*.
A.R.S. Judgment in the way of discernment?
J.T. Yes, quite; and administratively too; because the discernment falls to the ground unless I can administer what is required. If I find one is not just right, and I do not administer what is needed for correction, I do not help. Many have discernment, but the thing discerned is not met; for discernment will not in itself help unless I couple it with administration.
J.S. Discernment will not correct unless there is action.
J.T. No. The element of administration must come in.
{106}
So you find in Judges, "he went out to war" (chapter 3:10) -- that is, to deal with the evil. So that the element of judgment is an immense thing; without it we cannot be effective in our church relations. There must be discernment first and then administration.
Ques. You would make a difference between *our* actions and divine interventions?
J.T. Quite. Our actions, based on discernment as in the light, will lead to, or synchronise with divine interventions. If I have discernment and am governed by it, the Lord will be with me and use me in dealing with evil.
A.N.W. The judge arises in response to the cry from the people.
J.T. Yes. God ever regards the genuine cry of His people. He raised up Othniel, but according to what was there morally.
A.F.M. All through this book moral features are in evidence; exercise in the godly is going on.
Rem. Is not that the character of the book? It is moral rather than historical. At the end of it you find things that probably happened at the beginning.
J.T. Exactly. It would be a mistake to assume that the events occurred chronologically. You have, for instance, things brought in here before the action of Caleb and Othniel, that happened after. They are put in because of moral importance, that we might see what God has in mind. I refer particularly to the need of leadership expressed in verse 1. Leadership has a great place with God.
A.N.W. Chapter 1 gives the death of Joshua, but chapter 2 shows what he does before he dies.
Rem. The last incident in the book probably occurred soon after the death of Joshua, but morally it is necessary to close with such a sorrowful picture.
W.M. Do you see an analogy between Judges and present conditions in the assembly?
{107}
J.T. I do; and because of this analogy the book was "written for our instruction", (@Romans 15:4).
Ques. Would this book of Judges be parallel with 2 Timothy?
J.T. I think so. I hope we shall see first, the good elements; how God brings in these. Because not only are the words inspired, but also the arrangement of the book. The people said, "Which of us shall go up against the Canaanites first, to fight against them?" They put it into God's hands as to who should lead. The book thus begins with the recognition by Israel of God's place amongst them -- that *He* was King. This was the fact governing the dispensation, and fully maintained by Gideon, but wickedly denied by Abimelech. It is not that the others would not go, for there was no question of holding back; but which should go up *first*?
J.S. Why is the question of leadership raised?
J.T. It is God's way. Joshua is no longer there and it is a question of God giving a new start; and God's way is through leadership. We have in Christ the great idea of leadership. He is the Leader of our salvation, for example; He is Leader in everything. Their inquiry brings an immediate answer from God.
G.W.H. It was an honest desire on their part to know whom He would choose.
A.F.M. In sovereign selection Judah is taken; it is in line with the end of the book: the need of a king, and David is chosen afterwards.
J.T. Bearing in mind that "our Lord has sprung out of Juda" (@Hebrews 7:14), we have an instance here of how Christ was always in the mind of God. He did not move except in relation to Christ. This book, Ruth, and Samuel all go together, leading up to David who represents the kingship of Christ.
A.R.S. Is it not important to be able to discern when the change of leadership comes? We might desire things to go along in an easy way; but that is not God's way.
{108}
Joshua has died, and now it is a question of new leadership.
J.T. That is the idea. It makes much of God, and should exercise everybody. It was not a question for *some* of the children of Israel; the inquiry as to leadership is by all of them. Earlier, Joshua was divinely appointed but not so here; so that the test is great.
A.R.S. What do you make of that -- that the new leader was actually apparent?
J.T. It is the general state of the people. Things here are not on the same level as when Moses died in the plains of Moab; Jordan was in view, Canaan near; typically, the ministry of the Spirit, beginning with the brazen serpent, had been effective. But we are in the presence of decline here. The chapter shows, while speaking about Judah and Simeon and others, that in the main they did *not* possess -- there was failure. So that I think no leader being appointed had that in view.
Ques. Have you any thought why leadership went from Levi in Moses, and Joseph in Joshua, to Judah here in Othniel?
J.T. It is sovereignty. But leadership culminated in Judah (compare @Psalm 78:67 - 72). Christ is in view. The selection of Judah here would remind one who had faith, of the purpose of God prophetically indicated in @Genesis 49:9 - 12.
W.M. Christ came of the line of Judah.
A.N.W. Why does the selection of Simeon come in?
J.T. It was by Judah. That brings out the next thing -- the *brotherly* spirit. Judah represents that; he is the big brother, so to speak; he is big spiritually.
J.S. So that if you make room for Christ in Judah, you make room for the brother.
J.T. Exactly. Simeon's territory was within Judah's territory. This brings out the moral greatness of Judah; he made room for his brother, and was on happy terms with him. Instead of going afield for one to join him in the war, he takes the brother in his own territory.
{109}
W.M. "Simeon *his brother*". God's answer to the question of Israel is very prompt.
J.T. God does not take long to move, when there is real exercise. And there is the promise of deliverance through Judah, in God's answer.
A.R.S. They asked Jehovah. There was a good state. There was, as it were, prayer about it on the part of the whole congregation.
B.T.F. Is there not also the expression of Judah's fellowship?
J.T. If there is the divine selection of Judah, there is in him a brotherly spirit. Because if God makes a selection of you for some service, and you fail of the brotherly spirit, you will discredit Him.
C.B. It says of Judah, "as to thee, thy brethren will praise thee", (@Genesis 49:8).
Ques. "He first finds his own brother", (@John 1:41). Would that be like Judah and Simeon?
J.T. Quite. That fits in here. God makes a selection; but it is vindicated by the character of the one selected.
F.H.L. Is there any moral leading-up here?
J.T. I do not know whether the people got much gain. They grew worse and worse. This brings out the wonderful faithfulness of God. Their state was evil, and they were going down all the time; so that there was no remedy but a king.
Rem. God says, "I will never break my covenant with you".
J.T. It is the faithfulness of God.
A.F.M. Is there any point in only the tribes in the land being reviewed here, and those on the wilderness side not being mentioned?
J.T. This would mean that failure is reckoned in relation to the greatest privilege accorded, as in Ephesus. The Lord says to the assembly there, "Remember therefore *whence* thou art fallen", (@Revelation 2:5).
The existence of the brotherly spirit is confirmatory
{110}
of the divine choice of Judah. As a brother he confirms it here by seeking the co-operation of Simeon, the one inside his own territory. It brings out the character of Judah. Already this had been evidenced in his speaking to Joseph with regard to his father and Benjamin (see @Genesis 44). This is most practical as bearing on what I am in my own locality. The element of mutuality comes into view here -- Judah said, "Come up with me into my lot". See what a partnership Simeon is brought into! It has already been indicated that Judah would be successful; he is not selfish about it, but shares with Simeon his brother.
J.S. Would Simeon being within Judah's boundary indicate the divinely appointed way as to boundaries?
J.T. The idea of boundaries comes into this subject, because Simeon was actually inside Judah's territory. The boundaries are named in Joshua; these being *irregular* are intended to draw out latent love among the saints. They are not on straight lines as in Ezekiel; one brother's share coming inside the territory of another. Therefore we cannot bring natural wisdom into divine boundaries.
There are two things in @Proverbs 22 and 23. First, "Remove not the ancient landmark which thy fathers have set" (verse 28); this suggests the result of the work of God in the early brethren. In the next chapter you get, "Remove not the ancient landmark" (verse 10), leaving out reference to fathers. The first implies affection and respect for the fathers. But then the landmark itself is right. What they did is right.
Ques. It says, "And Judah went with Simeon his brother" (verse 17). The brotherly feature is emphasised, is it not?
J.T. Yes. First it says, "And Judah said to Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, and let us fight against the Canaanites, and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot; and Simeon went with him". And then, "And Judah went up; and Jehovah delivered the
{111}
Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand, and they smote them". That is, they share in the thing, and God honours that.
Rem. Then in verse 17 it says, "And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites", they help each other.
E.J.N. There is a perfect showing forth of what brethren are normally; they share together. "A brother is born for adversity", (@Proverbs 17:17).
M.D.F. Would you say they had a good start? They made room first for God, and then there is room for the brother.
J.T. That is it. I am sure in our *local* meetings we could not possibly proceed on any other principle. First we consider for God; we recognise His rights in the place.
Rem. Sovereign selection goes hand in hand with qualifications for that selection.
J.T. I think it does. Only we have examples of failure, as in Jeroboam and Saul. These are a challenge for us. I refer to the fact that you may get certain persons apparently brought forward who become material for the enemy to work on. How solemn! We must recognise divine wisdom in this, for God would expose the flesh in the varied circumstances in which it may be found. In Christ we see what God has selected for His own pleasure. All else is detail, either to foreshadow Christ or to bring Him in prominently. But if God makes a selection, it is for the one selected to justify it.
A.R.S. God's government is worked out through selections such as Jeroboam.
J.T. That is it -- to bring out the bad elements. It is part of God's way to bring out such elements; in such cases we have examples of the flesh in the circumstances given. All this is for our learning, so that we should not be deceived by outward appearances.
A.F.M. God's selection is justified in Othniel, Caleb's son-in-law.
{112}
J.T. I think the Spirit of God intends Othniel to convey the full thought of a judge. His service justifies his being selected. If God gives you a gift, He has laid His hand on you. Well, you might rest in that and say, 'Do you not know I have a gift?' But then are you justifying God in your character and ways?
G.W.H. This thought, delineated here, finds full development in David -- the brotherly spirit in sharing the spoils.
Rem. Timothy had known Paul's "teaching" and "conduct" (@2 Timothy 3:10).
J.T. Just so. The Lord uses a word about Paul that is suggestive of quality. He says, "This man is an *elect vessel* to me", (@Acts 9:15). If you are going to use a vessel, you are very particular about it. We are to be "sanctified, serviceable to the Master", (@2 Timothy 2:21).
Ques. Why is Judah's territory too great for him?
J.T. To bring out what was there. God loves to bring out the brotherly spirit in us; so that He orders our circumstances to this end. If God gives you more than others in your meeting, it is not to glorify you, but to enable you to serve His people. What you have is, in a way, their property; indeed you are this yourself, (compare @1 Corinthians 3:21 - 23). If I have any ability from God, or any commission, it is for the saints, and I must not use it selfishly. Christ shares the inheritance with us. In Him the great principle we are speaking of is seen, and it is to be worked out in detail in us.
Rem. "Wisdom has been justified of all her children", (@Luke 7:35). If one is selected and marked with gift, one should justify it.
J.T. I think God would delight in the opening out of the thing, like a flower. Think of the vastness of the opening out of Christ in His people as under God's eye! Christ is to be reflected in us; what is any one of us otherwise?
In this warfare they come in contact with an extraordinary
{113}
kind of man, Adoni-Bezek. Having caught him, they cut off his thumbs and his great toes. What can you do with a hard man like that? They could have killed him, but they do not. One thing, however, is in his favour, he recognises the government of God upon him. He says, "As I have done, so God has requited me".
G.W.H. They limited his movements and activities.
J.T. Yes. He exemplifies a man that relies on developed natural power, and was cruel in the use of it; he compelled seventy kings to glean under his table.
A.F.M. Is this disciplinary in his case?
J.T. Yes. It brings out how those having the spirit of Judah deal with a man like Adoni-Bezek.
A.R.S. It says he died.
J.T. It does not say how long he lived; the point is *where* he died. They brought him to *Jerusalem* and *there* he died. As reduced he was set in advantageous surroundings, but he never flourished again. It takes grace and wisdom to deal with a brother typified by this man. If there is anything of God in a man like Adoni-Bezek, limitation helps him; if he is not likely to be governed by the Spirit of God, that is the best you can do with him. Understood spiritually, Adoni-Bezek received wise treatment from Judah here.
W.M. It is a serious thing to be reduced in this way under the government of God.
J.S. It is better to limit a brother than that he should be at large pulling things down.
J.T. In view of what Jerusalem represents spiritually, they could not have done better for him; it was more than he deserved. But then it is these two brothers who are doing it!
W.M. He was an extraordinary man to deal with, and they dealt with him in an extraordinary manner.
Rem. What they did was an evidence of the government of God.
{114}
J.T. Typically, it proves ability among the brethren to do what is right. There must have been something of value in him, for he made an acknowledgment of the just government of God.
G.W.H. That is, what he had done to others they had done to him.
Rem. They became the actual instruments of God in the matter.
J.T. The fruit of the work of God is very scarce, and ought to be preserved. Every little bit of it is of value. The ministry of John develops the ability to conserve every bit of the work of God. You might say, 'This brother is hard to get along with'; but if you heard of a brother, say, from among the sects, interested in the things of God, you would go miles to see him! There was not much in Nicodemus at the beginning, but he comes out well at the end.
W.M. It is a serious thing to mutilate our brethren.
J.T. It is very much like circumcision, the putting off of the body of the flesh -- the thumbs and great toes.
B.T.F. Would you say that the ministry of Christ comes in in a case like that, that what is evil is completely neutralised?
J.T. Yes. It is neutralised by spiritual power. Jerusalem, although burned as the stronghold of the Jebusites, was of great importance in God's mind. Scripture abounds with great spiritual thoughts centring in Jerusalem. Adoni-Bezek, crippled in the flesh, was brought there.
Coming to Othniel -- if we are to have a true idea of the judges, we must keep him clearly before us.
J.S. What feature of the truth does he set forth?
J.T. I think it is the spiritual family setting. That is the next great element, the roots of the man. He is, so to speak, "rooted and founded in love", (@Ephesians 3:17). It is like Colossians and Ephesians, the family setting is ever in view.
{115}
W.M. It is very significant that what we have in Colossians we have in Othniel, the setting aside of natural mentality -- he takes the 'City of the Book'. And the Spirit of God comes in in connection with the springs of water.
J.T. That is very important. He was tested: could he take *that* city?
W.M. It is much easier to be guided by a book of rules and regulations than by divine principles.
A.F.M. I suppose the 'City of the Book', Kirjath-sepher, is superseded by Christ, as is also Kirjath-Arba, as seen in Colossians and Ephesians.
J.T. It says, "And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron -- the name of Hebron before was Kirjath-Arba; and they slew Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai". It was the seat of the giants, and it was important to deal with them; they refer to great men according to the flesh, which we have to meet now. "And from there he went against the inhabitants of Debir; now the name of Debir before was Kirjath-sepher". This is where Othniel shines.
Ques. What about the change of names?
J.T. Hebron and Debir are the two new names instead of Kirjath-Arba and Kirjath-sepher. The latter, the 'City of the Book', suggests the universities of today; they must have their books. Much is made of education and universities, but not in relation to the things of God. Caleb is urgent about the smiting of *this* city. He represents those who know that the young brothers and sisters will never get on, so as to exercise their judgment among us, unless they are delivered from the 'City of the Book', what man's mind produces -- the great men of this world. Caleb represents the spiritual element which sees that unless young people overcome these things, they never can be of service in the church.
A.R.S. A spiritual element working among the young to spur them on.
{116}
J.T. These meetings are to bring all, but particularly the young, into the mind of God. What dangers there are in the giants! We are to be delivered from these things.
B.T.F. The 'City of the Book' refers to mere human ability and learning.
J.T. It appeals strongly to human pride and ambition. A *good* library, however, is valuable; Paul advises Timothy to give attention to reading. Paul was also concerned about "the books" and "the parchments", (@2 Timothy 4:13). We cannot get along without written ministry, both past and present; but by itself it will never make a Caleb, a man of long experience with God. These things will never help apart from experience in the wilderness with God. Achsah, Caleb's daughter comes in, and she is concerned about *springs*, not books, finery, nor mere wealth. She wanted springs of water.
Rem. They correspond with Hebron.
J.T. That is right. Hebron is before the world; it is most interesting and instructive. It was the burial place of Abraham, Isaac, Rebecca, Jacob, and of others marked by faith.
Rem. It was built seven years before Zoan. It antedates everything here.
J.T. It gets its name *before* it is taken by Israel. It is called Hebron in @Numbers 13:22. The city stands for what is spiritual.
W.M. In Scripture what is spiritual comes last. Hence Kirjath-Arba, as a name, is before Hebron.
N.McC. There is an element of reward entering into the capture of Kirjath-sepher.
J.T. Achsah conveys the idea of the church. The church needs the Spirit. If you get the features of the church, there will be a recognition of, and desire for the Spirit.
A.F.M. You infer that the church demands the Spirit?
J.T. If the Spirit is operating in any company, they will look for the spiritual touch in the ministry. Normally the church will ever demand that. Achsah had already an
{117}
inheritance, but she says, "Give me also springs of water". A good deal is said in this book about springs of water.
Rem. Apart from what they represent, church procedure is mere ceremony and form.
J.T. There may be accuracy in form and order, but you need more than that. You may get good addresses too, but without spiritual substance.
Rem. The meaning of Othniel is, 'Lion of God'. It is the character of Christ; and if Achsah is coming in and demanding the springs, it is as linked with Othniel.
J.T. Kirjath-sepher would mean that you can get along with books, implying intellectual culture and power; but Achsah sees the need of springs. She urged Othniel to ask for "the field"; but she *sprang* down and asked for more; it seems that she waxed bolder in her requests. She says, "Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a southern land; give me also springs of water". And he gave her more than she asked for; Caleb represents God in giving "the upper springs and the lower springs". God does "far exceedingly above all which we ask or think, according to the power which works in us", (@Ephesians 3:20).
W.B-w. You might attract people by natural ability, but they cannot make headway without the Spirit.
J.T. We may be accurate in our ministry, if you go by "the book". As working on the line of human education and ability you have that standard in mind; but if you rely on the Spirit of God in your ministry, you are not a slave to man's standard; what you are concerned about is the mind of God being ministered in power.
Ques. What about the upper and lower springs?
J.T. I suppose they would include Romans and Ephesians. Ephesians gives us the heavenly things.
Rem. Romans makes much of the Spirit.
J.T. Colossians mentions the Spirit only once. But both Romans and Ephesians make much of the Spirit.
{118}
Now I thought we might notice the failure alluded to in the end of the chapter -- what Israel did *not* do. This is set forth from verse 27 to the end. But before that, it ought to be noted that Joseph took Bethel, which is the house of God. Afterwards it says that they did *not* dispossess. "Ephraim did not dispossess the Canaanites"; and so with Naphtali and others. That is the failure. The greater part were in failure. They allowed the Canaanites to stay, not being able to dispossess them.
A.F.M. This is the *detail* of it. Joshua took the land; that is more *general*.
J.T. And what was left for each of the tribes, was to dispossess the Canaanite in his *own* territory.
A.F.M. The point would be, as to ourselves, as to how much we have yet to possess. The general thought is that the land is taken; but how much have we in the way of *possession*?
J.T. For that, you have to dislodge the Canaanite. It is local responsibility, what they ought to have done, but did not do; and that is the basis of the next chapter. It says, "And the Angel of Jehovah came up from Gilgal to Bochim"; that is, there is a lower spiritual state of things. Bochim is on a lower level. It is not Gilgal; it is not Colossians; it is Revelation. The position the Angel has taken up is on a lower level.
J.T.Jr. The springs, rightly appropriated, would keep us near God and on the high level.
A.R.S. Would it represent the angels of the churches?
J.T. They are representative, but in @Revelation 1 the angel also represents *distance*. The ground of the epistles is left.
Rem. Weeping sometimes proves nothing of moral value, as for example, when the spies returned, (@Numbers 14).
J.T. There is virtue in it here in that the Angel came to the place of it; but it does not represent proper church ground. It is angelic ministry. The law was "ordained
{119}
through angels" (@Galatians 3:19); but that is not our dispensation.
Ques. Is the reason that Joseph overcame, the same reason that makes one local company prosper more than another?
J.T. Obviously Judah and Joseph did better than the others. They were the first to get the inheritance and had the chief place. Judah is royalty and Joseph takes Bethel, the house of God.
W.B-w. Joseph wanted a larger portion.
J.T. It was a good indication. But Joshua said, 'If you are great, go up and take possession'. They had not done so.
A.R.S. Why did not the Angel tell them to drive the Canaanites out? He speaks of what they did *not* do.
J.T. I think it is to bring out the actual state of things, so that the changed circumstances, because of the failure of Israel, and God's relation to them in these circumstances, might be clear. God intervenes in faithfulness amid the irretrievable condition of the people. Chapters 18 and 19 are brought in to show the condition that existed. Chapter 2:14 - 23 records the steady descent to the general depravity which marked the people.
Rem. The Angel says, "But ye have not hearkened unto my voice. Why have ye done this? Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you". I suppose that would indicate that it is hopeless to look for a universal recovery in christendom. We must be thankful if there is any touch of divine work and that we are put in contact with it, and we should make the most of it.
A.R. The people later even go so far as to give Samson, one of their saviours, into the hands of the Philistines.
J.T. It was Judah, the tribe that began so well, as we have seen -- foreshadowing, in their dealing with Samson, the guilt of the Jews in handing Christ over to the Romans. Chapter 2 explains all that develops in the book.
{120}
Jehovah in grace raised up judges, and was with each judge for the deliverance of the people, but as "the judge died ... they turned back and corrupted themselves more than their fathers" (verse 19).
{121}
THE SPIRIT OF JUDGMENT (2)
@Judges 3:1 - 31
A.N.W. Would you mind making plain how the service of the judge comes in as in the character of discernment, as stated this morning, in view, for instance, of verse 18 of chapter 2: "And when Jehovah raised them up judges, then Jehovah was with the judge, and saved them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for it repented Jehovah because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and crushed them".
J.T. I think that what is given us of Othniel helps to the understanding of the qualifications of a judge, and how the ability to judge with discrimination necessarily enters into this book. It is said in @Isaiah 11:2 - 4: "and the spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah. And his delight will be in the fear of Jehovah; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears; but with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity the meek of the earth". I thought that we might see there the spirit of the judge as seen practically in Christ, with a view to what is said in @Acts 17:31, that God "is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed, giving the proof of it to all in having raised him from among the dead". Judgment according to God must take on the character of discernment.
G.W.H. And is there not a distinction to be made as regards the heroic deeds of these judges, and this exercise of the spirit of judgment active in regard to the people themselves, as Samuel went around from place to place judging Israel?
{122}
J.T. Yes, quite.
Ques. Is not judgment equally a discernment of right as of wrong; a discernment of what is and a pronouncement of it?
J.T. Exactly. In Othniel you have one from good family roots, in connection with which there is ability to discern what the enemy is using to disaffect the people of God; added to this there is the judgment required to know the conditions under which they suffer, so as to meet such conditions. Hence we are enjoined as to the exercise of our senses so as to discern between good and evil; otherwise there cannot be judgment according to God.
A.F.M. The judge was raised up to meet what the enemy had brought in. So that Othniel meets this condition brought about by the king of Mesopotamia.
J.T. What you see is that Chushan-rishathaim was a man of great resources. Well, to meet that, you would require to have resources. Therefore, the consideration of Othniel will help us as to what judgeship means. You have to meet the conditions with such means as would overcome them. Now this king, Chushan-rishathaim, is said to be king of Mesopotamia, meaning 'Syria of the two rivers'. A river indicates many things; amongst others, resourcefulness, or the means of resources. Any country well 'rivered' is sure to be prosperous and fruitful, therefore affording resources. And it was that sort of thing that the enemy was using to enslave the people of God at this time. How would Othniel meet it? He was a man of resources of another kind, but of resources, nevertheless.
A.F.M. He had upper and lower springs.
J.S. Would the end in view be not only deliverance, but rest for the people? "The land had rest forty years".
J.T. That is the end in view. But I think we should get clear as to what judgeship and its qualifications mean.
{123}
The history of Othniel indicates the kind of qualifications God had in mind. Service requires secret history with God; so that the servant is divinely prepared when the time comes. You find in the history of God's ways with His people that in emergencies a man of God is there, sometimes without a name even, as in chapter 6:7 - 10. On certain occasions He will use nameless persons, for God has His reserves *always*. And so if a judge is needed, God has been preparing him beforehand; Othniel is typical of that. In verse 9 of this chapter it is said, "And the children of Israel cried to Jehovah; and Jehovah raised up a saviour to the children of Israel, who saved them, Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother". He already had him, but now he is "raised up". It is not his qualifications now, but the fact that he is raised up as a *saviour*.
W.B-w. Spiritual discernment precedes judgment; discernment of what the enemy is doing before we arrive at a judgment.
J.T. How can we exercise discrimination so as to arrive at a judgment, unless we have discernment?
W.B-w. The application follows that.
J.T. The application is that you begin to administer according to what you discern. God may raise you up for that purpose. We must distinguish between the ability to discern and responsibility to administer according to what is discerned, in God raising up a person and using him.
B.T.F. Have you a thought as to why Caleb is mentioned in regard to Othniel?
J.T. He represents the mind of God. He knew what was needed. And then he had *some* understanding of what Achsah represents. We have to look at these things antitypically to understand them. There is the mind of God, and those who are with Him here understand what is necessary and what He provides. Achsah understood what was needed, and Caleb gave her the springs. These entered into Othniel's qualifications for service.
{124}
A.J.D. Is raising up consequent upon there being features that please God?
J.T. The raising up is God's act; it would be based on His knowledge of the servant. He said of Aaron, "I *know* that he can speak well", (@Exodus 4:14).
A.F.M. In most instances we get the judge delivering first, and then judging afterwards. Is this normal, saving first, and then judging?
J.T. Here Othniel "judged Israel; and he went out to war"; but the general statement is that "Jehovah raised up a saviour to the children of Israel, *who saved them*, Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother. And the Spirit of Jehovah was upon him, and he judged Israel; and he went out to war". He saved them.
W.M. Chapter 1 suggests potential gift, and chapter 3 the exercise of it. He becomes a saviour. It is a sovereign gift and then responsibility.
J.T. Chapter 1 gives the earlier history of the man; chapter 3 shows how that history entered into his service. He was a saviour, a man of spiritual resources, and so met the thing that Satan used. Satan was using resources, but God met them with His in Othniel.
Rem. Is it not contemplated in Corinthians that the spirit of judgment should be among all saints. Even if it comes in leadership, as it does, it should prevail among the saints as such.
J.T. So that even the one "little esteemed in the assembly" (@1 Corinthians 6:4) is to judge.
W.B-w. Would you say the 'two rivers' represented currents of evil which Othniel discerned to begin with?
J.T. They indicate means of worldly resources. We know from the prophets exactly how the Nile was regarded (see @Ezekiel 29). Rivers represent, when in the hands of the enemy, what is evil, as the resources of the world.
Rem. It is a serious thing when we consider that these
{125}
two rivers originally were of the four from Eden, intended for blessing, yet they had become perverted under the power of evil.
J.T. Two of them so employed, I think, would suggest excessive opposition to what is of God. It is a combination.
A.R.S. Othniel knew the tactics of the enemy and planned to defeat them. Is there a connection between that and the strong man who gets bound by the Stronger than he (@Luke 11:21,22)?
J.T. There is; you see in the letters to Corinth how a movement of Satan is made. Every movement of Satan has its own features, and requires discernment as to how to meet it. The apostle Paul says, "That we might not have Satan get an advantage against us, for we are not ignorant of *his* thoughts", (@2 Corinthians 2:11). This enters into judgeship, involving ability to discern and meet the attacks of the enemy.
A.N.W. Is Othniel a saviour with a view of being a judge, or a judge to be a saviour?
J.T. Both. He raised up a saviour to save them. And then we are told how it came about: "And the Spirit of Jehovah was upon him, and he judged Israel; and he went out to war, and Jehovah gave Chushan-rishathaim king of Syria into his hand". We have the general fact stated that he was a saviour and saved them; but the judgment came first according to verse 10. That is, he judged Israel, but it was by the Spirit of Jehovah. It came upon him. It is not essentially his experience or qualifications, but by the power of God's Spirit specially upon him. As discrimination begins with any one of us, such a one discerns a thing is wrong; that is good, but if he is quiescent as to it, that is not good. Judgeship implies not only discernment but administration, which is not to be viewed lightly, for it enters into every act based on discernment. How do I regard the brother or sister responsible for the evil? As soon as I begin to administer
{126}
according to the judgment, then God comes in and the Spirit of Jehovah coming upon me means I represent God; not only am I controlled by righteousness, or the exercise of love, but the Spirit of Jehovah comes upon me, as upon Othniel here, who judged Israel and went out to war.
Rem. In the book of Revelation not only is there discernment, but judgment, and the carrying of the thing out.
J.T. One great point here is that the Angel leaves Gilgal and goes to Bochim. That is an important feature of this book, the change of the divine position. God goes on as far as He can; but He cannot go on with apostasy.
Rem. So in 1 Timothy a definite attitude is taken by God, and then conditions come in which necessitate 2 Timothy; this is like going from Gilgal to Bochim.
W.B-w. The Spirit coming upon a person (corresponding with chapter 3:10) is when he commences to administer in the light he has got, in a given case.
J.T. Inquiry may begin by one, but you can only go a certain length, as in @Matthew 18. You first go to your brother yourself; then you take one or two besides; and then you go to the assembly, where you have what God identifies Himself with. The power of God is there to deal with the evil. This principle is exceedingly practical: whenever I see anything evil occurring I judge it, and then move to meet it. Many of us are quiescent in such instances, and the enemy gets an advantage. Nabal's young man saw what happened, he understood the answer Nabal sent to David, and while he could not meet the difficulty occasioned, he was not quiescent about it. He told Abigail -- as if to say, 'That is your matter'. That is the thing; if we move to meet the difficulty God will come in.
W.M. It requires courage to do that.
J.T. It does indeed, but there is a great deal of letting things go with us. "The Spirit of Jehovah was upon him";
{127}
when that takes place in any measure you have what represents God, and evil is dealt with authoritatively.
A.J.D. Should this principle be found in sisters?
J.T. I think so. The house of Chloe did not let the thing rest, but acquainted Paul with what occurred, and God came in, and the matter was dealt with.
A.F.M. There is a great difference between being quiescent and militant in regard to evil; and even if we are not able to act, we can look to God to come in; we can be militant in our spirits.
J.T. God will surely help, and the procedure will take on a divine character; not only are you acting in love, but in authority, so that the thing is effectively dealt with.
E.P. Do you get both ideas in @Isaiah 28:6? Jehovah will be "for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate;" and this is in the presence of Israel's apostasy.
J.T. Quite. It often comes to this, that the Spirit of the Lord lifts up a standard when there is discernment and administration based on it. It is there that His standard is lifted up.
A.J.D. Is that the Spirit's special move for the moment?
J.T. It is. Of Othniel, the first judge, it is said: "And the Spirit of Jehovah was upon him, and he judged Israel; and he went out to war, and Jehovah gave Chushan-rishathaim, king of Syria, into his hand; and his hand prevailed against Chushan-rishathaim". You see how the victory is complete; his hand prevailed.
Rem. In Revelation a great deal is made of *seeing*.
J.T. What you get there is that the Lamb had seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God which are sent into all the earth. Both in regard to the assembly and the general government of God there is the power of discernment. There can be no judgment
{128}
or deliverance without such power and action based on it.
Ques. What about "all the wars of Canaan"? Are they general crises?
J.T. I think they are. The expression refers to the book of Joshua particularly. It is important to see that these Canaanites were left so that we all should become warriors, and so have part in further wars for the testimony. The wars are on a high level.
A.P-t. In the forty years following Othniel's victories what would be his position?
J.T. He would be a judge, during which time the land had rest.
A.F.M. Why is it said, "The land had rest"? The expression occurs frequently in this book.
J.T. The land itself is much in the mind of God. It would mean that, there being no war, there was rest generally.
A.F.M. The land and people are identified. With regard to Othniel, we are not informed as to what instrument he employed for subduing the king of Syria. The two following judges, Ehud and Shamgar, used a sword and an ox goad respectively.
J.T. What you get is that the Spirit of Jehovah is enough to cope with all these attacks. I should think that this war with Chushan-rishathaim would be a military operation on a large scale, by the Spirit of God.
Ques. How about the eight years of verse 8?
J.T. That refers not to warfare but to the oppression. The period of the war is not stated. He went out to war. Othniel judged Israel and went out. He was not an indolent man like David was on one occasion in Jerusalem -- he abode at the time when kings go forth to battle. Othniel *went out*.
Ques. Is it in contrast to verse 5 when they dwelt among the Canaanites?
{129}
J.T. The early part of the chapter shows how the matter stood. They were not faithful, hence they dwelt among the Canaanites, and you have corruption in marriage alliances.
With Ehud it is not a question of the opposition of earthly resources, but *fatness* -- human pride. Eglon was a fat man, and his forces took the city of palm trees. He evidently made Jericho, or the city of palm trees in the land, his headquarters. This warfare is marked by a personal exploit.
Rem. So it says of Ehud that he "made him a sword"; it is individual work.
J.T. Being a left-handed man, he would make one to suit himself A judge understands what he has to deal with, and *must* meet it. God helps him in his preparation as in the actual conflict.
G.W.H. He does not go by precedent either.
J.T. No. We have no record of any one acting just in this way before.
Rem. As is the man so the implement. David used a sling and a stone.
J.T. Ehud makes a weapon that would deal with fatness effectively. And he lets it stay in Eglon, where it can do the best service. It refers to the word of God.
G.W.H. He struck the thing at its root.
Ques. Would Moab typify pride; and the belly the lower affections?
J.T. That is right. Moab was at ease, not emptied from vessel to vessel. It is typical of a condition among God's people where the flesh, fostered by ease and selfishness, and resulting in pride, had acquired a place. The Lord Jesus is the very opposite of this; He says, "I may count all my bones" (@Psalm 22:17).
R.W.S. What is the force of his being left-handed, and of the way he girded his sword?
J.T. It speaks of what is irregular. In religious history a great deal is made of regularity; you must conform to
{130}
certain rules to be in the service of God. This man would not have come up to that; he was irregular.
Ques. Do you touch the clerical system when you speak of this?
J.T. Yes. Ehud would not have conformed with clerical requirements.
Rem. There is no allowance made for the Spirit of God in those systems.
Rem. The Lord did not go on regular lines when He chose Peter and Andrew, John and James.
J.T. Why did He not choose Nicodemus or some others of the rabbis? He does not choose what man recognises. Ehud indicates God's choice.
E.P. Paul said to Timothy that he had fully known his doctrine and manner of life. And he would use it.
J.T. He was not told to wear Paul's cloak, but was to *bring* it with him. Timothy knew that he could not put it on, but he would admire it! I believe the cloak and the books would humble him, for they would suggest how great a vessel Paul was -- one to be followed.
Rem. Gehazi used Elisha's staff, but he did not accomplish anything.
J.T. Neither could Elisha himself. He could not raise the child with that staff. He had to lie upon him, to come down to the child's measure. Everything has its own requirements, and we have to be ready to meet them.
Rem. Do we get "the wars of Canaan" in the way Paul deals with things at Corinth, for instance, and in the epistle to the Galatians? Timothy would have the gain of all that.
J.T. Just so. We are all to learn how to be good soldiers of Jesus Christ, taking our share in suffering.
Rem. We get the equipment for the wars of Canaan in @Ephesians 6.
J.T. It is the *whole* armour of God.
W.B-w. Ehud girds the sword on his thigh. Is there a connection with the word of God?
{131}
J.T. There is a very great connection. Ehud was with God, and acted with skill. He brought a present to the king, which evidently was borne by others. They went back and he with them; and then he returned by himself from the quarries, which required remarkable courage and wisdom. Everything fitted perfectly, and the result is complete.
A.F.M. The first rest through Othniel was forty years, and this rest through Ehud eighty years. Is this period of eighty years according to the greatness of the victory gained?
J.T. I think it is; it is the longest period mentioned. It is evidently the result of evil being dealt with at the root by the word of God.
A.F.M. I was wondering about the city of palm trees being re-taken, what is the point of that?
J.T. I do not know. Undoubtedly Jericho, the scene of the first great victory of Israel, is referred to. It represented the prowess of Israel in spiritual power. And now it is in enemy hands; Moab had taken that. The Kenites had been there. They were a wilderness people, relatives of Moses¬ father-in-law; they were children of the wilderness; they had left the city of palm trees and dwelt in the wilderness. The place thus is vacated and Moab takes it. It was complete defeat for Israel.
G.McP. If we do not judge evil in ourselves, God will expose the flesh in us.
J.T. Ehud's victory is remarkable in that it emphasises the authority of God's word and the effectiveness of it.
W.B-w. It was a sword of two edges.
J.T. It is figurative of the word of God, the sword of the Spirit.
Then there are these ten thousand fat men; they are referred to in the sense of derision. They were spectacles in their fatness. Their carcasses lay there; they were brought down by the power of the word of God. It is very encouraging as to what is available in these crises;
{132}
if we respect the word of God and use it rightly, what may not be done!
W.B-w. The sword was of one cubit. It does not represent a long sermon.
J.T. Exactly. David chose five smooth stones, but one was enough. And so this one-cubit sword was quite enough. If it had been longer, it might not have been effective. It was just long enough to be plunged in and left.
I think we might notice in closing that as to Shamgar it does not say he had to do with an oppression; rather that these six hundred Philistines were there. There are occasions of opposition to the truth, which are not exactly oppressions. It is not complete domination; but it will be unless it is dealt with. Deliverance was needed, however. Samson later deals with an oppression by these people; but this is what one man did to six hundred who having had a status in the land were specially formidable. They came into Canaan otherwise than through the Jordan.
A.F.M. How could a man slay six hundred people with an ox goad?
J.T. I think it is a question of experience with God, bearing out what we have been saying. An ox goad is something you prod the ox with to keep him in his place and make him obedient. It is discipline in the school of God. Every one of us must be dealt with in this way; for we are not sons if we are not under discipline. He represents that side; he knew what goading meant. With Othniel it is the Spirit of Jehovah; there is a great general position; he is a man imbued with the Spirit of Jehovah and goes out to war. Ehud values the word of God; he is resourceful; he is a type of what is original and unique, but most effective. Shamgar sets forth experience with God, without which we cannot represent Him, nor be effective against His enemies.
A.R.S. Shamgar knew how to use what he *had* to
{133}
advantage. The Lord used what was there in feeding the multitude.
J.T. Shamgar understood what it was to be in harness and to work under discipline.
Rem. In chapter 5 Shamgar's days were marked by the blocking of the highways. "The roads were unused, and the travellers on highways went by crooked paths", (verse 6). This state of things would be the result of Philistine work -- corresponding with the religious world today.
J.T. Evidently, therefore, the ministry of Shamgar did not result in divine principles becoming operative. I think Deborah alludes to his times as if they did not make a way for divine principles generally. The highways were neglected in spite of the great exploit. Luther is illustrative of this. He did a wonderful work, but he did not open up the great highway of fellowship and the assembly.
G.W.H. The travellers went by crooked paths.
J.T. Yes, in spite of this intervention of God. Luther's work was not final as leading anywhere; it was, however, important. But with regard to experience, it is what you have got in your hand. Moses was concerned as to how God could use him. God said, "What is that in thy hand?" (@Exodus 4:2). He will use that.
Ques. Is not there a certain amount of reproach in connection with an ox goad? Deborah says there was not a shield or a spear among forty thousand.
J.T. That is right. I suppose literally those expressions implied that the people were disarmed, and that would bring Ehud into greater relief in making his own instrument.
R.D.G. There is no reference to the land having rest in Shamgar's case?
J.T. There was a rest of eighty years as a result of Ehud's action, but no rest is mentioned in connection with Shamgar's exploit; however, it is said, "he also delivered Israel".
{134}
THE SPIRIT OF JUDGMENT (3)
@Judges 4:1 - 24; @Judges 5:31
J.T. There is a touch in the closing verse of chapter 5 which should be in view in our present inquiry; it refers to those who love God. It is the first reference to love in the book, and the only reference to love for God.
G.W.H. Is it normal in the land that God should be loved?
J.T. Yes, and then the answering effect of that is, that those who love Him are to be as the rising of the sun in its might; that is the general effect of love for God. I just mention that as something to be in our minds, because, after all, that is what everything hangs upon subjectively. The apostle says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", (@1 Corinthians 16:22).
A.F.M. Do you suppose that some who did not go out to the battle were not active in love?
J.T. Evidently they were not. I think the poem (chapter 5) is very discriminating in this respect. It conveys discriminative judgment as to the different tribes; how they were affected by the crisis. The crisis here is exceptional, because it is due to the revival of Hazor. Hazor was primarily the head of the nations (see @Joshua 11:10); that is, its domination represents what the people of God were confronted with at the beginning in apostolic times, what had dominated in the world politically. That was overthrown by Joshua, but it has revived here. It refers to some revival of power in the history of the church, power which had already been overcome.
Rem. During the Dark Ages this power manifested itself as in apostolic times.
J.T. Yes, the apostolic service overcame what had dominated in the world, as, for instance, in the religious
{135}
centre, Jerusalem, and the political centre, Rome. These were the two leading features. Jerusalem was overthrown. God says that faith in them would enable the disciples to say to this mountain, "Be thou taken away and be thou cast into the sea" (@Matthew 21:21), and it would come to pass. Subsequently we have the great political powers overthrown in a moral sense; it was a question of the saints being free from them. The victories of Joshua foreshadow all this; but in Judges we have the revival of Hazor, so that there is a very formidable power to be overcome.
Rem. The special response here is in the weakest and most despised part. You have Zebulun and Naphtali who "jeoparded their lives", (chapter 5:18). It was in the parts of Galilee.
J.T. Quite. Judah is not in evidence.
A.F.M. You spoke of a centre. Do you refer to Harosheth-Goim (Harosheth of the nations) as being a great political centre?
J.T. Yes; Sisera dwelt there, but Jabin reigned in Hazor. The military chief dwelt in Harosheth-Goim, whereas the king reigned in Hazor. So that it was a very extensive organisation, the military man having great powers.
A.N.W. "Let all thine enemies perish" is quite in keeping with lovers of God. "Thine enemies", not *our* enemies.
W.B-w. Would it be a question of meeting a combination of evil?
J.T. Exactly. I think it points to the revival, in a spiritual sense, of the empire in Rome and its unique organisation. It is organised power in a special way here, so organised that the military man can afford to live in a different place from the king. The organisation is not weakened by the fact that the military man lives elsewhere. Harosheth of the nations is a wide thought, alluding, I think, to complete servitude of the people. So that the domination is very extensive and powerful.
{136}
A.N.W. *Iron* characterises it.
Rem. Deborah says, "I will draw unto thee, to the torrent Kishon, Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, and his chariots and his multitude, and I will give him into thy hand". What an impression it gives of the control of God!
A.P-t. Why did Jehovah sell them?
J.T. It is that they might be humbled and return to Him. After all, God is over the whole position in regard to His people and their enemies.
Rem. It is difficult for us to understand the thought of the control of the empire that will be set up.
J.T. It is not an empire that *will be* set up, but already *is*. It is not the empire of "the beast" that is in view here, but the current, active, religious thing seeking to establish its complete domination; the revival of the empire under the beast will be in a special way. This is the third great domination in Judges: first the Mesopotamian, second, the Moabitish, and then the Jabinian which is more lengthy than any so far -- twenty years.
J.S. Are the people seen in a lower state morally here?
J.T. No doubt. But I think what we should notice is the part that women played in this deliverance -- Deborah and Jael. That is to say, there was now something more concretely subjective among the people. Deborah represents fine moral qualities. In spite of this oppression she judged Israel, and the children of Israel came to her. She did not assert her greatness; but it was there and they came up to her for judgment.
A.N.W. That subjective state is as effective as an official position.
J.T. The official comes in in Barak, because it is out of keeping with God's ways to make an absolute leader of a woman. So Barak was the leader, but the initiative was with Deborah. She had a history with God; she had a palm tree of her own, and dwelt under it.
J.S. What would answer to that today?
{137}
J.T. It would be some subjective result, brought about by self-judgment and general exercise as to the current need among the people of God. Deborah was "a mother in Israel" (chapter 5:7), which suggests maternal exercises in view of others; the assembly as seen in Galatians is indicated.
W.M. Her femininity is emphasised. She was 'a woman prophetess'. This expression reminds one of @Revelation 12:5, where the Lord is called "a male son".
A.F.M. Might I ask what is definitely the character of this opposition?
J.T. It helps to revert to the history of Hazor which was the head of the nations, as it says in @Joshua 11. Joshua had burned it with fire. That is, there was complete destruction of the thing. But here there is the recovery of it. In the history of the church the public body has actually settled itself into that which apostolic testimony morally destroyed. There is a revival of the Roman system in a religious form -- it is seen in the woman who sat upon the scarlet beast. In the zenith of her power she controlled the empire.
A.F.M. Roman Catholicism, speaking simply.
J.E.H. How does it affect us here?
J.T. Any revival of a principle that has been exposed or overthrown would correspond. Hazor represents the political system as the apostles had to do with it. Jerusalem, representing the religious system, had the lead in the world; but the apostles had also to overcome the political and national features of the world -- not actually, of course, but in a moral way. Hence Paul says, "For *our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens", (@Philippians 3:20). There is in that the overthrow of the idea of a political head or centre here on earth. Patriotism is a very powerful thing in the hearts of men. The gospel is intended to overthrow it in the believer.
Ques. Historically then, being sold into the hands of Jabin fits into @Revelation 2 and 3?
{138}
J.T. Yes, there is a revival of what had been most drastically overthrown, because it was burned.
Rem. The offset is in Philippians: "*Our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens". And you have: "Jerusalem which is now ... is in bondage with her children" (@Galatians 4:25).
J.T. Deliverance here, is in connection with the "mother in Israel".
W.N. I suppose we may look at this as connected with the historical character of the assembly. At a certain time Luther appeared, and I would almost compare him with Ehud -- he destroyed all the lusty men.
J.T. The analogy is there. God, through Luther, dealt Rome a blow from which she has not recovered; nor will she. "Great Babylon has fallen, has fallen, and has become the habitation of demons", (@Revelation 18:2). But the idea of the assembly did not take practical form through his ministry, nor did he even overcome the national thought. The Reformation retained the national thought: Lutherans, Anglicans, Presbyterians, and Calvinists all witness to the fact that nationalism remained. But in the 'mother' here you have a suggestion of the assembly in a positive way.
Rem. Does not that hang upon the Holy Spirit? The movement with Luther appealed to men's reason and to the letter of Scripture; but it made no room for the Holy Spirit.
J.T. The place of the Holy Spirit and the mother coalesce. So that you have: "Jerusalem above ... which is our mother", (@Galatians 4:26). Galatians involves sonship. Philippians gives us our commonwealth or citizenship as in heaven. The two ideas that held the people of God, the religious, Jerusalem that now is, and the imperial, in Rome, as the great head of the nations, were overthrown by apostolic ministry. In our chapter there is an allusion to the church, in the spirit of the mother. There is some development, however small, answering to that here.
{139}
Deborah's location between Ramah ( 'elevated' ) and Bethel ( 'House of God' ) is to be noted. She dwelt there in moral power under her own palm tree; and they came up to her for judgment.
G.W.H. Indicating her own personal victory.
J.T. She had moral power that drew people to her. She was the wife of Lapidoth; she did not dominate her husband, but was his wife, meaning that she was subject.
A.R. She remained in her place; they came up to her.
J.T. She said, "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" It is not man's will at all. It involves subjection to the will of God, and this will result in complete deliverance.
Ques. What was lacking in Israel, as indicated in the song of Deborah, when she says, "Until that I Deborah arose", (chapter 5:7)?
J.T. The highways were unused and the villages ceased. Divine principles were not known or acted upon and, typically, there were no local assemblies.
G.W.H. Also there were new gods chosen; that was a serious situation.
A.F.M. Do you regard Deborah and Jael as bringing in this mother or assembly idea?
J.T. I think it is the wife first and then the mother. It is not that Heber was Jael's husband or that Lapidoth was the husband of Deborah; but rather they were *wives*. The church is subjected to the Christ. That is the position of these women. Hence there is moral power.
J.S. They were holding the truth in moral power?
J.T. In subjection. So that in Othniel, Ehud, and Shamgar there is no allusion to the 'commandment'. It was a question of meeting the opposition. But Deborah says, "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" As the apostle says, "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14:37). That is where the moral element lies.
{140}
Rem. The moral restoration in Philadelphia was: "Thou ... hast kept my word", (@Revelation 3:8).
A.N.W. So that a woman in praying gathers power in covering her head.
J.T. In @1 Corinthians 11 it is the woman's place, preceding the idea of the church; but in Ephesians the church is subject*ed*, not just subject.
G.McP. In @Revelation 21:9 it says, "The bride, the Lamb's *wife*".
E.P. The highways had ceased in Israel, but Paul would indicate the way: "If therefore one shall have purified himself from these ...", (@2 Timothy 2:21). That would be opening up the way.
J.T. The Lord's commandment is the point; as He said, "He that has my commandments ...". Timothy had the commandments. The apostle saw to it that they were handed on. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", (@John 14:21). Deborah has in mind lovers of God. In 2 Timothy some are designated as lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God. The 'highway' for us is opened up in 2 Timothy: first, as naming the name of the Lord we withdraw from iniquity; then we purify ourselves from vessels to dishonour, flee youthful lusts, and pursue righteousness with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
S.McC. Would not the recognition of the Lord's commandments in Deborah involve spirituality? "If any thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14:37).
J.T. The evidence of Deborah's spirituality lay there. She recognised the commandment. That is what she has in view; lovers of God obey His commandments.
W.B-w. Evidently the oppression of twenty years brought to light that the only thing that would meet it would be the moral state in the woman.
J.T. You may depend there had been great formation
{141}
in Deborah to meet this mighty oppression, evincing the work of God.
W.B-w. It is not anything official in her, but moral state.
J.T. Her maternal instincts were manifest.
A.R. She was a prophetess, but really a great deal more.
J.T. Others were *raised up*, but she *arose* a mother in Israel; it was from herself, and you cannot resist that. It is not a question of being official; it is what she was morally as dwelling under her palm tree. It was obvious that victory was there.
W.B-w. She commenced by administering judgment, corresponding to what we have been saying.
A.F.M. What was the lack in Barak?
J.T. He was not equal to her, though it was a great thing that there was such a man as Barak. There are men and women who are useful, but every man is not equal to taking a lead. He would not go without her.
G.McP. Deborah was brought in as a woman to fill up a breach. Has this a voice to our sisters today?
J.T. It is a question of a Deborah arising -- really moral power in the saints. She has her own palm tree. She is said to be the wife of Lapidoth, whose name signifies light, which shows she was related to one who had light. It was not, however, what Lapidoth was doing; formation and activity were in Deborah. There was light in the Reformation; the husband was there, but not the mother. Our attention is here called to the power of that feature.
G.W.H. Do you think that further light came in Mr. Darby's day in view of assembly features?
J.T. Exactly; the Head in heaven and the body on earth.
Rem. The element of Barak is to be seen in the religious world generally even now, associated with many who are strong in mental qualities which are utterly insufficient unless the Deborah element is along with
{142}
them; so that the mental must be accompanied by the subjective.
J.T. That brings into evidence the economy of the church, the brethren moving in relation to it locally. You get the mother spirit, and then you get a Barak coming in, a brother who has signalised himself in the service, but he is moving now in relation to the mind of God expressed in the local company.
N.McC. What was the matter with Barak?
J.T. I do not think we should complain much of him. @Hebrews 11 mentions him honourably. He was not equal to Deborah, but that brings into relief what Deborah stands for -- the revival of church traits, the mother spirit, as we have been noting. Barak responds to her call: "And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedesh-Naphtali, and said to him, Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" That is the mind of God expressed in the subjective qualities of the saints, as in the light of the church. And she says further, "Go and draw towards mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun, and I will draw unto thee, to the torrent Kishon, Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, and his chariots and his multitude, and I will give him into thy hand". Barak is an available vessel at her call; the only provision he makes is that she must go with him.
Ques. As elements in the church, there is nothing abnormal about these movements, is there?
J.T. The responsible side is somewhat behind; we also see this in Manoah's case. This book shows that the subjective side, when in evidence, eclipses the responsible side; it does not set aside those responsible, but the work of God is greater, which is represented in Deborah and Jael here.
Ques. Would, "Deborah arose", indicate that the work of God makes room for itself?
{143}
J.T. The work of God needs no advertisement. It is its own advertisement, as in @John 9: "that the works of God should be manifested in him".
B.T.F. Would you say that Barak rather emphasises the importance of the prophetic word?
J.T. He does. He recognises its value, which is a good trait in him; he does not despise Deborah, but puts her before himself.
A.N.W. Deborah judges before salvation is effected.
J.T. She judged Israel while the oppression existed. It shows great moral power.
J.E.N. Deborah stands for the church; so that no person, however gifted, could intelligently go out in service apart from it.
J.T. However gifted or influential one may be, he moves in relation to the work of God in the saints. It is of great importance that each should be attached to a local company. Administration is not in the whole body of saints on earth, but in the local companies. That is church economy. We have to wait for the millennium for the whole great scheme of God. But now it is in the local companies.
Ques. Were not those features in the assembly at Antioch?
J.T. Exactly. There was the recognition of the gifted man on the part of the local company. "Separate me now", says the Holy Spirit, "Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", (@Acts 13:2). And they came back to Antioch after their great service "and they stayed no little time with the disciples", (@Acts 14:28).
F.H.L. An unjealous spirit is seen in Deborah inasmuch as she calls Jael "blessed above women", (chapter 5:24).
J.T. Jael had an earlier history, as the song would indicate, in which things were not going so well, yet Deborah gives her credit for the victory. The Lord
{144}
delivered Sisera into the hand of a *woman*; that is what is emphasised.
A.N.W. I was wondering why Deborah says, "*above* women"; Mary in @Luke 1:28 is blessed "*amongst* women".
Rem. Jael was blessed above women in the *tent*.
J.T. Her dwelling was a tent, not a house, The Kenites were nomads and so dwelt in tents, even in the land of Canaan. That God should use one of such in this signal way is a testimony to His sovereign resourcefulness.
W.B.H-w. Is Jael an extension of the power seen in Deborah?
J.T. I think it is the Ephesian position. The bringing in of the Kenite here points to Jew and gentile brought together. The universal bearing of Ephesians lifts us out of what is national and local into what is general. And so Deborah emerges from her own locality into what is general. For while the local company is according to the economy of the church, we must never lose sight of the assembly as a whole. The Kenite is, I think, the gentile typically. Jabin was head of the gentiles, but God meets that in this conflict. Politically Rome was the head of the nations; later she was head of the nations spiritually. God meets that by the truth of Ephesians; for it is the only true way of meeting Romish pretensions. If you have the divine position of the church before you in the local boundary, you can afford to move out into the fullest position of it.
G.W.H. And Luther did not meet Rome with Ephesians; he met it rather with Romans.
J.T. He met it with Romans and set aside James; and he did not bring in the church at all.
B.T.F. Would you say that Rome religiously claims to be the one church today; while in the true sense the one church is emphasised in Ephesians?
J.T. Yes. Ephesians emphasises the fact that Christ has reconciled both Jew and gentile in one body by the
{145}
cross, and that there is one body, one Spirit. That is the truth that effectually meets Rome; it overthrows in the souls of God's people the system of christendom.
W.M. He has brought in a corresponding subjective state in both Jew and gentile.
J.T. That is the thought. We are reconciled in Romans severally; but in Ephesians it is in one body.
W.B-w. So that Ephesians shows that our struggle is not against blood and flesh.
J.T. You may depend upon it that with Sisera who dwells at Harosheth-Goim, representing the military side, and Jabin who resides in Hazor, there is typically a powerful organisation with universal bearing. How can you meet it save in a spiritual way? Deliverance begins in a locality. Deborah dwelt between Ramah and Bethel; and then moves from there to the universal position: "Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh". Deliverance begins locally and extends universally. Here Israel prevails, and Deborah and Barak celebrate the victory in a striking way in chapter 5.
C.B. Jael found the tent-pin and hammer and used both to good effect.
J.T. The milk comes first; we must get the thing in its order. It says: "Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, Blessed above women in the tent! He asked water, she gave milk; In the nobles¬ bowl she brought forth cream. She put her hand to the tent-pin, And her right hand to the workmen's hammer" (chapter 5:24 - 26). It was not accidental; they were furnishings which she knew how to employ to the best effect. They were all in the tent.
{146}
Rem. It is remarkable that Deborah knew all these details.
J.T. It suggests the perfectly good relations that existed. Had Deborah been jealous of her sister she might have neglected all this. The nobles¬ bowl would mean that Jael was a woman of quality. God meets quality with quality. Sisera represented quality in a worldly sense. Jael represented quality in a spiritual sense; the vessel that belonged to nobles would suggest that.
A.F.N. What about verse 26?
J.T. It goes on: "She put her hand to the tent-pin, And her right hand to the workmen's hammer". You descend from the nobles¬ bowl to the workmen's hammer. She knew how to use that implement; she was not left-handed. That is to say, it is *order* here. In Ehud's case it was irregular, the left hand. Peter took hold of the right hand in raising up the lame man (@Acts 3:7); it is the divine order, indicating strength. That was the hand Jael used.
C.B. The whole truth.
J.T. That is Ephesians. You act according to God in a skilful and powerful way. The next thing is: "She smote Sisera, she struck through his head" (verse 26). That is the thing. It is not a matter of dealing with outposts. Saul dealt with them (@1 Samuel 10:5); but David, in meeting Goliath, had to do with the champion of Philistine power. He smote him in the *head*. Jael smites Sisera there also. Hazor was the centre of the oppression. Ephesians shows where the centre of opposition is; it is not mere detail; it is principalities, powers in the heavenlies; it is the universal lords of this darkness.
A.N.W. The struggle is not against blood and flesh.
Rem. I suppose with Eglon it was the lower passions and evil lusts and motives which corrupt; but here it is the intelligence.
{147}
J.T. It is man's mind in opposition to God.
W.M. It speaks of the Lord prophetically as crushing the serpent's head, (@Genesis 3:15).
J.T. Satan has been met, the Lord has annulled him; he is not literally destroyed yet, but he is nullified for faith.
A.F.M. As with Goliath, the stone sank into his forehead. What would you say about verse 27? "Between her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down".
J.T. It is in keeping with what we have been saying. It is a question of the complete overthrow of that which dominates, wherever it takes form. It is very beautiful to see how Deborah speaks about her sister; she is not "a little sister" to her. Sometimes we have to deal with meetings in that way, through lack of formation in them. But here it is as on equal terms. The working of love amongst us gives the credit to others. You go to Ephesians to get the full working of love in a universal way.
J.S. "Faith working through love", (@Galatians 5:6).
J.T. "The love which ye have towards all the saints", (@Ephesians 1:15). We should be rejoicing in what we hear as to what others have done. Jael's great exploit could not have damaged Deborah. It would only enhance her position. Deborah inaugurated the movement; Jael finished it. Barak represents headship. However poor the head may be, we must never lose sight of the fact that headship belongs to man.
Ques. What does the mother of Sisera represent?
J.T. There is a difference between the mother of Sisera and a mother in Israel. Sisera was her progeny, a great oppressor of the people of God. It is not hard to find her. She is the one who begets the great oppressors of the people of God.
A.F.M. It is Rome, I suppose.
W.M. The way Deborah speaks of Jael reminds one of @Philippians 2:4: "Regarding not each his own qualities, but each those of others also".
{148}
J.T. It would encourage attention to commendable details in another.
A.J.D. What would you say about, "Shattered and pierced through his temples" (chapter 5:26)?
J.T. I suppose that would indicate the *completeness* of the work. In David's case he brought Goliath down with a stone, typically the word of God. But he was not content with that; he took Goliath's own sword, and cut off his head, and took the head to Jerusalem (@1 Samuel 17), suggestive of leading captivity captive. The head of Goliath was thus in the centre of God's system, Jerusalem, as the evidence of the complete overthrow of the devil.
Rem. I suppose the mother of Sisera would answer to Babylon -- "Happy he that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the rock", (@Psalm 137:9). The children of that system should be utterly destroyed.
Ques. What about the sun rising in its might?
J.T. It is the complete domination of Christ in a benign way, as against Jabin and Sisera, who prefigure the universal lords of this darkness. I suppose, apart from those in the truth, Satan is the most intelligent of God's creatures, and uses his great intelligence by means of counsel -- like the gates of hades. It would be on that line to secure results. So that the struggle here is against the head and centre of satanic power. Now the sun is over against that; how benign and glorious it is, dispelling the darkness as it rises! What takes the place eventually of all this darkness is the church, coming down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God; she will shine like Christ.
A.R. There is no need of the sun there.
J.T. Not in the church; but from it there will radiate all the light of God upon this dark world.
W.B-w. It is a kind of prayer: "But let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might" (verse 31).
J.T. It shows the great thought of Deborah; she would
{149}
voice the mind of God as to what He was going to do.
A.J.D. "Let them ... be" would have present application.
J.T. It suggests how we are to shine here. God would always give a light to David (see @Psalm 132:17). The point is, do we love God?
Ques. Would you say that love really is the background to the writing of Revelation in which there is so much judgment?
J.T. Revelation brings the saints in as the reflection of the light of heaven. The elders have spiritual intelligence and would be over against the universal lords of this darkness. They know what to do. And then there is the great universal thought in the assembly coming out, her shining like a most precious stone, as a crystal-like jasper stone.
B.T.F. Does the Lord take up His power on earth in connection with this?
J.T. Yes. He is known through the church. The great desire in the end as regards those who love God, finds its answer in the church.
J.S. Loving God suggests the rising sun, which is Christ; and then the land rests forty years.
A.F.M. Rest would have an end in view. There are periods of warfare and then periods of rest in this book. Would rest be to develop in us the truth of the church?
J.T. After war there is opportunity to develop family affections and moral growth. "The assemblies then throughout the whole of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified and walking in the fear of the Lord, and were increased through the comfort of the Holy Spirit", (@Acts 9:31).
W.B-w. Is something in connection with the battle set forth in the torrent Kishon?.
J.T. I think what you get there is the display of God's military skill. I suppose for light in military affairs we should go to Joshua who is the great military leader. But
{150}
even he gave place to another who said: "As captain of the army of Jehovah am I now come", (@Joshua 5:14). If God is going to enter into battle, as He will by and by, this will be the great battlefield of the world, "the waters of Megiddo", (@Judges 5:19). But for us it is spiritual. We are to be strong in the Lord in Ephesians, it is the *Lord*. The lordship of Christ in Ephesians is not simply to subdue our wills but to act against Satan. It is a military position. And so if He is in command, He will draw the enemy to a place of advantage to the saints and disadvantage to him. That is a great point in military tactics. So that Deborah indicated for Israel the position having every advantage for the attack. The river Kishon is sometimes dried up; it is no great river; water might or might not be there. It is a question of God's ordering and will. It is all a matter of depending upon God. God might send a torrential rain, which doubtless He did, for the Canaanites were swept away.
G.McP. It is like the exceeding greatness of God's power.
Rem. So that there are no accidents or mere happenings in spiritual warfare.
J.T. If you are with God, everything goes well.
A.J.D. And we are to be strong in the Lord as having to meet universal lords of this darkness.
{151}
THE SPIRIT OF JUDGMENT (4)
@Judges 6:11 - 24; @Judges 7:19 - 22; @Judges 8:18 - 19
J.T. The last two verses read serve as a clue to what is in mind in this section in connection with the brethren in their relation to Christ -- not to one another, but as in resemblance to Christ.
G.W.H. "The sons of a king"?
J.T. Yes. So that we are reaching elevation in Gideon. He has to be taken as a counterpart of what we had this morning, the counterpart of Deborah's ministry. Deborah's ministry, with Barak, is Jehovah's commandment which is kept by those who love God. Gideon's ministry is on a higher level, so to speak, in that we have a divine appearing. And consequent upon that we have a spiritual transaction between God and Gideon.
G.W.H. This would be in contrast to communications that might come through another.
J.T. Yes. The relations with God are more immediate and intimate. I think that the narrative is to bring out Gideon personally. The prophetic ministry in this section is through another, a nameless person (chapter 6:8), but a prophet; it is not as with Deborah. Gideon brings out rather Christ personally, in type.
Rem. The climax is in the last verses read.
J.T. And so I thought they should be specially before us.
Ques. Have you any thought as to why it is "my mother" and not my *father*?
J.T. It carries on the maternal side, as Deborah was a mother in Israel. The idea of the mother is there in Deborah, without any product being mentioned. It is simply the maternal idea; whereas here you have a product, "the sons of my mother". They were like Gideon, "the sons of a king". She had a high ideal:
{152}
"Each one resembled the sons of a king". Probably this was beyond anything Israel had seen, they having no king, but she anticipated royalty in her children.
Rem. "Jerusalem above ... which is our mother", (@Galatians 4:26).
J.T. Just so. "Jerusalem ... is the city of the great King", (@Matthew 5:35). The idea of the king goes with the city.
W.M. Do you not think there might be included in it the fact that nothing but a subjective state will meet public failure? Objective truth is not so much needed as subjective conditions.
J.T. That is the point in these two sections. Then, after Gideon you have antichrist in Abimelech, which is another course leading up to Samson. In connection with Samson we get a divine appearing similar to what we have here. These divine appearings are special, because through each you get a distinctly new feature. With Deborah it is a question of what was there -- the commandment; if people hear not Moses and the prophets, one rising from the dead cannot persuade them (see @Luke 16:31). But a divine appearing contemplates impressionableness in the person or persons appeared to, and brings in something distinctive. It is God's way. He has a hand in things here, and comes in so as to impress and give character to those in whom He is working.
Rem. The mother line runs through Samson and Samuel.
J.T. That idea is continued through the period of the judges.
Ques. Where the appearings are lacking, is it because of the condition of the people?
J.T. I think so. In Gideon himself you have a condition that God could recognise, hence the appearing. There is no doubt that an appearing is intended to convey something that had never been here before.
{153}
A.R.S. That is what I thought. Saul got the heavenly side, the revelation of God's Son, (@Acts 9).
J.T. The idea of an appearing is seen in the first one, that to Abraham: "The God of glory appeared", (@Acts 7:2). It suggests variety of glory. You cannot limit that; it is a question of God. How very distinctive that was!
A.F.M. The appearing to Gideon would be in relation to the condition of the people. This character of oppression had not been before.
J.T. It was an oppression in connection with *food*. It had in view to rob the people of food. And so the appearing is to one who is taking care of the food, threshing wheat to hide it from the Midianites. And when God appears Gideon has something to offer to Him. That is a great point; whether there is food for God, for in the food God must have His part, see @Numbers 28.
A.N.W. Why is it angelic?
J.T. It was the time of the ministry of angels, but it is a *divine* appearing. It is the mode of God's intervention. It says, "And Jehovah looked upon him". Jehovah Himself is there.
A.N.W. Is it an advance on the Spirit of Jehovah coming on Othniel?
J.T. It is. The Spirit of Jehovah had already come on persons, but a divine appearing goes further, and is always distinct and new.
Rem. The form of the pressure has something to do with the form of the appearing, whether in Mesopotamia or in Canaan; this time it is the Midianites, descendants of Abraham through Keturah. There would be a corresponding character about it.
J.T. There is a certain natural link with the people of God in Midian. I think that the social side is in view in Midian; it is that side which seduces the people of God. Here they are associated with "Amalek, and the children of the east", and they "destroyed the produce of the
{154}
land ... and they left no sustenance in Israel" (chapter 6:3,4).
A.F.M. How would you apply this lack of food today?
J.T. The enemy is always seeking to destroy the food supply. There is here an immense number of Midianites allied with the Amalekites. It is the form in which the flesh appears as claiming equal status with the people of God, which, if admitted, involves corruption and the taking away of the heavenly food. Gideon is able to present food to God. He presented it in courses: the flesh was in a basket and the broth in a pot. All is served according to God and accepted by Him.
J.S. It is like setting forth things in *order*.
J.T. Well, it is the order of God. I have no doubt that the Lord's supper presents the great idea of food, and divine order is connected with it.
Rem. At the appearing to Abraham at Mamre (@Genesis 18), Abraham knew what was suitable; possibly Gideon benefited by that.
J.T. As a spiritual man he would, no doubt, know about that, and so acquire ability to present food to God.
G.W.H. He was in touch with what had passed; he speaks of the "miracles that our fathers told us of".
J.T. And now he has food in the *wine-press*; this may suggest that he had been through the pressure occasioned by the Midianites. The Angel sits under the terebinth, having peculiar interest in Gideon. Sitting would indicate that the matter on hand required definite time and deliberation; it was all of great importance to heaven.
J.S. His exercises were pleasurable to heaven.
A.F.M. As having food for God, he evidently had a sufficiency, although the people generally lacked food. You can only offer of what you possess.
J.T. A man is accepted according to what he has.
{155}
Gideon threshed wheat in the wine-press. A wine-press would be a place of small proportions for such an operation. It was not like the threshing-floor of Ornan, which was a large place, for David bought it with the idea of having plenty of scope for the house. A wine-press is contracted, and suggests pressure; we need contraction in view of enlargement. But although he was threshing the wheat under such limitations, he was obtaining the food. In threshing the wheat, he was *acting against the enemy*. This is important to note.
Rem. Would this be suggestive of what the blessed Lord went through at Gethsemane? He was there under deep pressure and at great cost to open the whole scope of God's riches.
J.T. Gethsemane is pressure; the word conveys the thought of wine-press.
W.B-w. Does Gideon's exercise involve the lifting of things from the Midianites¬ level to a higher level?
J.T. Yes, from the level of the social order which would claim distinction in the flesh. Midian and Amalek are the flesh. Midian claims distinction in the flesh. God is raising things to another level and Gideon is up to it.
J.S. Would the word, "mighty man of valour" imply secret history?
J.T. I think it would. Of course, it would be potential here.
A.J.D. The Angel says, "Jehovah is with thee".
W.M. It was very pleasurable to God that Gideon was considering while he was threshing wheat. As Paul said to Timothy, "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things",(@2 Timothy 2:7).
J.T. His mind was filled with the terrible oppression of the enemy; he was impressed with it. God knew all that exercise, for He knows the thoughts of our hearts.
Rem. Possibly we do not think much in this way.
{156}
J.T. Well, I believe that is the suggestion here: whether in one's ordinary employment one thinks of the needs of the saints.
A.F.M. There is something important in this movement of Gideon's. He considers first for God. The widow of Zarephath first brings to the prophet a little cake, and thus secures provision for all the famine time. So that if God is first, the people are sure to be considered.
J.T. That is important. Where God is working you will find His claims recognised. "And Jehovah looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of Midian. Have not I sent thee?" And then Gideon says, "If now I have found favour in thine eyes, shew me a sign that it is thou who talkest with me. Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee". There you have some insight into the character of the man. He has confidence enough to ask God to wait, which is very remarkable here. He waited for Abraham under similar circumstances. God waits for Gideon to prepare the food, and it involves considerable time. But he would know that Abraham had done the same thing, only on that occasion the three men were standing; here Jehovah is sitting, and offers to wait. It is a very beautiful touch.
Rem. Morally it is as great as when "Jehovah hearkened to the voice of a man" and the sun stood still, (@Joshua 10:14).
J.T. What follows is what Gideon can provide and do. So that now it is a question of what one can present to God; Gideon says, "*My* present"; it tests me as to what I can present to God.
G.W.H. It is what he has.
J.T. "A man is accepted according to what he may have" (@2 Corinthians. 8:12); it is what I can present. So he says, "My present"; it would be the very best he could give. Jehovah said, "I will tarry until thou come again".
{157}
God is committing Himself to him now. "And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid of the goats, and an ephah of flour in unleavened cakes; the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out to him under the terebinth, and presented it". Now we have to follow all this, because he is a type of Christ giving a lead spiritually. In Deborah you have the prophetess and the military movement at the command of the Lord: that was on a lower level. Here it is approach to God -- knowing how to present to Him. What can I do in this way? I may copy others, but when I come to a manifestation of God, what can I do then? One is entirely dependent on what he is according to God. It is a question of entering the spiritual realm.
Rem. Here the Lord waits until Gideon comes; often we wait until the Lord comes.
J.T. I think the Lord is giving occasion to show what was in him. He well knew what was there, but would let Gideon show what was in him; because in entering the spiritual realm it is what one is spiritually that counts.
W.B-w. In @Acts 1 the Lord presented Himself *living*, and Peter in chapter 9 presented Dorcas *living*.
J.T. @Acts 1 brings in the spiritual idea. The Lord was seen during forty days after He arose, in a spiritual body.
A.J.D. What would the Angel's appearance suggest?
J.T. An impression of Christ under these peculiar circumstances. It is an appearing.
G.W.H. And it would leave a lasting impression too.
J.T. Quite. Gideon would never lose it.
W.B-w. We are already lifted above the Midianitish element.
J.T. What we see is a man taken out of the wine-press to minister to God! God is pleased with what Gideon is doing. He is delighted with our movements at the time of a conference, for example; and also in our prayers which have gone up for months back, in view of this occasion; and now there is opportunity to minister to Him formally.
{158}
A.L-k. The Angel of the Lord did not partake of the food.
J.T. Why should you say that? It says, "And the Angel of God said to him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so. And the Angel of Jehovah put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. And the Angel of Jehovah departed out of his sight".
Do you think there was odour there? We must not liken God to a man; here Gideon's "present" is accepted.
Rem. It was really a savour ascending to heaven where the Angel belonged.
J.T. Heaven was refreshed. "Jehovah smelled the sweet odour", (@Genesis 8:21).
J.S. It is like the result in @John 12 after all the pressure there.
Rem. The odour of the ointment filled the house.
A.N.W. Why was Gideon left free up to a point, and then he receives directions?
J.T. It was to bring out what was in him.
J.T.Jr. He is really a son led by the Spirit of God.
J.T. Yes. Only he receives directions from the Angel: "Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock". This was all delightful to heaven.
A.F.M. What are the rock and the fire? Have they any allusion to Christ and to His sufferings?
J.T. I think so. The rock alludes to Christ, it always brings Him in; He is the foundation on which everything rests.
G.McP. The burnt-offering would be wholly consumed, and we see this here.
W.M. Elijah said, "The god that answers by fire, let him be God", (@1 Kings 18:24). It was God's way of recognising the offering.
{159}
J.T. Then "the staff" in the Angel's hand would indicate that there was a journey, and that God had entered into all this. The Lord says, "My Father worketh hitherto and *I* work", (@John 5:17). God's work was going on hitherto; so that this was not new to God. The staff would indicate what had gone before.
J.S. And God still is journeying with His people.
J.T. He says to David, "Since the day that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, ... I went about in a tent and in a tabernacle", (@2 Samuel 7:6). There is no cessation of the activity of divine love.
W.B-w. Is the fire the answer on God's part?
J.T. God answers by fire.
R.D.G. In the case of Elijah it came down; here it rises up.
J.T. The fire as applied to the offering, brings out its perfection. The staff which the Angel had in his hand would point to the authority of God. He touched the offering with it, and fire rose up out of the rock and consumed it.
J.S. It is different from what had gone before; previously water had come from the rock; here it is fire for the sacrifice.
Rem. The reference to the staff is very interesting, because the word of the prophet is: "Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage; and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drove them out from before you, and gave you their land". God would *continue* in relation with what has been before.
J.T. The staff is very much like the synoptic gospels as compared with John. I think the account of things in chapter 13, where the Angel ascends is more John's line. The synoptic gospels connect the Lord's ministry with what *preceded*. But in John it is "the beginning". I think
{160}
the staff and the rock here suggest what had taken place in relation to previous operations of God.
B.T.F. The wine-press would speak of the death of Christ, and then the offering would come from one who had entered into that.
J.T. So that you have a burnt-offering here.
W.B-w. Matthew and Mark refer to *food* in the institution of the Supper.
J.T. Yes. Neither of them says anything about the Supper as a memorial.
G.W.H. That is Luke.
J.T. Yes, Luke alone. But the three writers link on the truth with God's previous operations, whereas John introduces christianity as new and apart from what had been before. He brings in Christ as the beginning of everything.
A.F.M. You get the idea of God's previous operations from the resurrection being "on the morrow *of the Sabbath*", (@Luke 24:1).
J.T. Yes. Whereas in John it is the first day of the week. The New Translation emphasises the distinction in this respect between the synoptic gospels and John.
A.A.T. Up to this point Gideon had not known the person he was talking to. He perceived he was an Angel; but before that he addressed him as Lord.
J.T. He saw clearly that he was a divine representative; but feared the after consequences of having seen an Angel of the Lord. He had more confidence in his actual presence, than after he departed. When the divine presence is withdrawn we too are apt to falter. Gideon faltered after the Angel's departure, as it says, "The Angel of Jehovah departed out of his sight". It is very much like the position of the disciples in @Acts 1:9, "A cloud received him out of their sight". The faith period then began; and it was a question of whether they could hold on after the Lord had left. "Ye believe
{161}
on God, believe also on me" (@John 14:1), the Lord had said. Gideon's faith was tested at this point.
G.W.H. And we know something of that too!
J.T. Yes. It is easier to believe when you are surrounded by the saints, and the presence of God is enjoyed in the meeting; but when alone your faith is liable to waver. So it says, "And Gideon perceived that he was an angel of Jehovah; and Gideon said, Alas, Lord Jehovah! for because I have seen an angel of Jehovah face to face ...". There is a hiatus there, as though God would not allow him to go the full way. He anticipates Gideon by saying, "Peace be unto thee: fear not; thou shalt not die".
Rem. Jacob could say, "I have seen God face to face, and my life has been preserved", (@Genesis 32:30).
H.S.D. How about the altar?
J.T. It is called, "Jehovah of Peace". A man's altar indicates the point he has reached in his soul.
H.S.D. He built it and named it.
J.T. It was *his* altar. Your altar indicates your spiritual stature.
H.S.D. Was he established now in the fact that he was accepted?
J.T. He is answering to the light vouchsafed to him.
B.T.F. You were saying that when the Angel departed Gideon began to doubt. But the point is, that while one's faith may waver, true affection for Christ will not.
J.T. Quite. Then God comes in here. Gideon speaks to God; and Jehovah said to him, "Peace be unto thee: fear not; thou shalt not die". And then Gideon builds his altar; and it is said: "To this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abi-ezrites". It is a *permanent* thing.
Then you have "the second bullock"; "And it came to pass the same night, that Jehovah said to him, Take the young bullock, which thy father hath, even the second bullock of seven years old, and throw down the
{162}
altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut down the Asherah that is by it; and build an altar to Jehovah thy God upon the top of this strong place in the ordered manner [note the question of *order*], and take the second bullock, and offer up a burnt-offering with the wood of the Asherah that thou shalt cut down. And Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as Jehovah had said to him. And it came to pass, because he feared his father's house, and the men of the city, if he did it by day, that he did it by night" (verses 25 - 27). This *second* bullock is the next point in the instruction; it means that in this revival God had passed by somebody. It is a very searching thing. Am I going to be passed by, or chosen? If God is doing something, we do not want to be passed by.
G.McP. It was a young bullock.
J.T. Yes, but it was *seven years* old -- suggesting matured experience.
A.F.M. The Lord would have passed the disciples by because of their unbelief, when He walked on the water.
J.T. If God is moving on, I do not want to be passed by. It is a word for older brethren.
Rem. They saw Him, which is the secret of His not passing them by.
J.T. The Lord "would have" done it (@Mark 6:48); it was intentional on His part. Why did God pass the first bullock by? That is the point.
Ques. Why did God pass by the seven sons of Jesse, and take David?
Rem. The bullock was seven years old, as was remarked.
J.T. But he is called a *young* one. It is a question of the new man as in *Colossians*. How ever long one may have been in the truth, how ever many years one may have been in fellowship he is to retain his freshness.
Rem. Moses was, so to speak, as a young bullock at the end of his days.
W.M. Barnabas and Saul were young men when they commenced work.
{163}
J.T. A bullock of seven years would be relatively as old as a man of fifty or sixty. It is a question of retaining youthfulness in advanced years.
W.M. The other bullock was too old!
J.T. There may be any number of years you like to speak of, passed as a believer, but be sure you can be called young; it is a question of freshness.
A.F.M. It is like the new man of Colossians, as you said.
J.T. "New" there refers to youth; it is the new man which we are said to have put on. It is "renewed into full knowledge"; "renewed" there, is that there is no knowledge like it. There are two words referring to newness used in the passage (@Colossians 3:10): one refers to youthfulness, the other is used in the sense of not having existed before.
N.McC. You said the passing by of the first bullock was a word to older brethren. Will you finish that?
J.T. I think it is that God will never pass any one by unless He is obliged to do so.
G.McP. The bullock is the greatest of the offerings.
J.T. Here the offering would point to the spiritual wealth that entered into the ministry of Gideon. He worked under disadvantages, for the material required belonged to Gideon's father, and his father's house might be against him. Thus he threw down the altar of Baal and built the altar to Jehovah by night, because he was afraid to do it by day; but he *did* the work.
Rem. He took *ten* men of his servants to help him.
J.T. The question is, has this man power in his father's house? He was a member of a family; what influence had he *there*?
Rem. Full *responsibility* would be in the *ten* men. The operation here, involving Gideon's father's property, suggests that God's rights are to rise above the natural.
J.T. And the father came to it. Gideon would convey in what he had done, that he had acted for God who must have precedence in everything.
{164}
W.B-w. In result he would bring the whole family out of the system of idolatry, and on to the level of the true worship of God.
J.T. Joash's house would be exposed to Midianitish influence, for he was an idolater. But idolatry is overthrown; Gideon's action brought out the great moral power he had in the household.
J.S. The house became a stronghold for the truth.
J.T. Which corresponds to the *rock* on which the offering was made; there was nothing uncertain about the position so far reached.
Ques. What about the "ordered manner", (chapter 6:26)?
J.T. It refers back to Horeb in connection with the priestly order. Gideon had shown himself to be a priest, and he must always act in a priestly way.
Rem. All must be done in faith if it is to stand.
W.M. The Lord took twelve men to do God's work; it was perfect administration.
J.T. Twelve is administration, not responsibility. It is a question of whether we can act together in love. Twelve is very divisible; we may be divided up in service, but love is never weakened by it.
A.F.N. This new altar built would give Gideon ability to deal with the enemy.
J.T. The altar of Baal would suggest; "other lords than thee have had dominion over us", (@Isaiah 26:13). So its overthrow is a question of the family being delivered from the authority of darkness in view of the approaching conflict.
R.W.S. Gideon's brethren do not appear here, and were later slain.
J.T. They are brought in (chapter 8:18 - 21) to complete the subject. They were slain at Tabor. The link there, no doubt, is with what we had this morning. The great conflict was at Tabor.
Rem. They had been morally formed by Gideon, for they were like him.
{165}
W.B-w. What is the difference between the two altars?
J.T. The first was a personal matter: Jehovah-shalom is what he had acquired in his relations with God. But the second altar is in relation to his father's house, and the overthrow of idolatry in the whole family realm.
G.W.H. The second altar is reared by divine command; the other, of his own volition.
J.T. Quite. The second was in the "ordered manner"; it has a public bearing in testimony to God's rights.
Rem. And after this the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him, (chapter 6:34).
J.T. He is qualified for the service and God commits Himself to him for it.
The great reducing principle in the next chapter (7) is to be noted; we should pay especial attention to this principle of reduction. I believe the economy of the assembly, among other things, is intended to keep us small; such as, small local companies who merge, when necessary, as we saw in Deborah, from the local idea into the universal idea. I can only take in the universal as I am formed in love. It tends to love in the local company, and merge from that into the universal.
W.B-w. The commandment connects with Corinthians, whereas the universal is Ephesians.
J.T. Colossians and Ephesians -- Jael is the gentiles brought in. Deborah merged from the local setting into the general setting *in the conflict*. But in Gideon you have reduction greatly emphasised, an army of thirty-two thousand men brought down to ten thousand; then to three hundred; then they are separated into three companies of one hundred each. All that means spiritual refinement in public reduction, which God is aiming at now. Contentment in small companies is the negation of the flesh in us and fits us for general conflict.
G.W.H. And there is a great increase of love.
{166}
W.B-w. Would you ever give up in your mind the thirty-two thousand?
J.T. The thirty-two thousand would lead to reliance on human strength. Twenty-two thousand of them went back; they did not want to go to the battle. There was a further testing at the water, which reduced their fighting numbers to three hundred. It was a poor thing for warriors not to be able to partake of water without lying down to drink it.
Rem. Gideon's men were as poured from vessel to vessel.
Rem. So you would look for smaller meetings, but also for quality.
J.T. Quality and unity is the idea. We further see how God helped Gideon at every point: He goes down with Phurah to the outside of the camp, and hears one telling a dream about a cake of barley bread tumbling into the camp! It is here a question of food, and how acquired. It is Christ, but in the form of food. Not grain cut down and presented in a sheaf as in @Leviticus 23; it is a cake that had been baked. It is Christ formed in the affections of the saints through exercise.
Rem. The barley cake was greater than the three hundred or the thirty-two thousand, because it was Christ.
W.M. It came in in an irregular way.
J.T. It "tumbled" in, it is informal, but involved the complete overthrow of the Midianites. The tent was smitten, it overturned and lay along.
G.W.H. It is what is in the saints, spiritual maturity as pre-figured in the cake.
J.T. I think so. Maturity runs through this section; judgeship in Gideon. And then the brethren of Gideon; they are a fine subject; Zebah and Zalmunna say of them, "As thou art, so were they". The enemies of Gideon were themselves the judges as to the excellent quality of his brethren. These men typically are like
{167}
Christ. The enemy may traduce us and even slay us, but they are compelled to admit a likeness to Christ.
J.S. These numbers reduced to three hundred would involve intensified exercise.
J.T. You come down to the cake, the product, as it were, of Gideon and his three hundred.
G.W.H. These kings say, "Each one resembled the sons of a king". Gideon says, "They were ... the sons of my mother". You get the outside impression as well as what Gideon says.
A.N.W. They were like royalty.
J.T. God has His own idea of royalty. Gabriel says of Christ, "*He* shall be great, and shall be called Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give him the throne of David his father; and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for the ages, and of his kingdom there shall not be an end", (@Luke 1:32,33).
Rem. Referring again to meetings: you would not be discouraged with small meetings.
J.T. If they are not growing or are dying out, you would be discouraged. The idea is increase spiritually and in the number of *meetings*.
G.W.H. A meeting should divide if it gets too large.
W.N. We have only one meeting in R -- .
J.T. We all know that. We have been thinking about that for years, and wondering why there are not two or three meetings here!
{168}
THE SPIRIT OF JUDGMENT (5)
@Judges 13:15 - 21; @Judges 14:5 - 9; @Judges 15:14 - 20; @Judges 16:22, 28 - 30
J.T. Gideon's judgeship was basically right in that he asserted the principle that governed the time, which was that Jehovah should rule His people immediately, and that there should be no king save Him. The action of Abimelech later was to overthrow that. There is a certain analogy to this in the history of the church; with the revival of the truth of the dispensation, the rights of God being fully owned, a subsequent movement occurred with the intent of denying and nullifying it. Abimelech's attempt was to nullify the principle that Gideon asserted. The men of Israel would have made Gideon king, but he disclaimed all right to, or desire for kingship for himself or his son.
A.F.M. What was the feature of that evil movement?
J.T. That which we are gaining from now became interfered with; namely, the revival of the truth of the assembly. There was the desire to rule in a clerical way on the part of some. Abimelech was related to Gideon; it was therefore an evil rising from within, not from without -- a sort of antichristian movement from within.
A.F.M. Desiring to have a place of pre-eminence.
J.T. Yes. And Jotham's parable (chapter 9) met that in testimony; it was spoken from mount Gerizim and at a distance; but was spoken very plainly, as intending to show that only one who was worthless in himself would aspire to kingship. The thorn bush did this. The "trees" which were useful, and consciously so, renounced the thought of kingship. They preferred to maintain their own service. The fig, the olive, and the vine were conscious of rendering service, and refused to leave their function of bearing fruit.
{169}
A.F.M. They abode in the place which God assigned them.
W.M. A similar thing is pointed out by the apostle, Paul, who says, "From among your own selves shall rise up men speaking perverted things", (@Acts 20:30). It does not say perverse things.
J.T. That was Abimelech. He had a certain relation with Gideon, but the whole position was perverted.
Rem. Perhaps those of us who know something of events of eighty years ago see application of this to the Newton movement.
J.T. I was thinking of that. It was not bad doctrine which came out at first, but the revival of clericalism.
A.F.M. Do you think that the revival of clericalism was to "draw away the disciples after them", as in @Acts 20?
J.T. Yes, like Abimelech, he made an alliance with the Shechemites.
A.R. Was Abimelech's movement an attack against God who was to rule over the people?
J.T. Yes; it was definitely against God. And the offence was the more heinous because Gideon had asserted that God alone was to be King.
Rem. In this day men sin against the Holy Spirit in the same sense.
J.T. Reminding us of that remarkable tract, 'The Notion of a Clergyman; Dispensationally the Sin against the Holy Ghost'.
A.P. Where did Abimelech get the idea of being king?
J.T. It is what is in each of our hearts, and belongs to fallen man. It appeared in Nimrod; and, in connection with the people of God, the idea came in with the descendants of Esau; before there was any king in Israel, they had their kings. It is what man as after the flesh aspires to.
A.F.M. It did not conflict, with the desire of faith for a king, when "every man did what was right in his own eyes", (chapter 21:25).
J.T. God finally brought in a king; but Jehovah was to
{170}
be their King. And that is what Gideon asserted. We are brought into the kingdom of God. One great feature of the testimony today is the kingdom of God; it is the moral sway of God here.
Rem. I suppose in 1 Samuel the desire for a king was engendered by what was seen in the nations around; the influence of what surrounds us is terrible!
J.T. Yes. The epistle to the Romans brings in the kingdom of God, which is a moral thing. It is a mediatorial kingdom, but none the less God's kingdom, for the King is God.
A.F.M. That is, in Christ.
A.R. Is there any significance in Abimelech's relations gathering around him in chapter 9?
J.T. Well, they were his mother's brethren. He did not have a mother like Gideon. That was, doubtless, where the difficulty primarily lay.
G.W.H. So that the thought of kingship according to God is not inconsistent with this mediatorial system which is developed in Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles.
J.T. No. You come to the mediatorial side in chapter 13. The Angel's name is "wonderful". He did wondrously too. There is a foreshadowing of Christ who bears this name.
W.B-w. The overthrow of Abimelech was by a woman and a young man.
J.T. It is the feminine side; an unnamed woman crushed his skull. It is the same thing in character, as with Sisera and Goliath, the head is prominent. Satan works in opposing God through man's mental ability.
W.B-w. It says, "And a woman cast the upper stone of a handmill on Abimelech's head, and crushed his skull. Then he called hastily to the young man that carried his armour, and said to him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that they say not of me, A woman killed him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died" (chapter 9:53,55).
{171}
J.T. The woman knew how to use what was ready to hand; no doubt she had often used it in domestic affairs.
J.S. Just as Samson used the jawbone of an ass.
J.T. Exactly. He *found* it.
J.S. Is Samson seen on a lower plane than Gideon?
J.T. It will be necessary to review the position clearly from chapter 13, so that Samson's ministry might be rightly understood, for many young people must be greatly puzzled as to how God could use a man like this at all. I think the incident of Manoah is somewhat higher: "the Angel ... *ascended*", it says. As to Gideon, we read: "the Angel of Jehovah departed out of his sight" (chapter 6:21).
Ques. Have you any thought why the name of Samson s mother is not given? In other cases the name is emphasised. Has this incident another point in view?
J.T. I think she represents a subjective condition, reflecting somewhat on those responsible. I think she represents what often occurs, that the general condition of a meeting may be beyond its leaders. The responsible ones may not be equal to the current state of the brethren, which is a great disadvantage. So that although Manoah prays for another visitation, and the prayer is answered, yet the visitation is again to the woman, not to him. I think he is slighted; his position is owned and his prayer answered, but the woman is honoured right through.
A.F.M. Would you give us a brief outline of the judges that intervene?
J.T. Just to touch on them: Abimelech is a type of antichrist, and a deadly blow is dealt him by a woman. There is a feminine element running through this book that is to be taken notice of; it insures victory for God. We must also note, alas! a feminine element in a bad sense, in the later chapters. There are two other judges following, Tola and Jair; then Jephthah, a man on very much lower ground than Gideon. There was great
{172}
general declension, after Gideon's judgeship, as chapter 10:6 - 9 shows. But "the children of Israel cried to Jehovah, saying We, have sinned against thee" (verse 10). The Ammonite attacks and Jephthah is called; he is an extraordinary man, really a sort of freebooter; and yet God uses him. I think this is to remind us that God acts to carry out His thoughts in ways different from what we might conjecture. Jephthah had remarkable knowledge of Scripture. There was evidently something hidden in the man that did not appear in his general conduct up to this time.
G.W.H. Something which God sees, for He "searches the hearts", (@Romans 8:27).
A.F.M. The attack here (chapter 10:17) was from the wilderness side where the two and a half tribes were. Is there any significance in that? Does it suggest Romans and Numbers?
J.T. I think it is Romans, the truth of the gospel; the danger would be of being robbed of it. The children of Ammon claimed territory that God gave to Israel through Moses, not Joshua. It is a lower level, but most important. If we lose Romans, the foundations are gone. So Jephthah outlines the territory, and points out that Israel had possessed it for three hundred years. 'Why then did not Ammon contest it before?' he asks.
W.B-w. They sent for Jephthah saying, "Come, and be our captain, that we may fight against the children of Ammon" (chapter 11:6).
J.T. He did not want a position like Abimelech. God used him, which shows that there must have been a moral work in him. He is well able to outline the divine territory; and understands Israel's history. He says, "Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon" (verse 15), which is an important point. He does not strike a blow until he clearly lays out the case. There should be no war without the case being made clear; he was not entering blindly into the
{173}
struggle, nor does he wish his enemies to do so. Israel's cause was a righteous one. Of course, a great deal could be said of Jephthah, of how he uttered his words at Mizpah before the Lord; all of which shows that there was more in him than appeared on the surface. He is an example of the latent ability which may be among the people of God, but which is known only to God, and brought forward by Him as needed. We should be warned against pushing brothers forward for leadership: God's choice is usually hidden, and brought forward and promoted by Himself. Jephthah, however, was much behind Gideon in the traits of Christ; his conflict with Ephraim was very distressing.
G.W.H. It was so lacking of the wise, conciliatory spirit Gideon had shown.
A.F.M. There was not the same discipline or spiritual formation in Jephthah as in Gideon, nor the same judgeship.
H.S.D. He is mentioned in @Hebrews 11.
G.W.H. Which shows there was faith.
A.R.S. Jephthah is primarily the people's selection, not God's.
J.T. Yes. But the Lord takes him on and uses him. As our brother remarked, he is honourably mentioned in Hebrews; such comments of the New Testament help us. There was faith and a knowledge of the territory of God. In a certain way there is an analogy in Luther. That was his point, really, Romans. He knew that much; and God uses us according to what we have. It is clear that Jephthah had a knowledge of the contested territory which God had given to Israel, and he would not forfeit one inch of it.
W.M. Why has Samson to deal with the Philistines more than with others?
J.T. This is an extended Philistine oppression. Shamgar's contact with the Philistines earlier evidently was when they were not generally oppressive; he slew six
{174}
hundred. It was an exploit against that class, a class which is always present. It is well to strike at them when you can. They represent a principle of the flesh in its bigness, as growing up in the land; and Shamgar struck successfully. But in Samson's time it was a long oppressive domination of forty years.
A.F.M. It appears that they came from Egypt, whence Israel came, but did not learn redemption.
J.T. They claimed a status because they were in the land. But they did not get there in God's way; they took the short cut; whereas, Israel came God's way.
A.F.M. The Philistines, as you said, were big; but Israel had to become small, they had to learn the way out of Egypt by death.
J.T. What Rahab did to the spies indicates what the Philistines did not do; she sent them out "*another* way", (@James 2:25). The Philistines came to Canaan the ordinary way; but "another way" is the way that faith takes. Christendom is on the principle of the ordinary way, as were the Philistines; whereas, faith takes the other way, which brings in conflict. The Philistines are marked by the numeral five -- five cities, five lords; this developed into the numeral six -- six toes, six fingers. There is development in the position, and they became Israel's most potent enemies. They were finally subdued by David.
G.W.H. It says, "Jehovah gave them into the hand of the Philistines forty years" (chapter 13:1). As though He had done it.
J.T. This character of discipline is seen right through the book. God allows different enemies to dominate. So that chapter 13 brings out His way of meeting this feature of oppression: He takes account of Manoah's wife.
G.W.H. He meets this enemy through Nazariteship.
J.T. But He begins by speaking first to the woman. That is a special feature running through this book; it is
{175}
the element represented by the woman, in a subjective and corrective way. It is not that all the people were marked by it, but that God is pleased to establish this principle.
A.F.M. Does this peculiar oppression give us a key to the declining state of the people?
J.T. I suppose it does. It is very solemn, that the form of the flesh typified in the Philistines should have been allowed to flourish until it dominated Israel. What has occurred in the history of the church is in view.
G.W.H. It would be through the breakdown of the responsible element.
J.T. Evidently. So that we have to carefully consider this chapter. The Angel appears to the woman with good tidings, and she relates the facts to her husband. Manoah is a remarkable kind of man; not only is he interested in the communication to his wife, but he prays to God to let the man of God come again. She says of the man of God, "His appearance was like the appearance of an angel of God" (verse 6). She had ability to discern in this person a *heavenly* visitant. How different he was from a Philistine! Manoah did not distinguish the Angel as his wife did; so that when he came the second time Manoah says, "What is thy name, that when thy word cometh to pass we may do thee honour?" Well, he was assuming quite a little in promising that he would do *him* honour. "Let us detain thee", Manoah says, "and we will make ready a kid of the goats for thee". We should notice that the Angel's answer suggests what is mediatorial: "If thou wilt offer a burnt-offering, thou shalt offer it up to Jehovah". He is asserting the rights of God, as the Lord Jesus did.
A.F.M. He is called "the Angel".
J.T. Yes. So Manoah's proposal to do him honour "when thy word cometh to pass" is poor. The angel says, "My name ... is wonderful". It is very poor to talk about honouring one so evidently great,
{176}
when his sayings come to pass. You can see how this name is expanded, for in @Isaiah 9:6 Christ's "name is called Wonderful". And then the Angel immediately proceeds, as the offering is made, to do *wonderful* things. Manoah did not have to wait until his word came to pass; it was a question of discerning the greatness of the person before his eyes. People put things off to the coming of the Lord; but the point is what is *now* before us. The person is here whose name is wonderful, and he does wondrously. It says twice, "And Manoah and his wife looked on". They were brought to that point, of looking on.
W.M. Saints speak about the coming of the Lord, instead of what we have now. I suppose the *event* of His coming is not the hope of the church.
J.T. It is the Lord Himself. "Christ Jesus our hope", (@1 Timothy 1:1). It is not exactly an event, but a Person that we have before us. Here He is doing wonderful things, in response to which, Manoah and his wife looked on and fell on their faces to the ground.
Ques. The inquiry of Manoah as to the Angel's name is like the Jews in John's gospel looking for signs; it was lack of faith.
J.T. Yes. The trouble was in not seeing who was there. So here the Angel ascends in the flame of the altar. The Lord says, "Behold, more than Solomon is here", and again, "Behold, more than Jonas is here", (@Luke 11:31,32). It is not now a staff in the Angel's hand, as with Gideon. It is more like John's ministry, in this chapter. The staff connects with what God had been doing. Here it is, typically, the Lord Himself who is the beginning.
J.S. What He is in Himself. So that the Lord *ascends* in John.
W.M. It is not previous work or experience, but something new.
J.T. The Person Himself is in view. John has that in
{177}
mind -- to bring in the Person, who is greater than anything He does; it is Himself.
S.McC. The disciples "contemplated his glory", (@John 1:14).
J.T. They saw what was there. It was said to John the baptist: "Upon whom thou shalt *see* the Spirit descending and abiding on him, *he* it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit"; and John said: "*I* have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God", (@John 1:33,34). And yet the Son of God was not viewed as doing anything at that time; for the same John says, "In the midst of you *stands*, whom *ye* do not know, he who comes after me", (@John 1:26).
J.E.N. I am glad for these thoughts as to John's gospel. There is no true beginning until Christ.
J.T. You have a real beginning, the Person Himself.
W.M. As we have it here, the responsible element fails; it is the woman, which is similar to John.
J.T. Women, as representing the work of God, are prominent in John's gospel.
A.N.W. The woman speaks of Him as Jehovah, but Manoah, as God.
J.T. It says, "Manoah knew that it was the Angel of Jehovah, And Manoah said to his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God" (verses 21,22). Manoah was the responsible element, he had a sense of responsibility to God, but he did not know God. The woman knew Him, and bases her remarks on that knowledge. She said, "If Jehovah were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering and an oblation at our hands, neither would he have showed us all these things, nor would he at this time have told us such things as these" (verse 23). I think that is excellent; she speaks from her knowledge of God. Manoah ought to have known these things, for both Abraham and Moses had seen God in the sense spoken of here; but he is not equal to the privileges accorded to him.
{178}
Rem. She turns (verse 23) to the name of revealed relationship, Jehovah.
J.T. Manoah's wife goes beyond Deborah; her reasons are based on her knowledge of God, as verse 23 shows.
Now coming to Samson, it may be well to point out, as was said already, that it must be a great puzzle to understand how God could use such a man. But if his life is taken up typically, it may be seen that God, in the history of the church, has done wonderful things in spite of adverse conditions. We have unmistakably, the Nazarite at the beginning, and then the death of Christ in a remarkable manner, both in the slaying of the lion and in the honey in its carcass; and the "fresh jawbone of an ass" points to the continued freshness of His death. Then there is reference to the Spirit in the drinking of the well of Lehi, and Colossian ground typified in the taking of the doors and bars of Gazah to the top of the mountain that is before Hebron. Samson's awful fall follows, brought about through the disclosure of the secret of his power from God. Then with the regrowth of his hair there is seen power which results in the overthrow of the world. The history unmistakably refers, not to a particular phase of the church, but to its whole history -- what God has done and will do despite the conditions described. The element of Nazariteship is seen running right through the history of the assembly, which shows that in however small a way or in whomsoever that element exists, God will surely recognise it and vindicate Himself.
P.A. Is there any subjective feature in the life of Samson?
J.T. The renewed growth of his hair and his exploits of power indicate that there was a work of God in him. He is one of the men of faith mentioned in @Hebrews 11, and faith is an evidence of the work of God in one.
Rem. It says, "And the Spirit of Jehovah began to
{179}
move him at Mahaneh-Dan, between Zoreah and Eshtaol" (verse 25).
J.T. The Spirit *began* to move him in his own locality.
A.F.M. Are the people at the lowest ebb here? Whereas before, God generally delivered His people not only through the judge but through the people themselves, here it is by Samson alone and through Nazariteship.
J.T. I think the oppression here has to be taken account of as covering the whole history of the church in the antitype. Whether the element of Nazariteship is great, as it was at the beginning, or small as subsequently, or whether it is found running side by side with the greatest sins, such as the history of the church shows, yet God always is true to that principle, and power is there as the result.
Rem. I suppose, "Let a man prove himself" (@1 Corinthians 11:28) would be Nazariteship preserved in freshness and vigour. If it is in evidence, it must be in relation to the Lord's supper.
J.T. It would be so. I have no doubt the position in chapter 15, the exploit at Lehi, alludes to the Lord's supper; it comes in there in the fresh jawbone. The Philistines spread over Lehi and Judah; that is, they were right among the leading tribe, which is most sorrowful. And those of Judah answer Samson, "Knowest thou not that the Philistines rule over us?" (verse 11). That is a most solemn admission; and they actually bind and deliver him over to them. This act of Judah foreshadowed that of the Jews in handing Christ over to the Romans.
J.S. "We have no king but Caesar", (@John 19:15).
J.T. Yes. They handed the Lord over to His enemies, thinking they had triumphed; as no doubt Satan thought at Gethsemane and the cross. It says of Samson that the "Spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and the cords that were on his arms became as threads of flax that are burned with fire". That is to say, the power of God exhibited itself in regard to that which held him.
{180}
A.F.M. You refer to this as typical of Christ's death and resurrection?
J.T. Quite. Then it says, "And he found a fresh jawbone of an ass". Samson *found* it. I think that the figure runs on to the Lord's death as seen in the Lord's supper. It is not a mere historical matter; if it were only that, it would be as dry as the dry bones that Ezekiel saw in the valley. That is what the 'sacrament of the Lord's supper' is like in christendom; there is no freshness about it; it is just a religious observance with no sap in it at all. The Lord's supper implies that His death is an ever present thing, as if it happened this very day. It is never really and fully enjoyed except in this light; which makes it not a question of history simply, but enables us to enter into the *present bearing* of His death.
W.M. How do you apply the fresh jawbone to the Supper?
J.T. The death of Christ is brought to us in this fresh way. One might inquire as to that which is on the table. The answer would be, 'a loaf'. But the Lord said of it, when instituting His supper, "this *is* my body", (@Matthew 26:26).
W.M. Do you mean that the ass represents Christ as become sin?
J.T. Of course an eastern ass is a noble domesticated creature, and typically it refers to Christ in that sense. Balaam's ass, for example, was a remarkable creature: It said, "Am not I thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since I was thine to this day? was I ever wont to do so to thee?" (@Numbers 22:30).
Rem. It was a faithful servant.
J.T. But the jawbone would refer to the state of Samson as a believer. He was dwelling in the cleft of the rock just prior to this slaughter of the Philistines. What had engaged him there? We must bear in mind that these exploits are not simply incidents, but are types. He judged Israel twenty years we are told; he was not always
{181}
slaying Philistines. The cleft of the rock was an invaluable place to be in. Moses had been there before him, and Samson would doubtless know that. God had put Moses there. Typically, he was in Christ -- in the sense of security. The jawbone suggests the power of mastication; there is not only to be the reception of the word of God, but its mastication and assimilation. The Lord Jesus emphasises the word of God, in His temptation in the wilderness. He says, "Man shall ... live ... by every word which goes out through God's mouth", (@Matthew 4:4). He would Himself live as a Nazarite by the word of God. We have, so to say, to read between the lines of Scripture, and masticate the word of God if we are to get His mind. Of course, we must not add to Scripture, but to understand an incident, we must, in dependence on the Spirit, take in the full setting and bearing of it.
G.W.H. Has not the revival of the Supper in its true significance served to overthrow the Philistines, in the last hundred years?
J.T. It is so vital that it enters into everything!
W.M. Samson put forth his hand and took the jawbone.
J.T. And by it he slew a thousand men. He did more than Shamgar with an ox goad, which is another thing, and refers undoubtedly to experience. The jawbone occupies an important place in Scripture in connection with the food of the priests. Of the sacrifices they were given the jawbone and the maw (or stomach); the former means that I masticate; the other, that I assimilate. So that I acquire spiritual power, and am available to God.
J.T.Jr. Would it be like a fresh word from God?
J.T. It would indeed; Samson became, as it were, identified with the jawbone; he is fresh. We have to look at things in a spiritual way. First, he *found* it; the exigency of the moment required an implement; he had slain the lion without anything in his hand. But the jawbone
{182}
found, refers more to a believer who is in power acquired by the word of God, and characterised by the death of Christ.
J.S. You find ability to use that which is at hand.
J.T. How often one finds, in seeking to serve the Lord, what one did not know was there! You are conscious that you need something, and it comes to light.
E.P. Paul's presentation of the Supper in 1 Corinthians is like a fresh jawbone; it met the Philistine element at Corinth.
J.T. One feature of Samson is mutuality. The honey of chapter 14 is a mutual thought. So that the Lord's supper is brought in to bring down the Philistine element among christians, and to bring about mutual affection.
W.M. There is no place where a man feels so small as at the Lord's supper.
J.T. That is a very wholesome remark. Paul says, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body"; and then in connection with the cup, "This ... is the new covenant in my blood" (@1 Corinthians 11:23 - 25); how full and how touching are these words!
Rem. The use of the jawbone of an ass is suggestive of the lowly presentation of the truth in Corinth. The apostle begins in chapter 11 with the place of the woman and then comments upon the disorder in their love feasts, until the chapter emerges into the sublime memorial of Christ -- what the Lord had given Paul direct from heaven.
J.T. He had been amongst them with no pretension at all. "I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified", (@1 Corinthians 2:2).
W.M. After the defeat of the Philistines Samson was able to write a hymn!
{183}
J.T. It is a poetic contribution. How much poetry there is in Scripture! There is no singing until you get redemption; but there is poetry before. Now Samson here is able to put his feelings into poetic language: "With the jawbone of an ass, a heap, two heaps, With the jawbone of an ass have I slain a thousand men".
A.F.M. You would hardly think that a blunt jawbone could effect such great results; but it shows how effectual a word fresh from the Lord is.
J.T. So that in the directions for "open" meetings in @1 Corinthians 14, one point is brevity; another is that you *have* something; a third is that while you are speaking another gets something, and you are sensitive enough to sit down. The first speaker would rightly have a definite word, but the second or third speakers would be sitting by and get revelations, something that is revealed at the moment.
Rem. You are saying this abstractly!
J.T. We must keep the truth before us, even if we come far short of it. The brother who is exercised about a word is *sitting* (not wanting to stand); if he has a revelation the first speaker holds his peace.
W.M. How would he know when to do that?
J.T. It is a test to one's spirituality. The Lord's supper puts us in touch with one another, and prepares for the three following chapters. @1 Corinthians 12 begins the subject of ministry, which gives prominence to the Spirit. Chapter 13 is the more excellent way of love. Chapter 14 is ministry in the assembly; it suggests the highest kind of spiritual sensitiveness -- one speaking is conscious that a brother sitting by has a revelation, and gives way to him. It should be noticed that chapter 14 contemplates "the whole assembly come together in one place" (verse 23);
{184}
chapter 11:18 is "when ye come together in assembly".
A.N.W. Would you be more concerned about the first speaker's part than with that of those who follow?
J.T. I should. The first speaker gives the lead. It is a great principle with God to give a lead.
Ques. What about brevity?
J.T. Brevity is enjoined. "And let two or three prophets speak", @1 Corinthians 14:29. It is a limitation of mercy.
Ques. What do you mean by a limitation of mercy?
J.T. The brethren should not be worn out. Besides, "we know in part" (@1 Corinthians 13:9); indeed, we cannot take in much at once.
A.F.M. There is nothing wrong in having a psalm, a teaching, or a revelation.
J.T. But then one should know when to give out what he has and discern when another has something which he has got just at the moment. The assembly is *one*, and the Spirit acts in line with that.
A.A.T. Should the brothers be in line with one another?
J.T. The idea of a "word" is what may be spoken as well as what is spoken; that is, it conveys what you have even if you do not speak. Elihu had much to say, but he waited for his opportunity, (@Job 32).
S.McC. "If any one speak -- as oracles of God", (@1 Peter 4:11).
J.T. That is, you speak on the part of God. So that for all who take part in meetings, it is a question of being with God and discerning conditions that exist; there must be a constant meeting of conditions which arise.
Ques. Why was Samson thirsty after this great event?
J.T. It says, "And it came to pass when he had ended speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place Ramath-Lehi". I think the casting away of the jawbone means that it is not to be used again; which agrees with what we were
{185}
saying, that the ministry must be fresh. But he needed something to replace the jawbone, for he was very thirsty; and *we* have to go on to something after this. At the next meeting we shall need something fresh also; for we cannot rely on what we gave out at the last one.
J.S. Did he need something for his own soul?
J.T. He was very thirsty personally, and called on Jehovah and said, "Thou hast given by the hand of thy servant this great deliverance, and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? And God clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi, and water came out of it. And he drank, and his spirit came again, and he revived. Therefore its name was called Enhakkore, which is in Lehi to this day". 'The caller's spring' (footnote) *remained*; a fitting monument to Samson's faith, and an encouragement to us to make room for the Spirit.
A.N.W. Would you clarify a little more, for practical benefit, the difference between having a word and a revelation?
J.T. Having a word is right enough when you come to the meeting. 'Logos' means that; it is one of the words used in scripture for 'word' and means that you have something to say (i.e., the subject before you utter it), and also the utterance of it. It is quite right to have it, to come with it; but that, I think, would be the exercise of the first speaker. The second speaker's word is by 'revelation'; as he sits there something comes to him by the Spirit. The Spirit of God will use what you have; but it is on the principle of something coming to you from Him that you speak. The great value of such meetings is that the door is open for the Spirit. If there be haste or competition the Spirit is 'grieved' or 'quenched'.
A.F.M. There are very few 'open' meetings held among us now.
J.T. The Lord is owning the 'open' meetings in some
{186}
parts. It is a question of having confidence in the Lord and in one another. The Spirit's movements are always true. If the brethren have confidence in us, we must not betray it. A brother should wait for his opportunity, and be sure he has something to give.
Pursuing Samson's history, in chapter 16 we have Hebron. Samson carries up the doors, posts, and bar of Gazah, typical of Christ leading captivity captive. And then the great fall of Samson, due to the disclosure of his secret of Nazariteship; so that it is an out and out disaster, but room is made for God, and Samson's hair begins to grow, there is life there, referring to an element in the church. It refers, I think, to life as presented in John's ministry. It is said that Jannes and Jambres could not advance farther; their folly was exposed by life. Samson's hair begins to grow; the growth is the sign to faith that the world system is coming down; typically it falls in Samson's final victory; that is what faith sees at the present moment.
W.B-w. What about the great fall of Samson -- is it the breakdown of the public body?
J.T. Yes. That disaster is historical now; but encouragement lies in the fact that Samson's hair "began to grow after he was shaved". The hair beginning to grow becomes very practical with all of us; the growth of the hair denotes life, as indicating a healthy state of things. In it we have the evidence of life, and however small it may be, it is the death knell of the world. The world, as such, must come down.
A.F.M. It says, "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5:5).
J.S. The whole world structure is brought down.
J.T. First it is brought down in our souls -- "Now is the judgment of this world", (@John 12:31).
W.M. It is the subjective condition that gains the victory.
{187}
J.T. It is of great importance to follow that thread through this book.
A.L. "Strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once". Samson now values the power he had forfeited.
W.B-w. He was to *begin* to save Israel; and at the end his hair *began* to grow.
J.T. There was not *finality* with him; that is in Christ, and will appear when He comes.
Ques. Why does Samson perish with the Philistines?
J.T. It was a matter of the government of God. Samson was not going out with flying colours, but in a most humbling way. The same thing marks the history of the church -- its end on earth as seen in @Revelation 3 is humbling. But it synchronises with the overthrow of the world
{188}
THE WILL OF GOD
@Romans 12:2; @Ephesians 1:5 - 12; @Genesis 8:15 - 21
I am thinking, dear brethren, of the will of God, first as seen in Romans and secondly as seen in Ephesians; the latter I wish to illustrate from Genesis.
Romans presents the kingdom, the object of which, in the main, is subjection; involving sometimes severe struggles, both on the part of God and on the part of the subject of His will. Ephesians does not contemplate this side, but rather that, in the exercise of His will, God is occupied with material already prepared. This is according to the principle of the building of the temple: the stones were brought as already prepared, so that no sound of hammer or axe or any instrument of iron should be heard. But a great deal of sound was heard in those quarries whence the stones came! There were stonesquarers, and those men had to use hammers without regard to the ears of those who may have stood by. And so we have examples in certain believers, descriptive of all of us, of the service God thus renders, having in view *prepared* material; and He is very patient in this process.
We find men like Jacob, Moses, David, Peter, and Paul, who are but types of us all, in the preparation of whom there were many struggles; but in result the finished product appeared. With Jacob, for instance, as he went into Egypt, you have his family from four mothers. Not in any way conducive to good material is the plurality of mothers; but God would show that He carries on His work in spite of the most adverse conditions. If there was a family in which conditions were adverse, it was that of Jacob, not only on account of the plurality of mothers, but because of the difference in their social status, affording occasion for jealousy
{189}
amongst the children, for obviously the children of Leah and Rachel had an advantage over those of the maidservants. But those of the maidservants were all Jacob's children and were to go through the process also. And so we find that the struggle went on and on. I need not go into detail. There was much in them that was shameful, but the work of God went on in spite of that.
At length the time came for Jacob to move into another realm -- and that is what I had in mind; to show how we *move out of one realm into another*. In what condition is God going to accomplish this, are we to be finished, or are the conditions too adverse to admit of finishing? No! for nothing is impossible with God. He deliberately selects certain conditions to show that He can complete His work in spite of the most adverse conditions. And so we find that when the time drew nigh for Jacob to go into Egypt, he goes down in a spiritual manner; that is, in the recognition of Isaac, typically the risen Man. The line on which we leave one realm for another is in relation to the One who has gone before; He represents every perfection under God's eye. Are we then to detract from that as we go into our proper realm where He is? Indeed not! It is a question of God's ability to make us like Him, to conform us to the image of His Son.
Joseph had gone before. What a model for the family of Jacob to come up to! Think of that young man as he stood before Pharaoh after the extraordinary experience of thirteen years of suffering under the ordering of God. Scripture says he "stood before Pharaoh", (@Genesis 41:46). Was there anything lacking in Joseph? No, he was, so to speak, a finished product of the school of God. What is recorded shows how fitted he was for the great place he was to occupy and the service he was to render. It was a standard to which the remaining members of the family of Jacob had to come, for they, too, were to appear before Pharaoh; and we find they were equal to it -- at least Jacob himself and five of his sons.
{190}
Jacob goes down to Egypt on a high level. He offers sacrifice to the God of *Isaac*. Isaac here, typically, is the risen Christ, God's beloved Son. God had said to Abraham, "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac, and ... offer him up for a burnt-offering", (@Genesis 22:2). We are told in the New Testament that he received him from among the dead, in figure. Jacob moves in the light of resurrection and God says, "I am God, the God of thy father", (@Genesis 46:3). He is owned thus typically in relation to a risen Christ. That is the idea here. This takes place at Beer-sheba, when Jacob was departing. He was going into another realm in the light of what Isaac (Christ) is to God. His sons too are with him; they carry him down. They, with their father, are 'perfected' in the divine school, and are here called "the *sons* of Israel", (@Genesis 46:5). They are no longer merely the sons of the four mothers, but are a spiritual generation, the sons of Israel going down in dignity to Egypt! @Exodus 1:1 confirms this: "These are the names of the sons of Israel ... with Jacob had they come". They are actually in Egypt in this dignity. This brings out the great patriarchal principle established in Genesis, when it says, "With Jacob had they come". They are in Egypt fully recognising the responsibility attaching to their relationship to the patriarch -- with *him* had they come.
That is the great result of God's education, beloved brethren, and one could multiply illustrations of it, for that process goes on, so that as we emerge, according to God, from one realm into another, we do so in full growth. And so in the book of Numbers, the numbering was of persons from a certain age, not from the little ones, but from those who were twenty years and upwards. The Levites, indeed, are numbered from a month old, emphasising God's rights over us; but for actual service, a mature age is required in each case.
I want now to speak a word about Romans, for the reason that most of us are experimentally there. We are
{191}
in the struggle period to which I have referred. I do not speak of that in any depreciative way; because we find that no less a personage than Jacob was at one time struggling -- a man wrestled with him. He wrestled with a man to the breaking of the day, and prevailed so as to secure the blessing (@Genesis 32). Such struggles do not belong to heaven, though heaven is greatly interested in them. I call them struggles, for I believe that most of us are in the struggle period, which is an important one, for it is the *making* period. What comes out too is that the Lord is stronger. Thank God for that! That is clearly brought out at Corinth where the will was at work, the word is, "Are we stronger than he?" (@1 Corinthians 10:22). We also shall find out, if will is at work with us, that we are not stronger than He. Romans confirms this thought; so that we may as well make up our minds to it, that God *will not* give up what is before Him regarding us, for His testimony is involved in what He is doing; so that the struggle period is to culminate in complete subjection. But to whom? To the One who *loves*. It is said that "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", (@Romans 5:5).
In Romans all things are made to work *together* for good to those who love God. So that things are brought in, and circumstances arise from one quarter and another, all to one end; viz., to bring about complete subjugation so that there is obedience "from the heart". God has no use whatever for obedience which is only from the neck up, from those who bow their heads like the bulrush! God has no interest in that; He aims at the *heart*. So that it says, "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart", (@Romans 6:17). And then we are enjoined in this twelfth chapter to prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God. Mark you, it is what you *prove*; for the finishing of the work implies that you are not like a lifeless stone that the squarer makes fit, but are *living* material. And so I allude to Peter, for we have in him that idea: "Thou
{192}
*art* Peter" (@Matthew 16:18); that is what I am for God's *use*. But then the Lord says, "Thou shalt be *called* Cephas", (@John 1:42). What I am called is my dignity. It is a name given, but such as corresponds with my characteristics. That is how I am to regard the brethren. They are material for God's building, but each also has his own distinction in which he is to shine; it is his character, by which he is known. And so one looks abroad among the brethren and thinks of them not according to the name given when born or baptised, but according to what they are in spiritual character. By and by I shall be called by what I am, for I shall be known as I am, and not beyond that; for what I am here spiritually I shall be in heaven. That is the idea, as I apprehend, of a name given by the Lord.
Now, having said so much in regard to Romans I would ask, Is it not worth your while to *prove* what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God? Once I have proved that the will of God is good, perfect, and acceptable, I cease struggling. If we come into the assembly as strugglers, we are sure to be troublers. As a matter of fact, Jacob was wrestling in his mind with Esau before the angel wrestled with him. How very different from Esau was that 'man' who wrestled with Jacob till the breaking of the day! Very often we wrestle with one another in our localities. Is it not so? One says, I am not getting my due; I am deserving of more recognition. Would I thus wrestle? God says, as it were, 'I will wrestle with you'. Let Him have an opportunity to wrestle with you. It says that he wrestled with Jacob "until the rising of the dawn", (@Genesis 32:24). It was then that the light shone in. After that Jacob put Joseph before Rachel (@Genesis 33:7). Rachel was the object of his tenderest affection, but now he puts the little boy, Joseph, before her. This shows he is learning; he has got a little glimpse of Christ, as one might say, and in that measure Christ displaces the natural. I give up struggling as Christ is on the scene;
{193}
there is a gradual relinquishing of all struggling as He takes things in hand. That is the history of Jacob; things pass on to Joseph and then all is settled. This is our history, too, for there is a cessation of the struggling and a quiescence in what God is. My outlook is now changed; as I accept that His will is good and acceptable and perfect, then what more can I wish? Nothing more. I begin to leave all that seems adverse in God's hands, and I prove that in His hands things become *for* me instead of being against me, for @Romans 8:28 says that "all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to purpose". These "all things" are educators for us, and so of great value. In God's school there are many elements of education; we cannot afford to be without any of them; therefore we must suffer loss if we resist even one of them. We can never overcome by opposition when it is a question of God's will. The point is: "That ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God". When I come to that, it makes me restful; and it is the restful man, upon whom the iron tools no longer have to be used, that God can employ. The stonesquarer's work is finished at the quarry; nor could such work be done at the temple site, for no sound of a hammer or of an axe or of anything of iron, was to be heard there.
What I read in Ephesians presents to us three beautiful features of the will of God. First we have, the *good pleasure* of His will. This does not imply a subject for the stone squarer, the hammer, or the axe. God has marked us out beforehand for sonship through Jesus Christ to Himself; this is said to be "before the world's foundation", which suggests to my mind the question as to how we should regard God, for I am afraid most of us have a very poor idea of God. God has to be apprehended in absolute Deity: "Dwelling", it is said, "in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see", (@1 Timothy 6:16). We have to begin with that. He is in a
{194}
realm beyond our creature understanding. Then we have to apprehend Him in the realm of purpose; again, in what is mediatorial, and in which last we must apprehend Him as *actually* working. Now I mention these three features so that we may have God clearly before us in view of our entering into the realm of purpose. He has a Man in His mind: whether we know Him as the Word, or as the Son, or as Jesus Christ: that blessed Man is in the mind and purpose of God. In relation to Him I am on *known* ground. I am on ground on which God has been pleased to come within my range. And the wonderful fact comes into my soul that I have had a place on that ground as purposed from eternity. Think of God looking on through these myriads of thousands of years to this very moment! For God is God. And having marked *us* out, what pleasure He has in us in Christ! God has stepped into the realm of the purpose of His love, in the centre of which is a Man known as "the Beloved", and has taken us into favour in Him! He has "marked us out beforehand for adoption [sonship] through Jesus Christ to himself". This is one of the instances in which a name, Jesus Christ, attached to our Lord in time, was in the mind of God before the world. Here it is not in Him, but *through* Him; it is therefore a *mediatorial* thought. He has taken us into favour according to the good pleasure of His will. It is His will, but it is the *good* pleasure of it. Think of all the delight that God had in us as marked out for sonship, as accepted, and graced in Christ, the Beloved. The Beloved is mentioned as if there were not another; as if in the whole universe there is only one. Not that we are not beloved, but *the* Beloved is One, and there is not another. Jacob and his family were accepted by Pharaoh, as it were, in Joseph. But I speak now of ourselves, of the wonderful fact that, in the realm of purpose, God "marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will".
{195}
The second thing is the *mystery* of His will. This is in view of the labyrinth of evil which marks this world. In the midst of it God has a mystery; it is the mystery of His *will*. It is sure to go through because it is a question of God's will. This mystery is not made up of immature persons. It must be viewed from the standpoint of God, and of what is in His mind and will, and of what He can *use* in His government; for His purpose is to head up all things in Christ; the things in heaven and the things on earth, even in Him. You will see, therefore, the great importance of spiritual *maturity*, of coming up to manhood, that we may be available to God, that iron implements may be no longer necessary, but rather that He can use us silently. Although the gospel is announced publicly, God is not making a noise to call the attention of men to the *mystery*. He is working silently, but effectively, surely; so that the world will be amazed when God displays this wonderful thing. It is already "made known to us"; as a christian I belong to it and am, or should be, initiated into its secrets; then why should I seek to shine in this world? Rather let it be a question of the good and acceptable and perfect will of God, which I have proved in my little way. But we ought to see that the mystery of His will is to head up all things in Christ. God will lift all that He has been developing out of the labyrinth of evil here and set it in the clear light of day. Everything will be headed up in Christ, things in heaven and things on earth. We also read later: "And gave him to be *head over all things* to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all", (@Ephesians 1:22 - 23). That is the mystery of His will. And what an immense thing it is to be quiet in the knowledge of the dignity of our position as marked off as sons of God; to go through this world in obscurity, in the knowledge that we have part in that mystery which, when brought into display, will amaze the universe.
The third point is "the *counsel* of his own will". You
{196}
have the little word 'own' here, which does not appear earlier in the passage; it is, "his *own* will". We are marked out in that connection, as you will observe in verse 11: "In whom we have also obtained an inheritance, being marked out beforehand according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his own will". How very precious are these words, "we have also"! May we not take them to ourselves? No doubt the apostle referred to the Jews, but then *we also* have part in the inheritance. It is according to the counsel of His *own* will; He did not take counsel with another. He took counsel in regard of Adam, saying, "Let *us* make", (@Genesis 1:26). There it is God in the plural expressing absoluteness.
In closing I would say that Genesis affords illustrations of what I have been saying, that God in taking us from one realm into another, would have us there in maturity. We are awaiting this transfer. Indeed, we are on the very threshold of another world -- "*that* world", (@Luke 20:35). But how are we transferred? Finished! So that the ark which Noah built was preservative of the thoughts of God expressed livingly. That is the idea. There is no idea of increase of the family of Noah or of the rest of creation that was in the ark. What we find is: "Thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons¬ wives with thee", but no children. And similarly in regard of all the creatures, there is nothing said about an offspring with them. The idea is that God has *complete* thoughts, and these thoughts are expressed livingly. If we take an elephant, it expresses a thought of God, or a lion, or whatever creature it may be. Noah expresses a thought of God, and so does his wife and each of his sons and their wives. They are all *mature*, for God is not carrying over immature things. We should, therefore, be exercised that we should "be no longer babes". They are normal to a point, but abnormal beyond it. There were no babes in the ark. What went in came out and nothing more. The increase
{197}
would be afterwards, because it was a question of another world. I am speaking of the will of God; what that will is, and of how it should be recognised. Noah removed the cover of the ark for observation, but he did not move out until he was told to do so (see @Genesis 8:13,15). He and his wife, his sons and his sons¬ wives were to go out; then, "Bring forth with thee every animal which is with thee, of all flesh". It is clear from the facts given that all came into the renewed earth in maturity. This has an instructive significance, as I have been pointing out.
That is what I had in mind, dear brethren; and my hope is that the result of these meetings will be that we all shall go on to full growth. May God grant it!
{198}
Pages 198 - 317 "Eternity to Eternity", Readings and an Address, Bristol 1931. (Volume 109).
ETERNITY TO ETERNITY (1)
@Ephesians 1:1 - 23
J.T. The Lord will help us, I think, in going over this heavenly ground, and perhaps it may be well to keep before us that, there being six chapters in the epistle, we may have one chapter for each meeting.
I have been thinking recently of the link there is between the epistle to the Ephesians and the ministry of David and Solomon. In this connection it is interesting to note that the prayer of Moses the man of God has in view eternity; he says, "From eternity to eternity thou art God" (@Psalm 90:2), and David, in inaugurating the service of God in @1 Chronicles 16, delivers a psalm which is formed of parts of several psalms ending with @Psalm 106, in which he says, "Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, from eternity and to eternity!" In bearing these thoughts in mind, we shall be able to see what is in view in this epistle. The epistle brings before us what is really "from eternity to eternity", going back to the purpose of God and culminating in glory to God in the "assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", (@Ephesians 3:21). In David's psalm (@1 Chronicles 16), all the people *said*, Amen, that is to say, there is the suggestion of the saints being brought into agreement with what is stated, that is, of our being brought on to the ground of eternity -- "from eternity to eternity".
P.L. So the psalmist in @Psalm 106:5 says, "That I may see the prosperity of thy chosen ones, that I may rejoice in the joy of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance". Does that suggest the epistle to the Ephesians?
J.T. Exactly. Moses would link us on in @Deuteronomy 26
{199}
with the purpose of God in the thought of "the basket"; and I believe a right understanding of Ephesians would enable us to understand what is typified by the basket; it is what the believer is from the standpoint of divine counsel. We shall recall that in @Deuteronomy 26 the basket is said to be taken out of the hand of the worshipper and set down by the priest before the altar. That illustrates the abstract thought of the believer always being held in regard of divine purpose, and as in that dignity he is able to speak of his responsible origin, of what his father was. Then it will be noted that the worshipper goes back to the first-fruits, and the priest is no longer mentioned; he sets the basket down before Jehovah and he worships. "From eternity to eternity" would signify that there is a dip down, and in that dip, God makes known what He is -- but the object is eternity.
H.H. "From eternity *to* eternity" covers all the period of *time*?
J.T. I thought so. The dip, so to speak, the down coming is to display what God is, and how He effects His purpose.
H.H. And that is what the scriptures deal with in the main, is it not?
J.T. Yes. In the period between the two eternities, there is the display of what God is, in the working out of His thoughts and the testimony here in the presence of evil, so that He might be known, but the great end is "*to* eternity".
C.A.C. It seems to bring us into the full scope of the divine thought.
J.T. The opening verses of the epistle clearly exhibit the idea of "from eternity": "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ; according as he has chosen us in him before the world's foundation, that we should be holy and blameless before
{200}
him in love; having marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has taken us into favour in the Beloved". That is all, so to speak, "from eternity". Redemption is not brought in until after all that is stated; redemption involves the dip down.
H.D'A.C. Redemption was necessary because of what had come in in the interval. In eternal ages we were not viewed as sinners, but as persons chosen in Christ.
J.T. Yes. "The basket", to use the simple figure in @Deuteronomy 26, refers to what we are according to the counsels of God. "A perishing Aramaean was my father" (verse 5), refers to the condition and time of responsibility, and all that terminates, for after speaking about his history and his fathers, the worshipper comes back to the basket.
Eu.R. Who is the priest suggested in the passage?
J.T. I think it is the Lord as securing the believer. That is what the Lord is set for. He is the minister of the sanctuary and secures us in conditions according to the light of purpose. That is presented in the abstract, in the priest taking the basket and setting it down before the altar; but afterwards reference to the priest is omitted, and the worshipper puts the basket down before Jehovah. That is to say, there is a full recognition of our responsible origin and history, and of redemption meeting all that condition. The passage here deals with that side of things: "In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of offences, according to the riches of his grace".
M.W.B. Would you say the one is on the line of purpose and the other the line of the ways of God?
J.T. Quite so. Therefore, Moses and David in the types, are linked, the one ministry bringing us out of Egypt, involving redemption, and the other (including Solomon) setting us up as a habitation of God, growing to a holy temple, as seen in this epistle.
{201}
M.W.B. I wondered whether you would link the ways of God more particularly with chapter 2 verse 11 and onward.
J.T. Well, the earlier part of the chapter also deals with what we were, and speaks of the power of God; but we have to see that for the working out of the testimony here in the church, we are first taken up to heaven: "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", (chapter 2:6). All that has in view the testimony down here, that the heavenly feature should enter into it.
J.H.T. Would the baptism of John in @Acts 19 refer to the responsible side, and then the men being baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus and the Holy Spirit coming upon them, link up with this? The Spirit coming upon the twelve men would enable them to enter into this.
J.T. Quite so. Those referred to in @Acts 19 were placed on the ground of Paul's ministry, and the Holy Spirit being given would enable them to enter into the heavenly side, and it is similar with us. I think we ought to distinguish between eternity and heaven. "From eternity to eternity" is one idea; but heaven has in view the testimony *here*. It is a question of the predominance of heaven. It is, of course, alluded to as the abode of God, but that is all in view of His relations with the earth.
Ques. You mean that heaven is not really looked upon as a description of a past eternity?
J.T. No; it is part of creation. It is in view of the testimony. I think all references to heaven, and to elevation, are intended to impress us as on the earth. What God is, is infinitely beyond us. We may have some idea of moral elevation by seeing the heavens; they convey the thought, but there is the recognition in scripture that the heavens cannot contain God (see @2 Chronicles 6:18).
C.C.E. The heavens are all created.
{202}
J.T. God in grace seeks, through physical things, to convey His thoughts to our minds, but it is a great thing to reach a point where you are clear of mere physical environment. Spirituality involves that. I find it very difficult to get rid of physical environment in my thoughts, but I think spirituality involves that we do.
Ques. You mean we ought to get outside of any idea of a specific place for God?
J.T. He dwells in light unapproachable.
A.M.H. How do you regard the new heavens and the new earth?
J.T. The same idea is retained in them as in the present heavens and earth; they are created. They are seen in the eternal state of things (@Revelation 21).
W.R.P. Do you make any difference between heaven and the heavenlies?
J.T. I should. The word "heavenlies" in Ephesians is a peculiar one. The end of chapter 1 clearly shows it is above, where Christ is. I think it would be an intensification of the idea. Verse 3 says, "who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ".
A.M.H. Is the idea something entirely above and different from the earth?
J.T. I think so, showing that our blessings are marked off, or distinguished, from blessings that others may have on the earth.
F.H.B. You were dwelling on the statement, "From eternity to eternity thou art God"; would that give you the idea of God being the beginning and cause, and then the end of all things?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, and this epistle develops that thought for us.
Ques. Would the apprehension of that be connected with maturity in the believer? Hence in this epistle you have the climax of the work of God.
J.T. I am sure that is contemplated in the work at
{203}
Ephesus because it is the acme of Paul's work, so that the state of the saints clearly would warrant all this being opened up. I have no doubt the saints at Ephesus would say, "Amen". In @Psalm 106:48 it is, "Let all the people say, Amen!" but in @1 Chronicles 16:36 they *said it*.
A.S.L. What difference would you make between heaven and the heavenlies?
J.T. The Lord is said to have entered into heaven itself. It is something distinctive.
Ques. Is it defined in @Colossians 3:1 where it says, "The things which are above, where the Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God"?
J.T. Yes, I think so; only there elevation and power are more in view, as the terms "above" and "right hand of God" imply.
W.R.P. Would you connect the thought of place with heaven, rather than the heavenlies?
J.T. Yes. What is presented here is an intensified thought, not that we are *with* Christ, but that our status is "*in* Christ".
H.H. Would you distinguish between the beginning of Genesis, "God created the heavens and the earth" and the scripture just referred to, that Christ is entered "into heaven itself"? (@Hebrews 9:24).
J.T. I think all these expressions are used to convey divine thoughts and to fit in with our limited ability to apprehend things. "Heaven itself" would convey the thought in its totality. We have the "third heaven" (@2 Corinthians 12:2), but "heaven itself" would involve more than that.
H.H. You would allow for what is spiritual in the expression "heaven itself", but the heavens, as created, do not suggest what is spiritual.
J.T. The sidereal heavens are material, but generally the realm of the spiritual is conveyed by the term "heavenlies", even as to what is satanic; we read of spiritual wickedness in the heavenlies. God is dealing
{204}
with us with a view to our education, taking account of our limited powers of apprehension. After all, besides the heavenly bodies, what do we see? The idea is, something far above, which is intended to dominate, and in a convincing way, to convey the idea of our privilege and supreme blessing and exaltation. But to 'go up', that is to enter upon these blessings, we must learn to be spiritual. The disciples saw the Lord go up.
W.J.H. The heavenly bodies are for 'signs', pointing to something spiritual.
J.T. Exactly; that is one of the reasons for which they exist. In creation God formed a means of conveying His thoughts, as, for instance, when He 'set' the heavenly bodies. We cannot say how long they had already existed; they were created as mentioned in @Genesis 1:1, and in Genesis @1:17 we read God "set them". That indicates how God has set things so that He can call upon them for use as He needs them. So the heavens and the earth, and especially the heavens, really suggest the thought of dominance. Matthew takes that up in a special way, emphasising the kingdom of the heavens.
The heavens and the earth are to be the scene of the display of divine purpose, and the idea goes right through; God never gives up that thought, and what will be in the new heavens and new earth, will be the result of what is worked out in the present scene.
Eu.R. Would Matthew be the working out of the principle of the heavens and the earth, in relation to the assembly?
J.T. That is the idea; the Lord says "My Father who is in the heavens", (@Matthew 18:10).
M.W.B. Is the purpose of God linked with God Himself prior to creation, and then is creation a sphere in which that purpose can be wrought out?
J.T. Yes, and He was pleased to create that sphere as heavens and earth. In His wisdom He did that.
M.W.B. And He did so in order to convey certain
{205}
moral ideas to our minds; but you link purpose with eternity and God, prior to all else?
J.T. That is my understanding of it. It is a question of God, of whom, and through whom, and for whom are all things (@Romans 11:36).
The heavens, spoken of in @Genesis 1 were not affected by the catastrophe: "the earth was waste and empty". In connection with the renewed earth, there was evidently an additional heaven formed on the second day which would be that which is nearest to us, but all as a means whereby God would convey His thoughts to us.
M.W.B. In what relation does the purpose of God stand to the world to come? Would you distinguish between the two thoughts?
J.T. What God purposed for us in love, has its full answer in the eternal state of things, but it comes into display in the world to come, thus taking the form of testimony; for the world to come is really to bring into public display what God is effecting now. We shall see that in this epistle, the main body of which deals with the world to come. Its teaching shews how God brings out here on earth now, the excellence of this superior thing, the assembly, and brings it out of heaven. Chapter 2:7 contemplates that in the ages to come God will set forth "the surpassing riches of his grace in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus". What follows on that is the habitation of God down here; that is to say, the 'habitation' depends on our having first been raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies. "Raised up" refers to elevation. This would promote unity; and we are to be here in unity for the habitation of God. All this, too, would tend to keep us small, for being great I can be small: "less than the least of all saints", (@Ephesians 3:8). Thus we are in God's hands as suitable for His present purpose.
A.S.L. That is the great effect; it enables you to be genuinely small.
{206}
J.T. In being small you are morally great, that is, you are like Christ:
<blockquote>'O keep us, love divine, near Thee, <br>That we our nothingness may know'. (`87:3) </blockquote>
Ques. Do you connect the basket with the inheritance because it is heavenly?
J.T. It contains what is heavenly -- the first-fruits -- and it is taken out of the hand of the worshipper by the priest. It represents what God has in mind as to us viewed in relation to purpose.
Rem. The person who brings the basket has the purpose of God in his thoughts, and values the inheritance.
D.L.H. He has the purpose of God in his basket!
J.T. That is better; because the man himself *is* the basket, figuratively speaking, but not as the Syrian; it is the man in the light of purpose. The basket is formally separated by the priest taking it out of his hands and setting it down before the altar. Then the man makes the confession as to his ancestry, and afterwards *he* sets the basket down and worships.
Ques. What about the basket in @Exodus 29?
J.T. It is similar, having reference to the humanity of Christ as essential to priesthood.
P.L. In @John 17 you have the Priest in relation to the basket, the Lord lifting up His eyes to heaven, demanding that He might have His own with Him.
J.T. That is very good. The Father had given them to Him. The Lord thinks of them in relation to the testimony, and then that they might be with Him as He says, to "behold my glory which thou hast given me" (verse 24). In the first four verses He speaks of His mediatorial service, and then asks to be glorified with the glory He had along with the Father before the world was; that is surely "from eternity to eternity". In verse 6 He speaks of His disciples, and the greater part of the chapter deals with them in connection with the testimony here;
{207}
and then He asks the Father that they should be with Him -- to "behold my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world".
It is quite clear that verse 24: "I desire that where *I* am they *also* may be with me, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me" is eternity in the future, and then He adds the past: "For thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world".
H.D'A.C. The glory of verse 5 is not communicated. But in verse 24 He says, "That they may behold my glory which thou hast given me".
J.T. "The glory which I had along with thee before the world was", (verse 5) seems to be spoken of in our hearing, as calculated to produce holy adoration. It is evidently the glory of Deity -- glory as between the divine Persons.
H.D'A.C. It is a very special privilege for us to hear of it in this way.
J.T. Verse 24 is the "glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". I thought the reference to "before the foundation of the world" was to link on eternity with eternity, that they agree. But verse 5, as remarked, seems to be between divine Persons: "the glory which I had along with thee before the world was".
Rem. The glory in verse 5 is not said to be seen.
J.T. We cannot say it is the same as verse 24, for the glory there is said to be *given*; the "glory which thou hast given me".
Ques. Would that be conferred glory?
J.T. If He says, "the glory which thou hast given me", I would leave that as it is stated. It refers to what has been given to Him as Man. He speaks of giving them a glory which the Father had given Him, which, of course, could not be essential Deity.
F.H.B. Is not the stress in verse 24 on the word 'my'? "That they may behold my glory".
{208}
J.T. It is His as given, and His love for His own would have them with Him to behold it.
F.H.B. In verse 5 He receives it.
J.T. It may seem to amount to that, only the expression is. "and now glorify *me*, *thou* Father, along with thyself, with the glory which I had along with thee before the world was".
A.S.L. Is it not so, that having come into manhood, even the glory that was His from all eternity He would receive now from the Father?
J.T. Verse 5 says "the glory which I had along with thee before the world was", apparently involving association. Elsewhere it is said that He comes in the Father's glory; but that would be revealed evidently, but the glory of verse 5 seems to be between the divine Persons.
J.J. Is that very much like @John 1:1: "The Word was with God"?
J.T. Not precisely; though it would include that; @John 17:5 is undoubtedly a reference to the Lord's status in Deity.
The mention of it should appeal to us, calling forth worship. "The glory which I had along with thee", He says. The preposition is very often translated 'with', but "along with" intensifies it. As Man He returns to the status of Deity.
Ques. Is it like the Mediator passing for a moment out of our sight, and in that way establishing equality in status with God in glory?
J.T. I think it is. In verse 14 of chapter 1 you have the same preposition, where it says, "as of an only-begotten with a father". There you have an object of affection in manhood in relation to purpose; but @John 17:5 seems to deal with equality of divine Persons.
Ques. Would you use the word 'unity'?
J.T. Well, the idea is *alongside*, as of one your own equal. It is not what They are *towards* One Another, as in chapter 1 verse 1. "The Word was with God" is
{209}
another idea, the preposition is different; it is *toward*; but chapter 17:5 is "along with" as involving equality, I think. In @John 17:1 - 4 mediatorial service is clearly in view, thus "glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee", but verse 5 goes further and so there is emphasis on the personal pronouns "me" and "thou".
W.R.P. Why do you bring purpose into chapter 1?
J.T. In regard to the Only-begotten. We have here (@Ephesians 1) the Beloved; we are made accepted in the Beloved. That is where you get an Object for the Father's affections. We are now on the line of purpose, because we are on the ground on which others can be brought in. Sonship is really with a view to others being brought in. That is the idea, and @John 1:14 has that in mind. The glory He had there, was the "glory as of an only-begotten with a father"; it is descriptive.
W.R.P. Then sonship is relative?
J.T. Clearly; it is to establish a ground for purpose, so that the position here is in the Beloved. Of course there is also the declaration of God in the Son.
M.W.B. What connection do you see between the Beloved as you are quoting the expression now from Ephesians, and @John 17:24: "for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". Is there any connection between these two?
J.T. I think @John 17:24 is to establish what we are considering today -- "from eternity to eternity". That reference is to bring in the love that was there. We shall see it in the eternity to come; the link is in love; that is, "eternity to eternity" is linked up by love; the One that was loved then is the Beloved in whom we are now.
J.J. Would you carry in your mind @John 1: 14, back into eternity?
J.T. No, I should not. It is a description of the Word as become flesh, as the passage most plainly states.
W.C. Do I understand that that was not an exclusive thought but rather descriptive?
{210}
J.T. Well, it is a human figure. It is not *the* Father, but *a* father: "as of an only-begotten with a father". He had that place, but to apply it to Him as in the Deity, would, it seems to me, disarrange the relations between divine Persons, because you must make room for the Spirit; but as soon as you come into the realm of divine operations and the accomplishment of divine purpose, you get sonship.
P.L. Is not that the very thing suggested in @John 1:1? "The Word was with *God*". It would not do to say, 'the Word was with the Father'; that would leave out the Spirit.
J.T. I think we ought to see in the Son becoming Man, One adequate for God to express all that He is. No finite being would be adequate for God to show how He can love a person. I do not mean, of course, that He did not love finite beings, but in the Son you have a Person great enough for God's heart. That is the idea you get in the baptism of the Lord: "*This* is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", (@Matthew 17:5). God has an Object great enough to shew His love family-wise, so as to lay the basis on which we can all be brought into it.
E.J.McB. Is that why you stressed the priest taking the basket in the first place?
J.T. I think the Lord takes the basket just in that way. He knows what the Father is set for, and He takes you, so to speak, for that and never gives you up. He has taken us up for that. It is abstract until you come to verse 10 in the chapter (@Deuteronomy 26). Then I take the thing up myself and worship.
In the Son you have the Beloved. He has "taken us into favour in the Beloved". That has eternity to come in view, but then we come down to the working out of it all and that involves redemption.
Eu.R. What is the contrast between "in the Beloved" here, and what you spoke of in connection with status as being "in Christ"?
{211}
J.T. I think "in Christ" is more the dignity of the anointing. You need that in heaven. It is another thought.
Ques. Does the thought of Christ being loved "before the foundation of the world" involve family relationship?
J.T. I do not think so at all. We have to leave, in that respect, what was before the foundation of the world. There was relationship, of course, the relationship that exists between divine Persons. It is important to remember @John 1 has past and present tenses in dealing with this subject; what Christ *was* and what He *is*. What is stated in the present tense refers to manhood, but what is stated in the past tense refers to Deity: "the Word was God".
A.S.L. What He was and what He became.
J.T. "The Word became flesh", (@John 1:14). There you are on the ground of God working out His purpose.
H.H. Is there any direct reference to His deity in Ephesians?
J.T. Of course it is assumed, but He is seen here as Man -- the object and centre of the divine counsels.
H.H. Quite so; I was only thinking of what has often been said as to Colossians where there is very direct reference to Deity.
J.T. I think the scriptures in which the deity of Christ is insisted upon are corrective. In heaven we shall never raise such a question; we shall be in the presence of God there.
C.A.C. "Who fills all in all" would involve His deity, but it is said of Him as the exalted Man.
J.T. It is remarkable that the church is referred to in connection with that expression. The church is His fulness. How great is the thought that God should bring out such a thing in a Man! Who He is is evident.
A.S.L. We have certain scriptures methodically setting out the Lord's deity, and having these we do not raise questions as to His Person; they are settled.
Ques. Would you not think the relations between
{212}
divine Persons in eternity were greater than anything that has been revealed?
J.T. I should, certainly. If God is pleased to come within our range it is clearly unwise for us to say that what we see is *all*. I think it is due to God that we should leave Him, so to speak, in His own realm. If He has come into ours we adore Him, but we must recognise the mystery of piety.
A.S.L. It is entirely beyond our competence to intrude into relationships that existed between divine Persons in eternity.
J.T. God has been pleased to come into revelation. We must not forget that *He* has come; the ark of the covenant denotes the smallness of the compass into which God can come.
A.S.L. Then there is one precious word from the lips of the Lord Himself we need to bear in mind; "no one knows the Son, but the Father", (@Matthew 11:27).
G.W.W. You said something about corrective scriptures; what has to be corrected?
J.T. In view of theology coming in, the Holy Spirit saw to it that the doctrine was there; there it stands; @John 1, @Colossians 1, and @Hebrews 1 remain, and all the theology of the world cannot overthrow what is there.
F.H.B. We have to remember the creature can never comprehend the Being of God. He has revealed Himself for finite beings.
P.L. So the psalmist said: "who humbleth himself to look on the heavens and on the earth?" (@Psalm 113:6), and the previous verse is, "who hath placed his dwelling on high".
J.T. All that assumes revelation, but we must not limit God to that which that psalm states.
Ques. Would it be right to say that love was there?
J.T. I believe love is the great thing in "eternity to eternity"; love was active before the world was.
J.J. And does not @John 1:18 suggest the limitation of
{213}
His revelation? "Who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". It shows that the revelation is limited to that, to the revelation of the Father.
J.T. I think the revelation involves *both*. "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". I believe the *Him* includes both God and Father. The Son is in that wonderful position, and so God is declared; the term employed is not 'revealed' there but 'declared'; it is declaration, and I think the position of the Declarer being mentioned is to bring out the advantage of it, that is, that He is in the *place of love*.
{214}
ETERNITY TO ETERNITY (2)
@Ephesians 2:1 - 22
J.T. In addition to what we touched upon this morning in chapter 1, it may be pointed out that what is brought before us in the chapter involves the will of God and the power of God. Having come down to the sphere of testimony, we have the subject of redemption mentioned (verse 7) whence all is worked out. The "administration of the fulness of times" implies that all is to be carried over as finished, or in a mature condition. Hence the apostle speaks of "all wisdom and intelligence", and having spoken of the "good pleasure of his will" he proceeds to allude to the "mystery of his will" and the "counsel of his own will". The period from Adam to Noah illustrates the working out of these things; so that we have the expression, "the seventh from Adam", as indicating full development, Enoch being translated; and then, in Noah, the carrying over of the result of the testimony, involving maturity; for all that entered into the ark was mature, there was no idea of multiplication in the ark. All the living creatures came to Noah; and his sons and their wives were, of course, full grown. There were no children in the ark and nothing immature. In all this, too, there was the idea of mystery. The epistle to the Ephesians has maturity in view; what is going over is to be mature. The teaching of this epistle is to lead to that. Hence we read, "that we may be no longer babes" (chapter 4:14). Maturity should ever be before us, especially as we draw near the end.
F.H.B. The apostle speaks in chapter 4 of arriving at "the full-grown man". Is that maturity of affection?
J.T. Yes. By the knowledge of the Son of God we arrive at the full-grown man. The Son of God being from God here in testimony, it is how He is seen here;
{215}
we "grow up to him in all things", (@Ephesians 4:15). But I thought we might see in chapter 1 the will of God -- the "good pleasure of his will" and the "mystery of his will" and the "counsel of his own will". The "mystery of his will" involves obscurity on the part of those who have part in it.
F.H.B. Is the "mystery of his will" here connected with the world to come?
J.T. Yes; "to head up all things in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth". I apprehend these "things" to be fully developed, that is, each answers to the mind of God. One can understand that the lives of Enoch and Noah were mysteries. The testimony of Noah in the building of the ark and preaching would be mysterious to the then world. What was all this about? But it culminated in material being carried over in full maturity, so that another order of things is begun.
Ques. What have you in mind as to carrying over?
J.T. Well, that should be the attitude of our souls. Enoch "was not, for God took him". Taken in connection with Noah and the ark, Enoch represents the heavenly side. In the ark, we have the result of the testimony carried over out of one world into another. It was full of life, but mature life, as far as the facts shew.
P.L. Would the expression "the men whom thou gavest me" suggest maturity?
J.T. Exactly. If God has abounded, as it says, "towards us in all wisdom and intelligence, having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself for the administration of the fulness of times; to head up all things in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth", it is clear that growth is in view; so that the next section of the chapter, the prayer of the apostle, is to the end that we might have the "spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him, being enlightened
{216}
in the eyes of your heart, so that ye should know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe". The mystery would be seen in those who are grown, who are in the light of the mind of God, who know how to hide it and are content in smallness here.
H.H. Would this suggest the perfection which is for God's world produced by the Spirit in the way of formation in the saints?
J.T. Quite so; the work at Ephesus evidently had this in view.
H.H. Paul stayed there for three years to be used of God in the development of all this amongst the saints there.
J.T. The divine thoughts presented in this chapter are brought to bear upon us so that there should be maturity, in mystery, so that there is contentment in obscurity, both in our daily lives and in our service. In the knowledge of the place that we have in the divine scheme, we can accept obscurity, so that an Ephesian christian is properly capable of taking up Corinthians. The teaching here involves smallness and obscurity outwardly. The "seventh from Adam" would mean that the testimony set out in Adam had developed. It descended from Adam through Seth, not through Cain: Abel's offering having come in and Seth being appointed instead of Abel, you have light descending from Adam. Adam is set up again, so to speak, and Enoch is the seventh, so that it is a development and a development involving maturity, because before his translation he had the testimony that he pleased God, and he prophesied that he saw the Lord coming with the holy myriads (@Jude 14). The heavenly testimony is involved in Enoch and the earthly in Noah, but in either case there is maturity, Noah suggesting the idea seen in the four living creatures (@Revelation 4), but Enoch is a disciplined or taught man, corresponding with the twenty-four elders.
{217}
Ques. Do you mean that the twenty-four elders represent experience in divine things?
J.T. Yes; Enoch is the "seventh from Adam", and his name signifies a disciplined man, that is, a man who is taught of God; that is one side of the position. The other side is what God has secured in a living way which is seen in Noah and the ark, I think.
Eu.R. How do those two sides come into the scripture before us?
J.T. They enter into the idea of the mystery. There is the mystery of God's will; that would imply that certain things are to be carried through, but at the present time it is mysterious: the expression "for the administration of the fulness of times; to head up all things in the Christ", meaning that all the periods of testimony have rendered their quota. I thought that the period between Adam and Noah helped to indicate how God works all this out, the experience and intelligence in the heavenly being illustrated in Enoch, and what is living in Noah.
A.M.H. Are you suggesting that all these thoughts enter into the idea of the "mystery of his will"? (chapter 1:9).
J.T. Yes. As having a bearing on us here at the end. There should be intelligence through discipline and walking with God, and then the development of life. One idea in life is variety, and I believe that the idea of variety was intended to be conveyed in the ark. These thoughts have a bearing on our growth and spiritual instruction under the discipline of God, and the development of the affections that God intends to be displayed as expressive of life. All is according to "the counsel of his own will". There is, therefore, the will of God in its "good pleasure", its "mystery" and its "counsel".
J.J. Would all that lead on to Abraham, after Enoch and Noah?
J.T. Well, in Abraham you get a family taken up. In him God has a people, an inheritance.
{218}
J.J. Where would you place Abraham in the epistle to the Ephesians?
J.T. "The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory"; he comes in there. In connection with Abraham you have the God of glory. In result God has an inheritance, as we see in verse 18.
A.M.H. What is your thought as to counsel?
J.T. What comes out in the world to come, "the fulness of times", is in keeping with eternal purpose; "He *works* all things according to the counsel of his own will" (verse 11).
A.M.H. Then what is the difference between the "good pleasure of his will" and the "counsel of his own will"?
J.T. Both refer, I think, to the way things are worked out. The "good pleasure of his will" is evidently what He finds in us in this respect, as we had this morning. Then there is "the mystery of his will". I think the will is brought in to show that nothing can interfere with it; that all goes through. We get the family idea in chapter 3, that is, every family in the heavens and the earth is named of the Father. That would bring us down to Abraham in the types, but what I think we might see here, is the intelligence that is alluded to and what God has in the saints: "the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints" (verse 18).
Eu.R. In connection with what goes through, have you in mind that God would give us the sense in our service, of being linked up with what He had in His mind before the foundation of the world, and what He will display in the world to come?
J.T. Yes, that it is a question of His purpose and the counsel of His will, all is in keeping with eternal thoughts, only that it belongs to the sphere of testimony. It is on the way from one eternity, so to speak, to another; the fulness of times is the result of all the testimonies.
C.A.C. Do you connect this with what was spoken of this morning as the dip down?
{219}
J.T. That is what I was thinking. Redemption was reached: "in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of offences", and then the entire will of God is worked out.
Ques. Is that connected with @Revelation 10:7 "the mystery of God also shall be completed"?
J.T. Pretty much so, only Ephesians touches our intelligence in regard to what God has in His mind, and what He works out in the sphere of testimony before entering the eternal state. The "administration of the fulness of times" is the culmination of testimony on the part of God, what He can do: "to head up all things in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth".
A.M.H. What is your point as to that?
J.T. Well, I think 'things' are used to convey the thoughts of God: "the invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made", (@Romans 1:20). They refer to the concrete thoughts of God, in whomsoever they may be seen.
C.A.C. Have you in mind maturity of a spiritual character?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. That is what God is working for; there is the development of intelligence in His school as in Enoch, so that we please Him, and there is the development of sympathy with Him that it arouses in our hearts while in a world of corruption. Enoch had the testimony that He pleased God before his translation, but he prophesied, saying, "Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads", (@Jude 14). And then the working out of life, not in a childish way, but in a mature way, regarding each other in affection. Hence, in the type, the ark was full of intelligent varieties of life. I think it would have been one of the most interesting studies for any one who understood life to have gone through the ark and have seen, not life maturing, but the life matured.
{220}
C.A.C. So that there is all the substance for glory to God in the assembly.
Ques. Would that maturity be developed in every one in eternity?
J.T. It is to be developed *now* or never. Do not put anything forward or you will be very small.
D.L.H. "That we may be no longer babes", (@Ephesians 4:14).
J.T. Yes; "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", (@Ephesians 4:13).
J.H.T. In the ark there were seven of every clean beast, and two of every unclean; why do the unclean come in?
J.T. It is not unclean in the sense of what is evil, but rather that they would be of *some* use. They would not be carried over if they were bad, but the sense is conveyed of the great preponderance of what was to be for God in the way of sacrifice.
W.R.P. You said just now that you get the thought of maturity of life in the ark and also of variety of life; would you say something about that?
J.T. I was saying that maturity of intelligence was seen in Enoch. He walked with God for three hundred years. What an experience that was! What an opportunity for acquiring a knowledge of God, and God was pleased with his companionship for He took him to Himself. But then the idea of variety is not there. Variety is in Noah, the full result from the creation in the way of life; and that, I apprehend, would now be the working out of affection.
W.R.P. Is variety seen in developed affections?
J.T. "In your faith have also virtue, in virtue knowledge, in knowledge temperance, in temperance endurance, in endurance godliness, in godliness brotherly love, in brotherly love love"; the latter is mature love, (@2 Peter 1:5 - 7).
{221}
C.A.C. Is it not referred to in this epistle as the "life of God"? (Ephesians 4:18).
J.T. That is a very remarkable expression; perhaps you would tell us something about it.
C.A.C. I suppose the "life of God" would be love in activity.
J.T. Therefore the unregenerate are alienated from it "by reason of the ignorance which is in them". That "life of God" is here amongst the brethren; it is moral; the life of God in this sense has come within the range of men; but unregenerate men are alienated from it. Would you think that?
C.A.C. Well, yes; and in that life the inheritance can be possessed and enjoyed.
F.H.B. Do you understand that God is working now to form that which is to be carried over, the present work of God?
J.T. Quite so, that is the maturity that this epistle aims at.
F.S.M. How is that maturity developed? What would be conducive to its development?
J.T. I think what was quoted from Peter helps, having one thing in another; having in your faith virtue, and in virtue knowledge, temperance, endurance, godliness and brotherly love, and then love. I think love there, is the height of maturity; that is to say, you correspond with God. It is in having these things, one in the other, that we develop maturity; hence, brotherly love is balanced by love; love is of God.
S.J.B.C. You would not be restful with brotherly love. There is a danger of loving one another more than God. You reach God in love.
J.T. Love is the "bond of perfectness" (@Colossians 3:14) and it is reached thus in a mature way, according to Peter's instruction.
W.L. Does it suggest that all those things presented in Peter are there in germ, but not developed?
{222}
J.T. I think it is by having the one in the other, you develop perfectness. It is not exactly that you could have faith without love, but the point is you have all the things in relation to each other.
F.H.B. That would give the idea of a complete man.
J.T. I think it would. We shall see later how we are to be imitators of God, to "walk in love, even as the Christ loved us" (@Ephesians 5:2); there is correspondence with God. I think there is a great deal of immaturity. Whilst there is a good bit of light amongst us, growth is what the Lord would impress upon us, so that if He carries us through it will be as mature.
Ques. Had Mary in @John 12 arrived at it through discipline, especially that of chapter 11?
J.T. I should say so; she is marked not only by love but by intelligence as to what she does.
Ques. Would you say the living creatures in the ark convey the thought of maturity?
J.T. They were capable of multiplication when the time came, but not in the ark; there is no evidence of any multiplication or diminution, it is just what was there in a mature way. So spiritually we may visit the ark and we see the varieties of life going through. I believe that is what would be attractive as a testimony to others; it is the variety of life.
F.S.M. It is significant as to Enoch and Noah that it was said of each of them that he walked with God. Is that an essential quality for both heavenly character and spiritual maturity?
J.T. Quite so; and the animals came to Noah. It is remarkable the sympathetic link there was; with the dove particularly; she returned to him and he took her unto him in the ark.
W.W. Do they suggest the matured thoughts coming into the minds and hearts of the saints?
J.T. Quite so. I think the "things in the heavens and the things upon the earth" refer to certain thoughts of
{223}
God concretely presented. We have the idea of a family later but the things in the heavens and on the earth headed up in Christ, would mean a mature, intelligent state of things. "In him", it says. Those thoughts are being, so to speak, brought out concretely; now in mystery, but presently to be seen in full maturity headed up in Christ.
A.M.H. Why is the thought of "heading up", in Christ?
J.T. It refers to maturity, what we are speaking of. If I am to be headed up I have respect for the idea of headship. In David's ministry you get that emphasised. It is remarkable the number of times you get the word 'head' in 1 Chronicles; and in the last chapter of the book it is applied to God. David says, "thou art exalted as Head above all", (@1 Chronicles 29:11).
Therefore, the "mystery of his will ... for the administration of the fulness of times; to head up all things in the Christ" (@Ephesians 1:9,10) would mean a developed state of things, in which the thoughts of God are presented concretely. It is no longer their being apprehended in the material creation, the "invisible things of him" (@Romans 1:20) will be seen in their full significance headed up in Christ. Everything that men are occupied with, that may have had origin with God, will be seen then in its true meaning.
A.M.H. It is maturity corresponding with headship.
J.T. That is the thought.
J.H.T. Is that why you have seven adults in the ark corresponding to Noah in headship?
J.T. You mean the three sons and their wives and Noah's wife; quite so. There you get maturity and we can be assured that every creature in the ark was in keeping with that. There is not the slightest evidence of any rebellious conditions. I believe the idea of headship permeated everything.
E.C.R. So, would the idea of attraction be seen in
{224}
the creatures coming two by two unto Noah into the ark?
J.T. They came to the person, and so the dove came back to him and he took her to him into the ark.
P.L. It says, "They went to Noah, into the ark, two and two of all flesh, in which was the breath of life", (@Genesis 7:15). Would that be suggestive of the movements of life?
S.J.B.C. I suppose that power of attraction is open to the weakest believer.
J.T. Is not that a leading feature of John's ministry, the principle of coming to Christ? "No one can come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him", (@John 6:44). We come under spiritual influence. John's ministry makes Christ an Object of attraction on the principle of life.
M.W.B. In which way is variety of life developed?
J.T. Well, we have to go back to the roots. God created variety, and, spiritually, every root for God must be in Christ. Take David. Christ is the "root of David".
C.A.C. Then the variety is distributed over the whole company of saints; "to every one of us". There is variety coming out in the gift of Christ to each one of us.
Eu.R. Why in chapter 2 does he take the Jew and the gentile back to their past state at the beginning?
J.T. I think it is to bring out what he had already started with in the second part of chapter 1 -- the power of God. There is the "knowledge of him", which is a thing we should notice; that we should have "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him"; (verse 17) and then, "what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of the might of his strength, in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead".
C.A.C. Does that bring in the thought of the "Syrian
{225}
ready to perish"? Does chapter 2 rather take up that side of things?
J.T. I think so, both in verse 1 and verse 11. So the first half of chapter 2 is to show the evidence of the power of God in those who, as it says, were "dead in your offences and sins -- in which ye once walked according to the age of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit who now works in the sons of disobedience: among whom *we* also all once had our conversation in the lusts of our flesh, doing what the flesh and the thoughts willed to do, and were children, by nature, of wrath, even as the rest: but God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love wherewith he loved us, (we too being dead in offences,) has quickened us with the Christ". That is a question of the grip of evil in which we were held, and the power of God taking us out of that; and then going to the full height of blessing, as it says, "and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". So that, in the first part of chapter 1, we have the will of God, and then in the second part the power of God applied to Christ and in chapter 2 to us, so that we are seated in the heavenlies. It is not here exactly a question of our eternal portion, but in view of testimony, as verses 7 - 10 show.
Eu.R. In what way does seated in the heavenlies have in view the present testimony?
J.T. It is to lend lustre to us as down here. It is "in Christ Jesus", notice, not 'with Christ'. It is with one another in that exalted position, in the status of "in Christ Jesus"; heaven is very conversant with the idea of the anointing, and our position there *in Christ* alludes, I believe, to the great dignity we have in the anointing. It is not a question yet of the family, but of the place we have in the anointing, which heaven would understand. The angelic companies understand that; and it is to give heavenly lustre and dignity to us down here. That, I think, is what chapter 2 means.
{226}
Ques. Is that connected with divine sovereignty?
J.T. It is, surely. It speaks here of great love wherewith God loved us and His rich mercy. He has in view the setting out of a testimony in us here, now, and in the future.
F.H.B. You spoke of an Ephesian christian being able to take up the Corinthian position in testimony; is that the thought?
J.T. That is what we may see. It is persons -- not yet a family, as I understand it, but rather the dignity connected with the anointing in heaven, our being in Christ and there unitedly; so that there is not a created being in heaven, that would not respect us. It is the status we have, as I may say, officially.
W.J.H. Stephen with the face of an angel would be understood by the angels. The dignity of the anointing was seen in his face.
J.T. Was not the heavenly dignity there in the most palpable way before the council, the superiority of the man? It was "as the face of an angel", (@Acts 6:15).
M.W.B. Some of us have linked testimony with the present, and display with the future. How do you link testimony with the future?
J.T. It will be seen in the assembly. You have here "display in the coming ages", I apprehend that in the coming world we shall be dignified in an official way. "In Christ" is our status, and this chapter gives us that: "in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". There is also what goes with it, the glory of God, which would mean the divine nature worked out in us. In the assembly coming out of heaven there certainly is testimony. I believe the members of the church will be employed universally, but in this dignified way, as in the anointing.
C.A.C. Is not that really essential to the body and the habitation of God at the end of the chapter?
J.T. I think it is. I do not see how you can have the habitation of God down here, without this dignity. It
{227}
marked the tabernacle, and it marked the temple. The tabernacle was dignified by the anointing and the temple by the wood, gold, etc.
P.L. Was this thought set out in wisdom in @Proverbs 8:23? "I was set up (or anointed) from eternity".
J.T. Yes. If God comes in to operate there must be that. It is the idea of representation, and I think the greatest thought of it for us, is in this chapter where He has "raised us up together". That brings in a peculiar link between us, "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". Think of the myriads thus seen! They are sitting. It is their place and there is not a dignitary in heaven who will not regard them accordingly.
A.M.H. That bears on our position down here. If we are to form the habitation of God, this necessarily enters into it, as also into our service in the millennium.
G.W.W. Why does it say in chapter 1 that we are blessed "with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ", and here that we are made to "sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ *Jesus*"?
J.T. I suppose "Christ Jesus" has a bearing down *here* in view of testimony. "In Christ" carries with it the idea of status or dignity that we have in *heaven*; and in which we are blessed.
I think the Ephesian feature enters into Corinthians. If I sit down to partake of the Lord's supper as in Corinthians, abstractly I am an Ephesian; I never lose sight of that. I do not need to bring that forward at *once*. As we may see in @Deuteronomy 26 the basket is set down by the priest. Well, there it is, but immediately I am talking about the Syrian. I am, however, going to speak about the basket.
J.O.S. "Created in Christ Jesus"; would that be the basket?
J.T. I think so. Notice, it is "in Christ Jesus". The
{228}
new man is "created in truthful righteousness and holiness", (@Ephesians 4:24). That is not a question of status but of *quality*.
D.L.H. When the man puts down his basket, does he not say I am in the good of that now?
J.T. I think he does, and he has got the first-fruits there too. I understand it is that I hold myself in that light, and the Lord as Priest takes that on; but it is so to speak, in abeyance until the time comes in the meeting to bring it forward, but it is there all the time.
Eu.R. Does it involve the work of God?
J.T. It does, but it is the believer taken up in the light of counsel. Therefore, you are a sort of dual being, not exactly dual personality, but you are viewed as in Christ abstractly, and, therefore, there is nothing attached to you at all as to responsibility. It is important, if I am to be in the assembly in the light of eternity, that I know how to analyse as to what belongs to that, and what belongs to the position of responsibility here. So I leave that, and I come to this, and then I go back to that. That is the order of the assembly. The basket is taken out of his hand and set down by the altar; and then he speaks about his father and about Egypt, and then he goes back to the basket, and he worships. That is to say, he worships in relation to the basket and what is in it, and that is what God seeks. He wants us, not in a mixed condition down here, but in the light of purpose.
J.H.T. At the close of that chapter in Deuteronomy it says, "that thou shouldest be a holy people to Jehovah thy God, as he hath said" (verse 19). Is that the public result?
J.T. Quite so. At the end of chapter 2 we see how all this position in heaven enters into what is for God here. In verse 18, it is said, "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father": that is how we stand down here; and then further, "ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints,
{229}
and of the household of God". You can see how the status we get in heaven enters into this.
W.W. As to verse 16 -- "and might reconcile both in one body to God by the cross" -- I was thinking that involves the saints being set together for the good pleasure of God.
J.T. You will observe it is "by the cross"; Ephesians gives you reconciliation in connection with the greatest reproach in this world. It cuts at the roots of all special links amongst the saints and it is "in one body". This means that we are linked up in a positive way, but under the greatest possible reproach.
H.H. Would you say a word as to the end of this chapter 2; the habitation of God in the Spirit is a present reality, is it not?
J.T. That is how it stands. "So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone, in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord; in whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit". We have the general thought up to the last verse, but in verse 22 I think he has in mind the position of the church among the gentiles: "in whom *ye* also are built together". It is the general position of Jew and gentile first, but I think the gentiles are the habitation of God by themselves, which would continue. We can hardly speak today of a habitation of God formed of Jew and gentile, but we can speak of "ye also", that is to say, gentile believers.
C.A.C. That is very interesting.
H.H. God has still His habitation on earth in spite of the failure there is at the present time.
J.T. And even although there may be few Jews which is perhaps so now. It was not so then; they probably formed the major part then, but now they are hardly able to be found.
{230}
H.H. This epistle was addressed to a gentile assembly.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. What were you going to say on verse 18?
J.T. Only to point out that we have come to that. "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father". It is the principle of access in a positive way by the Spirit. It includes @Hebrews 10, but goes beyond it. Verses 17 and 18 shew that Christ has brought God to all in the gospel and that through Him we have access to the Father.
Eu.R. Why do you get in verse 13, "But now in Christ Jesus *ye* who once were afar off are become nigh by the blood of the Christ"?
J.T. "In Christ Jesus" there is our status here on earth, the blood having removed all that would keep us at a distance. "In Christ Jesus" gives the gentiles a place of equality with the Jews.
{231}
ETERNITY TO ETERNITY (3)
@Ephesians 3:1 - 21
J.T. What I believe the Lord would stress in this chapter, is the relation of the apostle to the things of which he wrote; and the depth of spiritual wealth that was there in him as reflecting what is in Christ -- "the unsearchable riches of the Christ". It will require perhaps a little more spirituality to lay hold of this feature; but in relation to the ministry it is quite clear that God intends, whilst presenting these thoughts to us, that there should be an understanding of what spiritual wealth there may be; for unless the ministry is accompanied by spiritual wealth, there is not much to commend it. This epistle contemplates the gospel as that of "the unsearchable riches of the Christ". The gospel was never intended to be presented in spiritual poverty. So that, whilst the ministry of Peter was in abeyance in the early record in @Acts 5 - 9 there was the clear evidence of the body of spiritual wealth that he represented; whilst younger men came forward, such as Stephen, Philip and others, there was extant this spiritual wealth. Of Peter it is said that his 'shadow' was a feature. That would point to his spirituality. I think we may see a similar feature here in the apostle alluding to himself as "I Paul". The name meant much to the Ephesians, and he being a prisoner, enhanced it.
M.W.B. Do you link the idea of spiritual wealth with the condition of soul in the one who ministers?
J.T. Yes.
M.W.B. So the spiritual conditions were seen in @Acts 5 to 9 as a kind of basis for the ministry.
J.T. I think so, especially as younger men came forward more capable of active service. God would maintain
{232}
spiritual wealth, even although it may not be in the persons meant to be specially active in the ministry. In connection with Peter's shadow it was in the minds of the persons who brought out their sick into the streets on beds and couches, that they might come under it, which I think is very remarkable; one's shadow may be more valuable than one's preaching at times. Then in Paul's case napkins taken from his body effected cures, showing what precious substance was there. How valuable the body was as under the influence of the Spirit -- the body kept under, so that the Spirit pervaded it and not the motions of the flesh.
A.M.H. Are you connecting the spiritual wealth with the saints as a whole and with the minister in particular?
J.T. With the saints as a whole; but the person who ministers certainly ought to be marked by it.
A.M.H. Just so. Would the state of the saints as a whole be indicated in the expression "faithful in Christ Jesus?"
J.T. Exactly, but the apostle wished to lead them forward; he prayed for them in two connections. They needed, not acquired knowledge so much as the "spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him" (@Ephesians 1:17); and then they needed strengthening "in the inner man".
M.W.B. What would answer to the shadow of Peter now? Would it be our spirit and influence -- our bearing?
J.T. I should think so. We have a reference in the @Song of Songs 2:3 that helps: "I sat down under his shadow with great delight". That would mean that the speaker sat under the influence of Christ, and it would involve a shield from other things, so that she was restful.
W.J.H. I suppose you could not have a shadow without substance somewhere.
J.T. That is true. In @Acts 5 it contemplates spiritual substance, otherwise you could not have had a shadow with healing virtue. Then in Paul's case the napkins
{233}
were taken from his body. That, I think, would bring in touches of love; hands using those napkins for cures -- would regard with affection the precious body of the apostle.
Rem. And that took place at Ephesus, where "God wrought no ordinary miracles", (@Acts 19:11).
Rem. The saints at Ephesus would be greatly affected by his saying that he was prisoner on their account.
F.H.B. What do you understand by spiritual substance? Would it be spiritual formation in the person?
J.T. Yes. Peter and Paul were representative of the ministry in its fullest measure. It marked them both, characterising their bodies. Romans contemplates that the body is to be devoted to God, a "living sacrifice", and the Spirit in it would be life; so that evidently the Spirit is to influence the body of the christian.
H.H. All this comes into line with the greatness of Christ, the One who is set forth in this epistle. Spiritual wealth is resident in Him.
J.T. Yes. As I was remarking, the ministers reflect what is in Christ, the "unsearchable riches of the Christ". Ephesians contemplates what is unsearchable. It speaks of "the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge". It is well to accept that we cannot compass these things, but we can know that they are there, and enter into them to such an extent that they are seen in us.
W.W. "Of his fulness *we* all have received", (@John 1:16). Does that stand connected with what is on the line of the unsearchableness of the glad tidings of the Christ?
J.T. Quite so: "Of his fulness *we* all have received, and grace upon grace". It is a question of what we have received. What we are considering today is what marks the minister and whether the wealth is there, as a testimony. We can compass it in Paul; he is desirous that the Ephesians might know the extent of his knowledge of the mystery.
{234}
W.J.H. The apostle did not desire that the saints should think of him above what they saw him to be.
J.T. It is remarkable how he brings in 'Paul' in the epistles. In one, "Paul the aged", (@Philemon 1:9) but here it is "I Paul". Then he is the "prisoner of the Christ Jesus", meaning that the Lord had taken him aside in this way for certain ministry, that doubtless he could not have rendered otherwise; he is in a peculiar position. That is another thing that we ought to note, that one is not in one's position by choice. He is the "prisoner of the Christ Jesus": there might have been some other thought in his mind, but the "prisoner of the Christ Jesus" brought him effectively under the Lord's hand, where he would render the service that was needed. The epistles from Rome are all suggestive of this; that is to say we get the very best from brethren who are in positions entirely aside from their own wills or predilection. It is the "prisoner of the Christ Jesus". In the next chapter it is the "prisoner in the Lord" but here he is referring to the Lord's purpose in imprisoning him.
M.W.B. Would the "prisoner of the Christ Jesus" have the ministry in view, in contrast to the "prisoner in the Lord"?
J.T. I think so. It was also that the Lord might work out in him to the full the idea of the anointing, and that in it there would be that kind of man. "Christ Jesus" is the anointed Man, and this feature would work out in the prison.
P.L. Would "his bondman John" (@Revelation 1:1) represent the same idea, the best obtainable?
J.T. Exactly; he was "in the island called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus". He went there evidently under compulsion; he was a prisoner in Patmos.
J.H.T. Would @Philippians 1:12,13 help? "But I would have you know, brethren, that the circumstances in which I am have turned out rather to the furtherance of the glad
{235}
tidings, so that my bonds have become manifest as being in Christ in all the praetorium and to all others".
J.T. That amplifies this. Notice there he is the prisoner "in Christ", but here he is the "prisoner *of* the Christ Jesus". Initially, the Lord imprisoned him, but ultimately he was "in Christ" in the prison. Thus he was dignified in it. They might have thought he was a felon, but he was not that; he was "in Christ". Then in the next chapter he was the "prisoner in the *Lord*", not *of* the Lord. It is remarkable that knowledge should have come into the palace (praetorium). It shows how if the Lord imprisons us, He will work it that it becomes apparent that we are not there as felons, but in relation to His will.
J.J. Even the wicked spirits in Ephesus could say, "Jesus I know, and Paul I am acquainted with", (@Acts 19:15). It was just after the napkins and aprons were brought from his body that that incident occurred.
J.T. Those seven sons of Sceva were terrible instruments for evil. But it is most touching to think of the apostle's body: "*I* bear in my body the brands of the Lord Jesus" (@Galatians 6:17). That is a touching thing, and anyone taking off those napkins would see those brands.
A.S.L. How delightful is the way he refers the brands to the Lord Jesus, not to those who inflicted them.
Ques. Would they convey an impression of the love of Christ in His death?
J.T. Yes. In Galatians the apostle made a point of what was there before their eyes in that respect. Jesus Christ was "portrayed", it says, "crucified among you", (@Galatians 3:1).
A.S.L. The thought in @Galatians 6:17 is of the slave branded by his master.
J.T. The Galatian false teachers would emphasise the circumcision and the marks that it would make in the body, that is, current religion accepted by men.
{236}
A.S.L. That is an interesting contrast; circumcision makes its mark, but Paul had the brands of *his* Master.
J.T. All the epistles given to us from Rome point to the wealth that marked the apostle in those circumstances. The wealth of the saints is not in their writings but what is in themselves. This works out through their bodies as a testimony.
Ques. Is there a reference to all this where it says, "They took therefore the body of Jesus"? (@John 19:40).
J.T. He "was with the rich in his death", (@Isaiah 53:9). Joseph and Nicodemus cared for the Lord's body in the most touching manner. What they brought bespoke their thought of the body of Jesus. Angels also were attendant, "one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain" (@John 20:12), shewing the respect that heaven had for it; and relatively it is the same with the minister of Christ. I suppose Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus, persons not marked off in the testimony hitherto, represent the work of God for an *emergency*; the emergency is a test, and the work of God answers to it. That precious body was exposed to wicked handling, but they become the undertakers of it, and Joseph went into Pilate and demanded it, using, I judge, the advantage of his position. He had access through that.
Ques. It says that he was a secret disciple; has that any suggestion that he had in secret been appreciating the value of Christ in His body?
J.T. No doubt; the credit is in the word "disciple", not in the secrecy of it, but he was a disciple and John's gospel takes great pains to bring out the work of God. However small the measure, it comes out in an emergency.
J.J. Would the incident of the woman who touched the hem of His garment show the substance that was in the Lord?
J.T. I think that is an analogous passage; the virtue came out of Him, and there, I think, you have the idea of church formation. The virtue that goes out of Him is
{237}
really the germ of the epistle to the Ephesians, that the body is *of* Christ.
Rem. "Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you?" (@1 Corinthians 6:19).
J.T. That is the basis of the wealth we are speaking of.
J.J. Would you say why this whole subject of the mystery is put in parenthetical form in this epistle?
J.T. Evidently the apostle did not have it in his mind in the outline he had before him, but his heart became so full that he would have the saints know of his personal wealth in relation to that of which he is speaking.
F.H.B. What does he refer to in speaking of the "promise in Christ Jesus"?
J.T. I suppose it refers to what God had promised as included in His purpose. Promise is on a lower ground than purpose, and I think it contemplates need or desire, either known to God or to those whose it is.
A.S.L. Would it refer at all to that gospel promise made to Abraham: "in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed" (@Genesis 22:18)?
J.T. I think so; and there was "the promise of life" even before that.
M.W.B. With regard to your remarks, do you think the place Paul takes in this chapter emphasises the greatness of mediatorial service, the fact of it being seen in a vessel?
J.T. I think the mediatorial feature enters into the ministry, because this epistle contemplates that the preaching is by Christ: "coming, he has preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off, and the glad tidings of peace to those who were nigh" but it was largely through Paul. I believe what is in view is, that the minister is so marked by spiritual wealth, that the unsearchable riches of Christ are brought concretely within the range of his hearers.
E.J.McB. So that he says, "my tribulations ... which is your glory". We see thus what the apostle suffered,
{238}
and this enhanced the wealth of what was in his mind to bring to the brethren.
J.J. Would the same principle be true in Corinthians? He suffered greatly for them.
J.T. Yes. There was strong feeling against him. It was extraordinary that his ministry evidently was accepted but he himself refused, so that by the Spirit he brings himself before them, more than in any other epistle.
Ques. Why was the apostle anxious that the saints should understand his intelligence in the mystery of the Christ?
J.T. It is advantageous to us all if anyone (whoever or wherever he may be) has special spiritual intelligence. It belongs to *all*. What we should see is that christianity involves a community, and whatever is there belongs to us all; that, I think, is what is in view. The Ephesians were to know what a wealth of intelligence there was in the minister through whom the light had come to them.
Ques. Would the one who is of Christ Jesus, as you suggested, be the one likely to get the spiritual manifestation?
J.T. I think he would. The apostle must have had wonderful times in the prison. I was, therefore, interested in the address last night, because it brought in an elevated line. The manifestation of divine Persons is what gives colour to christianity. Who can tell what experiences the apostle had in those prison days? In writing this letter -- for instance, what light flooded his soul! How near the Lord was to him!
Ques. It is encouraging that neither Paul himself nor the saints are losers on account of his prison conditions.
J.T. His experience must have been most painful, at times, but what seasons of spiritual enlargement he must have had!
Rem. We have to accept the prison conditions if such are to work out for the furtherance of the testimony.
{239}
J.T. I think so. In @John 14:23 the Lord says, "My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him". But *where* is he? His position would be according to divine ruling. That is what you see in the apostle here. His position as a prisoner was in Christ. The Lord knew where he was, and would go to him in those circumstances; and the apostle needed it. When Onesiphorus came to him, how pleased he was! We might think, if Paul were in London today, we would all flock there to see him, but they did not do that in his days; they did not seek him out very much. This is remarkable, but he valued the man who did. He "sought me out very diligently, and found me", (@2 Timothy 1:17). What we should see in the epistles is this wealth of spirituality in the minister. How flooded with light he was, and how in keeping with it!
J.J. How completely it sets aside the mere professional side of service. It is the real thing here.
J.T. Well, the Lord has a word for us in that. There is much light, but spirituality is wanted -- the body of spirituality to correspond with it.
Ques. Could you define what spiritual wealth is and how it is obtained?
J.T. I believe it is in getting to the Lord that a question like that is really answered in the soul. He will not leave us in the dark. When He came into the house in @Matthew 13 His *disciples* came to Him; He did not ask them to come. They wanted an exposition of what He had been saying, and He gave them the exposition of the particular parable they mentioned. Then He began to speak to them about wealth; first of all about treasure hidden in the field, and how He sold all that He had to buy the field. The acquirement of wealth involves sacrifice. How much it cost Christ that we might have wealth. It is the principle of giving up to what abides. Then He goes on to speak about the merchant, a person who knew what refined things were, such as a pearl. A pearl is a
{240}
thing that belongs to refined taste, and the merchant would know its value and would look for goodly ones. He found one pearl of great price, and again He sells all to get it. That is the idea that the Lord would impress upon us, that wealth is acquired at certain cost. Then He asks them, "Have ye understood all these things?" and they said, "Yea Lord"; and He says, "every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old", (@Matthew 13:51,52). That is the line. He has got the new things and the old things, and he is not selfish about them. He treasures them, but he brings them out and shows them. Now, that is the real test in ministry. What can one bring out and show of new and old things, out of his own treasure? He is a householder, meaning that he cares for things and has them in their right places. That is, I believe, what the Lord would speak to us about.
Rem. That involves the work of God and not merely light.
J.T. It does.
J.J. Would the wealth be found in the prayer in this chapter?
J.T. Yes; the prayer refers to "the riches of his (the Father's) glory" (verse 16). Earlier the apostle says, "To me, less than the least of all saints, has this grace been given, to announce among the nations the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ, and to enlighten all with the knowledge of what is the administration of the mystery hidden throughout the ages in God, who has created all things, in order that now to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God, according to the purpose of the ages, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom we have boldness and access in confidence by the faith of him". You can see the lines on which wealth is acquired; the particular thing he is dealing with, was hid in God.
{241}
Ques. Would this at all bear on what the apostle says, "I know a man in Christ ... such a one caught up to the third heaven", (@2 Corinthians 12:2)? Would you not see the deep reservoir of wealth there?
J.T. That would add to Paul's wealth, but I do not think he refers to it here. It is a question of what is revealed and that means that I may have the 'new' things; as also the 'old' things, which would mean that I go back to the dispensation in which light began to shine -- from Adam to Noah; from Noah to Abraham, and from Abraham to Moses, and from Moses to David; the things brought out in these eras should be acquired.
M.W.B. Is that why the expression is "the administration of the mystery", referring to what is worked out?
J.T. That is the thought. Administration is from God's side. It was committed to Paul. The result is that the principalities and powers in the heavenlies see, in the assembly, what the divine thought is at the present time; they see the "all-various wisdom of God". There are the "treasures of wisdom and of knowledge" (@Colossians 2:3) in the mystery, but here it is the "all-various wisdom of God" in the assembly -- the highest conception of wisdom for heavenly intelligences to see worked out; and this in such as ourselves! It goes beyond even @Proverbs 8 and 9. What a thought it is for us! And so the apostle's prayer in *this* chapter has reference to the *inner* man; we need power inwardly to apprehend the marvellous things presented.
H.H. Why do you say it goes beyond @Proverbs 8 and 9?
J.T. Because it is "all-various". You do not get this in the creation of the material worlds.
A.S.L. Is it the idea of Joseph's coat of many colours? But what about that in connection with the actual state of the church down here? Does that affect the view that the principalities have?
J.T. Of course it does. What exists today must becloud the "all-various wisdom of God". This is a humbling consideration.
{242}
Ques. What is the distinction between the thought of the body and the assembly in this chapter?
J.T. Whilst formed of persons called out, the assembly contemplates intelligence. "I speak as to intelligent persons" (@1 Corinthians 10:15), that is, we are formed in the knowledge of God. This is furthered by the "spirit of wisdom and revelation". Therefore, what is done in our 'care meetings' and 'assembly meetings', as we speak of them, is intended for the angels to see; it is the working of love, but love acting wisely. Love, is so to speak, the background of wisdom; wisdom is its handmaid. So the existence of love amongst us will lead to things being done wisely. Love expresses itself in the wisdom of its ways.
M.W.B. Do you think there is a reference here to the expression in chapter 1:8, "which he has caused to abound towards us in all wisdom and intelligence"?
J.T. I should say so. What a thing the assembly is!
M.W.B. All is in view of there being a vessel here in which there is an answer to God, abounding to us in those remarkable attributes.
J.T. Exactly; so you can see that love must be the great feature in the assembly, and wisdom is the way it acts. @1 Corinthians 13 helps to this as showing how love acts. It is not wisdom there. What is done is wisdom, but it is love's actions. Wise actions are love's actions; it is the same with God. What He does is in wisdom because of His love.
A.J.G. Does this thought of the "all-various wisdom of God" emphasise the necessity for the variety of life?
J.T. I think it does. Life is a necessary feature, but I think love is the greatest expression of life.
Rem. In @Galatians 5:13 it says, "By love serve one another".
J.J. Would you bring @Psalm 139:16 into this "all-various wisdom of God"? "In thy book all my members were written; during many days were they fashioned, when as yet there was none of them".
{243}
J.T. Quite so; they were "curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth". That is formation, but this is more than that. It is not divine workmanship exactly in this chapter; what the apostle is alluding to here, is what we do; that God has brought about such intelligence in men here in the assembly, that His "all-various wisdom" is wrought out in them.
W.J.H. You were going to contrast the wisdom of God in creation with the "all-various wisdom of God" here.
J.T. In creation the material was inanimate, there was no love. It is a question of the material that God was handling, and of course there was wonderful skill in the creation, but the material did not lend itself to what God is Himself. "The invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made, both his eternal power and divinity" (@Romans 1:20), but that is not His love. The material did not lend itself to that; but when one divine Person became a Man, then you have love acting wisely. Every thing that the Lord did and said was in wisdom; what He said, and what He did not say, was in wisdom.
The assembly is of Christ: "Of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom ..". (@1 Corinthians 1:30); that is objective. We learn it in Him, so that the gospels are the great lesson book for us as we begin to think of acting in wisdom; it is how *He* acted. The Holy Spirit sent from heaven is from Jesus up there, so that the body is formed; but the idea of the *assembly* involves persons -- not simply an organism -- and persons formed in divine intelligence, so that they *know what to do*.
A.S.L. It is only in Ephesians that the church is viewed as in the heavenlies: "In order that now to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God".
J.T. We are raised up together and made to sit down together "in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". The angels
{244}
bow to that; and they would look for the results; because the idea is the anointing, the status we have there; so that, as down here, the angels recognise the dignity of the persons forming the assembly.
A.S.L. The church in the heavenlies, is the church really at the full height of God's thought for it, and that cannot be interfered with.
J.T. I think, as presented in Ephesians, it is to bring out the dignity of the anointing as it is up there. We are raised up and seated in the heavenlies *in Christ Jesus*. It is dignity we have up there; it is dignity in the supreme place, which angels would understand, and they could follow the working out of the thing on earth in *such* persons.
C.C.E. What is the connection with "God, who has created all things"? What is the particular reason of that being brought in here?
J.T. I think in connection with what we are dealing with, the question of wisdom; because the wisdom seen in all God's operations is cumulative. The physical creation is wonderful, a thing to be apprehended by *faith*, not by the telescope. "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God", (@Hebrews 11:3). That means that His mind was already coming out, and involved wisdom; Proverbs deals with that. Wisdom was His nursling, showing that wisdom was already operating. We should not overlook the wonderful skill seen in creation; in fact Corinthians says that nature teaches us.
J.J. Would it not show too that all created things have a moral import behind them?
J.T. "The invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made" (@Romans 1:20); that supposes intelligence, hence, it is "by faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God". That is a question for our minds, not for our affections. I do not think the creation is an
{245}
object for my affections, but for my mind. It is a wonderful lesson book for the mind.
H.H. Do you think you have Christ prospectively in @Proverbs 8:22, where it says, "Jehovah possessed me"?
J.T. We ought not to be too pronounced in speaking of that as Christ. It is a reference to Christ, but you cannot say it is He in an absolute way; wisdom is a quality.
A.S.L. It speaks of wisdom being "brought forth" there.
J.T. I think it is to emphasise what we are speaking of: the "all-various wisdom of God" -- how important it is. Of course, its expression is in Christ, but it is not well to go beyond that, that it was necessary in the creation. Of course, we know from the New Testament that the creation was by Christ, not only as an instrument, but in His own power (@John 1:3). In @Colossians 1:16 the preposition involves His own power, but Proverbs is dealing with wisdom as a leading feature that comes out in the creation. It was a quality operating in material things, but now it has taken form in incarnation, in Christ. But as here He was not dealing with material things but moral things -- with persons, not with particles. Wisdom created a thing out of nothing really. What wisdom was required to do that, and to poise the universe and set it as it is before our eyes! But Romans says that the mind apprehends behind that, the "invisible things of him", so that Proverbs has to be read in that connection. Of course in Proverbs wisdom also deals with moral things. Solomon being peculiarly possessed with it, and so a type of Christ, in the main applies wisdom to human circumstances.
A.S.L. "Thou shalt see me from behind", He said to Moses, (@Exodus 33:23).
C.C.E. When it says in @Proverbs 8, "When he prepared the heavens I was there", the *He* was really Christ.
J.T. It was He who actually did it.
C.C.E. Does that give the understanding?
{246}
J.T. I think it does. The Person that prepared the heavens was Christ, and wisdom was there.
G.W.W. Therefore, in reading Proverbs you have to bear in mind that the Jehovah mentioned there was the Jesus of the New Testament. The passage cannot be understood unless that is borne in mind. That puts wisdom in its right and proper place before the soul.
J.T. I think it does. It is Christ in a sense, who is said to be the wisdom of God and power of God; it is really a quality or attribute. When it says, "wisdom hath built her house" (@Proverbs 9:1), you get beyond the physical creation. It points on to the church.
W.C. Would you say a word as to how wisdom came out in the Lord Himself? It speaks of Him being "filled with wisdom" and then He "advanced in wisdom and stature", (@Luke 2:40,52).
J.T. I suppose it was the divine thought that wisdom should show itself in the way He acted in every stage of His life here; so that as born He is cast upon God, and then at the age of twelve years He is in the temple in the midst of the doctors hearing and asking them questions. That was a very wise way to act, and an example for young persons -- hearing and asking; and they were astonished at His understanding and answers. Then He goes down and is subject to His parents, and we do not hear of Him again until He is thirty years of age; and, according to Luke, He is apparently the last to be baptised of John, and when He was baptised, He was praying. That is the attitude; and then He is anointed, the Holy Spirit comes upon Him. So that, following up His ministry (it would be impossible to go over the details) wisdom was seen in every word, every breath, every movement showing who He was, but everything was done rightly. You could not conceive of one thing but as rightly done.
W.C. Would that bring us to the "all-various wisdom of God" in the assembly?
{247}
J. T. There is nothing in the assembly that does not come out of Christ.
Ques. If the assembly is thus the vessel of that wisdom and a lesson book for angels, should it not add dignity to our walk here?
J.T. It should, and that is the reason why the apostle prays: "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man". I think we come here to the great burden that rested on the apostle in regard to the saints, our being strengthened in "the inner man". It is a spiritual thing: "that ye may be fully able to apprehend", not exactly in intelligence as in chapter 1 but in *inward power*. This prayer is that the power of the Father's Spirit should work in us, so that we should be fully able to take in divine things -- viewed here in their full greatness. It is a question of ability inwardly.
H.H. The power which wrought *for* us in the end of chapter 1 now works *in* us; the power "which he wrought in the Christ" and which also set us in the heavenlies, is now working *in* us.
J.T. That is working in us to bring about ability to take in divine things. There is "breadth and length and depth and height"; so that we are to be able to stand, as it were, in the very midst of the divine sphere of operations and apprehend it.
J.J. What is the difference between the two prayers?
J.T. Well, the first refers to the "eyes of your heart"; it is more the intelligence, the "spirit of wisdom and revelation". This is but little understood, but what we had here last night as to divine appearings ought to help us as to it. You have the principle in Peter the prototype of christians in relation to the church: "flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens", (@Matthew 16:17). Of course in his case it was
{248}
special, but the principle is found in this epistle, the "spirit of wisdom and revelation"; it comes from God; it comes by prayer. It is not a question of ministry, but of prayer; it is directly from God. So, here, the strengthening of the inner man comes by prayer, from the Father.
C.O.B. Does the expression "the inner man" indicate formation in the saints?
J.T. I think it does. It is not what people see, but what relates to God, though it has an effect outwardly, of course.
Ques. Does this prayer bring in the thought of the work of God as a complete answer to His counsels?
J.T. Well, I think it does, giving ability to take in divine things: "that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height". The "inner man" includes the automatic organs of the man, so that he is able, as such, to stand in the midst of the great divine sphere and apprehend it. I do not believe one could do this mentally; it is a question of ability in the inner man, all the automatic organs being in action.
G.W.W. What do you mean by the automatic organs?
J.T. They are alluded to in Scripture, the organs that you cannot adjust or affect by the action of your mind. The Spirit operates through these organs, as well as the mind. They are referred to in the word 'reins' in the Psalms and other scriptures.
The Lord alludes to them in @John 4. Water refers to that part of the body more than breath. Breath is for the lungs. The believer becomes alive, not only mentally, but in all his being. He is living and energetic inwardly.
Ques. Is this what is referred to in Leviticus?
J.T. I think so; the inward parts are laid out before God on the altar.
Ques. What about the "riches of his glory"?
J.T. In chapter 1, He is the "Father of glory"; He is the source of it, but here it is the "riches of his glory".
{249}
The riches of the Father's glory is a very wonderful thought. "The God of glory" appeared to Abraham, and I suppose that enters into the working out of His thoughts; now we have the glory itself; so that the assembly according to this chapter, becomes the residence of it: "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". That is what the apostle has in view, and I think one of the most beautiful touches in the chapter is the note of worship from him here. He says, "But to him that is able to do far exceedingly above all which we ask or think, according to the power which works in us, to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen". That is the end of the parenthesis, including almost the whole chapter; and what a parenthesis it is! What wealth is in it, ending with this note of worship!
Ques. Would you say a word as to the measurements? There are four here; in the heavenly city there are only three.
J.T. The fourth dimension is remarkable. I do not know much about dimensions, but "the depth" seems to bring in the death of Christ. I suppose in ordinary things there are only three dimensions, but the death of Christ, I think, brings in the fourth, the depth to which He went.
God is the "God of measure" (@2 Corinthians 10:13), and it must enter into creation, but I think the fourth dimension alludes to the love that led Christ down into the depths.
M.W.B. What do you understand by the expression here, "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God"?
J.T. Well, according to what we had yesterday, that is eternity. That is what I understand. We are filled into what is infinitely beyond us -- not lost in it; I am intelligently in it. It is not in God exactly, but to "the fulness", which would mean the shining out of Himself in Christ.
{250}
ETERNITY TO ETERNITY (4)
@Ephesians 4:1 - 32
A.M.H. Would you mind saying how far the last verse of chapter 3 goes? "Unto all generations of the age of ages".
J.T. I have taken it to be in keeping with similar expressions in the epistle, such as "eternal purpose". Then you have in chapter 3:9, "throughout the ages", referring to what is past; then again, the "purpose of the ages" (verse 11). I regard the verse you mention as meaning eternity in the future.
A.M.H. I was wondering whether it would be the result of the dip of which you have spoken. God is now bringing into eternity what is suitable to eternity.
J.T. That is what I thought; He will have something now in the eternity to come, that He did not have in the past. The idea would correspond with @Psalm 106:48 to which allusion has been made, which David included in his psalm as the ark was brought to Zion: "Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, from eternity to eternity!" It seems as if the apostle is in keeping with that in this remark. It is a beautiful note of worship, because it rises to the full height of what is presented. The expression in chapter 1, "the administration of the fulness of times", is more limited and describes the culmination in the coming age of the various testimonies rendered, but this verse, being the outburst of his feelings in worship, goes to the full length of the thought of God. It is what accrues to Him in the assembly in eternity.
H.D'A.C. The "administration of the fulness of times" refers to the millennial period, does it not?
J.T. Yes, I thought so. The phrase translated "all generations of the age of ages" in chapter 3:21 implies
{251}
eternity. Our minds can hardly go any further than what is conveyed in that expression.
F.H.B. The expression used here is the strongest for eternity.
J.T. When you have 'times', you are within the sphere of testimony. Times and seasons are governed by the heavenly bodies, but "eternity to eternity" is descriptive of God Himself, and implies that which is beyond a provisional condition of things in the heavens and earth. So that being "filled even to all the fulness of God" would suggest what is in view.
J.J. Would it be like @1 Corinthians 15:28: "Then the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him, that God may be all in all"?
J.T. That is the line of thought. The fulness of God is the end here; we are to be filled to all the fulness of God. We are in fixedness, not lost in infinitude. We are in infinitude, but fixed in it intelligently, as I may say. "The fulness of God" refers to what has shone out in Christ.
A.M.H. What would be the force of "generations" in that verse; "unto all generations"?
J.T. I suppose it is what springs from God. The idea of generation is different from creation. I think it brings in the divine parentage of every family in the heavens and the earth. The whole epistle has God in view as the source of all.
G.W.W. Why does it say, "age of ages"?
J.T. I do not understand it very much. It is an intensive thought conveying eternity.
H.H. The "Father ... of whom every family ... is named" would correspond with what you have said about generation.
J.T. I think so. The two ideas of generation and creation run together, but generation, involves the nature of God.
{252}
F.H.B. Is that more connected with John's writings?
J.T. I think it is.
F.H.B. And "new creation" more connected with Paul.
J.T. Well, of course John has the new creation and Paul speaks of the family, but I think that generation is more John's line. In his first chapter we have it: "who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God" (verse 13). It brings us into correspondence with Christ as Son.
Ques. Could you help us on the thought of families? Chapter 3 speaks of "every family" in the heavens and on the earth. Which families would come to your mind in thinking of that?
J.T. I have no doubt that families are formed according to testimonies rendered. Besides angels and the church there will be families in heaven. There will also be families on the earth out of Israel and the nations. You have "*all* generations". They are generations that spring from God. It is really a higher thought, and brings us more into relation with Christ, than the idea of creation. He is the beginning of the creation, but no part of it, but the idea of generation is attached to Christ; He is the Son of God, and the Son of David.
A.M.H. The assembly is really the central body and conveys all the thoughts of God.
P.L. Would you connect the tabernacle of God in the eternal state as with men, with the different families?
J.T. The word 'men' would cover them all, though I suppose angels might come in. The tabernacle is distinct of course. It is a very wonderful thought that the apostle should bring it in in a note of worship. He is so absorbed by the depths of the things of which he is speaking, that he breaks out into this wonderful note as to what God would have "in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". There can be no doubt that, whilst chapter 3 is parenthetical, it is to effect what
{253}
we have here in chapter 4, namely, the unity that is befitting to us, the "unity of the Spirit" and the "unity of the faith". The Lord may help us under those two heads, and then the self-action in the upbuilding of the body.
A.S.L. Is it not one of those passages where the apostle is so overpowered with the infinite greatness of what he is expressing, that he, as it were, coins phrases and terms? As, for instance, not content to say the "least of all saints" he says, "less than the least". It is that kind of thing. So, "unto all generations of the age of ages" is surely his way of giving some idea of eternity.
J.T. The epistle is full of intensified expressions. We want to go the whole way, which is the principle of Ephesians; unity here is on the same principle. It is based on the full revelation of God, the three Persons being included in verses 4 and 6.
A.S.L. This morning there was a word on the "prisoner of Christ Jesus".
J.T. In chapter 3 it is the "prisoner of Christ Jesus", but here it is "in the Lord". The first is that Christ had imprisoned him; in the second it is perfectly evident he is not a felon; it was apparent to all that his bonds were "in Christ", (@Philippians 1:13). Here, he is "prisoner in the Lord".
F.H.B. In connection with the unity of the Spirit, are there not three circles?
J.T. "One body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling"; "one Lord, one faith, one baptism"; "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". So that the unity is really connected with the three Persons of the Godhead, as already said.
A.S.L. Then, would "with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering" be something of the character of Peter's shadow and the virtue from Paul, of which you were speaking?
{254}
J.T. Just so. The "prisoner in the Lord" is enjoining this. "I ... exhort you therefore to walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love; using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace".
A.S.L. That would be the character of those in whom the unity is seen.
J.T. It involves smallness, in keeping with the manner of divine revelation; it is in smallness here. Otherwise we shall have a lot of extraneous matter in the unity. If it be a unity in which anything of the flesh has any place, there will be extraneous matter that God will have to grind out through discipline. Here we are instructed as to how to avoid that -- "with all lowliness and meekness".
A.S.L. These are the traits of the "new man" he speaks of later.
J.T. They would be, only that the new man is more public, more for testimony. This has to do with our relations with one another; "bearing with one another in love".
J.J. Why is it called the "unity of the Spirit"?
J.T. It is the full thought, in keeping with this epistle. There is nothing less than that in the mind of God. It means that we are linked up in spiritual affection. The gold taches of the tabernacle typify this unity; we are linked up definitely in the unity of the Spirit. It is positive.
A.S.L. We have to use diligence to keep that.
J.T. It was already there and the Ephesians were to keep it in the way prescribed here.
A.S.L. Then "there is one body" is a definite statement; no case of endeavouring to set up another.
J.T. The three-fold unity that follows is brought in as affording an intelligent basis for the end to which we are moving. God has come down as we see. Revelation
{255}
involves the unity of the Godhead, the Father, the Son and the Spirit, so that the basis is no less than that. That is what the epistle teaches. It is to maintain us in the height of the revelation of God, this entering into our relations with one another. So the platform is very great and grand, and each one, however obscure, is to move in that light. He sees that the revelation of God involves unity in outward smallness. The Lord Jesus came here in that manner.
A.S.L. What is the idea of the unity of the Spirit?
J.T. As we were saying, it is a question of the brethren being formed in spiritual affections, so that there are practical links with one another. The "unity of the faith" is a matter of our thinking the same thing and speaking the same thing, holding in our souls the truth unitedly; but the "unity of the Spirit" refers to what the Spirit promotes, including, as we have been saying, what is suggested by the lower organs of man as well as the intelligence, for faith necessarily has to do with the intelligence -- what I believe. But the unity of the Spirit goes beyond that, and involves the work of the Holy Spirit in the whole man, so that there are affections in which we are linked together. We have all been "given to drink of one Spirit", (@1 Corinthians 12:13).
H.H. Do you think @Psalm 132 and @Psalm 133 correspond in some respects with chapters 3 and 4? Christ dwelling in the heart by faith corresponding with the thought of the ark coming into its resting place, and then the result in the unity seen in this chapter.
J.T. I think that is right; the symbols of unity in @Psalm 133 allude to the Spirit.
H.H. There is the suggestion of a past history in relation to the matter. The tribes had not been moving together in unity.
J.T. In his great apprehension of it, David brought the ark to Zion. The time it was at Kirjath-jearim "was long", it says, "for it was twenty years", (@1 Samuel 7:2).
{256}
That, I apprehend, was from the time that it was taken, until Samuel's ministry began. The people lamented after Jehovah and this was morally giving the ark its place. David's literal restoration of the ark was the culmination of that movement. The first feature of the restoration was seen when the people of Israel poured out water before the Lord (@1 Samuel 7:6) which was a remarkable expression of self-abnegation, the confession of what we are. The pouring out water here is not as the wise woman of Tekoah said, "We ... are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again". Samuel does not say that of the people under his ministry. They poured water out *before the Lord*, and that is another matter. What is impossible with man is possible with God; the water poured out on the ground before the Lord, can be gathered up again figuratively speaking. And then Samuel offers a sucking lamb, "a whole burnt-offering" which presents a *whole* idea. I think this chapter (@1 Samuel 7) would promote that, but beginning with that abject state in the soul that God can recognise. David's movement follows morally, and so the ark was brought to Zion. There you have the idea of a centre of unity; so that when David had to flee from Jerusalem on account of Absalom, going up the hill of Olivet, Zadok and the levites with him brought the ark, as if the centre could be transferred. But we cannot transfer the centre of unity, any more than we can transfer the centre of gravity. God has set it up Himself and it is set up for ever; it is in Zion, so the ark remains there. David said, "Carry back the ark of God into the city"; he was not going to make another centre. There is a danger of that, thinking we can transfer the centre of unity, but you cannot do that; it would spoil the whole moral system if it could be done by man, but it cannot. God has set it up, and everything revolves around the centre. "*I*, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me", He says, (@John 12:32). The ark was only a symbol.
{257}
but rightly understood it was the glory. That is to say, it was God come in, in the lowliest circumstances. It was His glory and it was His power, so that we need not be afraid of smallness according to God. The glory and power of God were bound up with the ark. Whenever it moved in the wilderness the enemies were scattered. When David brought it to Zion it was installed according to divine purpose; it had reached its rest typically.
W.R.P. Bringing the ark into the camp was making a new centre, and then David's action was the answer to that in faith.
J.T. Quite; he leaves it in its proper place, and, in fleeing before Absalom, said, "If I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah, he will bring me again, and shew me it, and its habitation", (@2 Samuel 15:25). So that we need not be afraid of smallness; it is God's way in testimony. Largeness according to God belongs to the past eternity, and the coming one will also be large. We shall be fixed in it there, according to chapter 3, but the point now is smallness. Smallness according to God means invulnerability; nothing can stand before it. So David says, "Carry back the ark of God into the city", and there it was during Absalom's time. It meant the overthrow of Absalom, because along with the ark there was a system set up by David in secrecy within the city, that meant the overthrow of Absalom's system. Thus David came back to the ark and its habitation. Hence @Psalm 133 rightly follows @Psalm 132. @In Psalm 132:4 - 6, the afflictions of David are spoken of and how he had heard of the ark and found it. "We heard of it at Ephratah", he says, and "we found it in the fields of the wood". Then, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob". You feel that unity in that connection is fixed, that we are moving in a unity that will never be broken up.
{258}
M.W.B. You spoke just now of a secret system in connection with the ark which involved the overthrow of Absalom. Would that apply to the unity of the Spirit? Is that a system that implies the overthrow of the whole world's system?
J.T. I think so. There were old and young brothers left behind in Jerusalem (see @2 Samuel 15), and if there had not been the unity of the Spirit, they would have been discerned. It was not the time to say much because talkativeness would have exposed them and what they were set for. It was a question of the unity of the Spirit, old brothers and young brothers being there; and then a little maid is brought into it, and then a well, and corn placed over the well's mouth by a woman to hide the messengers. All these things are typical of the unity of the Spirit. It was a very obscure thing, but it meant the overthrow of Absalom's system, and the return of David to the ark and its habitation.
M.W.B. What relation has the walking worthy of the calling with that? We are to "walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called, with all lowliness and meekness". Does that refer back to the end of chapter 2 or the beginning of chapter 1?
J.T. I should include all that is said about us in chapters 1 and 2. Whenever you have anything in Ephesians, you have the fulness of it. It is not being called into the fellowship of God's Son, as in Corinthians, which involves being called out of the world, as does the calling referred to in @1 Corinthians 1:26; so, too, called "out of darkness" in @1 Peter 2:9. Here in Ephesians it is the greatness of the calling in its full and positive character.
J.J. It is said of brethren dwelling together in unity that it is "Like the precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, upon Aaron's beard, that ran down to the hem of his garments", (@Psalm 133:2). What is the idea of running down?
J.T. I have no doubt you begin with the idea of headship,
{259}
the head of Aaron, and then the beard would be his appearance. That is, it brings in the Person of the Lord in His priestly position. Then you have the "dew of Hermon", the link between heaven and earth. The ointment flowing down involves the headship of Christ, and the beard the appearance, and the skirts of His garments would be the saints all linked up with Him.
Ques. Is the unity essential to eternal life, for it says, "There the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore"?
J.T. It is in @Psalm 133, but we are on higher ground here in Ephesians. We are not dealing in this chapter with eternal life, but with the church and the unity that is proper to it, so that we reach what might be termed a self-acting feature; the body acts of itself.
G.W.W. Are we to learn anything in the incident of the ark being mentioned at the moment of Jonathan's victory over the Philistines? It is said, "The ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel", (@1 Samuel 14:18). I was thinking of what you said as to smallness and the victory. Things had got to a very low level at that time, but Jonathan in the faith of his soul was in the good of what was indicated in the ark -- "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered", (@Numbers 10:35).
J.T. It is a very interesting connection as corresponding with @2 Samuel 15 and entering into this chapter, because the unity here referred to is not a question of what we are *saying* but of inwardly understanding one another. In the case of Jonathan and his armourbearer, they had to keep very quiet, and the secrecy was effective.
J.H.T. Do you get that kind of unity with Paul and his last contact with the Ephesian elders? It says that he "prayed with them all. And they all wept sore; and falling upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him", (@Acts 20:36,37).
J.T. I think so. Notice, they fell upon "the *neck* of
{260}
Paul". That would mean much, as to what he had staked. The unity of the Spirit is not exactly what is spoken, but involves a subtle relation with each other that cannot be overthrown. We understand one another; the thing is there.
Ques. Would @Philippians 2:1,2 enter into it, showing that the whole man is involved? "If then there be any comfort in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and compassions, fulfil my joy, that ye may think the same thing, having the same love, joined in soul, thinking one thing".
J.T. Exactly. There is not a word spoken. It is inward correspondence.
M.W.B. Do you link the unity of the Spirit rather with the inner man of chapter 3 and the unity of the faith with the prayer of chapter 1?
J.T. Yes; that is a very good distinction. I believe that the unity of the Spirit is the invulnerable thing. It means that we are invulnerable, that we are bound to go through, as we were saying about the ark and David sending it back. He knew it was the centre but there was alongside it, that which very aptly illustrates this unity of the Spirit in Hushai, Zadok and the others with them who were with the ark in the city, and their success depended on maintaining that unity. They inwardly corresponded with one another; they felt together and moved in unity.
H.H. One thinks of it in connection with church difficulties. Do you think that this scripture: "Using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace" would mean that so far as we have light and our brethren with us have light, we should seek to move in line with what is fully consistent with the revelation of God as set out in this epistle? We cannot make others agree with us; often difficulties arise; but should we not seek to be governed by the light that has come from the Lord and which is supported by the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, but I think it is well to bear in mind that this
{261}
unity as has just been remarked, is more that of the inward man, meaning that we are linked up together in a sort of subtle, or inward way, so that if you go to the care meeting, for example, that principle of unity is there.
M.W.B. It would govern us in relation to one another.
J.T. You would bear in mind that it must not be interfered with; it is better to leave things over than that *that* should be interfered with. It is a thing that God intends should exist, and it means invulnerability as far as we are concerned.
H.H. Nobody could ever break that down.
J.T. Here, too, it is rather the responsibility to keep it, that is referred to, and the way it is to be done is "with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love; using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace". That is the first thing to bear in mind if you go to a care meeting. I do not mean to say that any principles have to be made secondary, but it is better to leave things over for another time than to break in on this. It is imperative, and if brethren do not agree in one matter they may be able to in some other matter; this helps to maintain the unity (Compare @Philippians 3:15,16).
J.O.S. Do we see in Paul's letter to Philemon his endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit?
J.T. We do indeed. It was written with very great wisdom and patience, without any expression of authority. There are times when we would wisely avoid alluding to any advantage we may have. It may be we want to get a "brother beloved" reinstated. The apostle refers to his age rather than to his apostleship, but mark, not his age by itself; he did not mention how many years old he was. It is not that, because I may be a hundred, and not have any moral weight. He said, "being such a one as Paul the aged" (@Philemon 1:9) -- *that* aged man.
Ques. How would you speak of unity without agreement? You spoke of letting things stand over.
{262}
J.T. Agreement must be founded on unity. The unity exists, but if you cannot agree, the matter may be left over, and no ground lost.
Rem. I take it, if we find ourselves not in agreement, that ought to be a matter of great concern in view of the unity of the Spirit existing as you say, and which is available to us on a practical line in regard to any question which may arise.
J.T. I think if the unity of the Spirit is maintained agreement will come, but it may take time; the apostle has that in view when he speaks about "all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love; using diligence". It involves much concern and earnestness.
P.L. Do you get the idea in @Acts 21:14? "And when he would not be persuaded, we were silent, saying, The will of the Lord be done".
J.T. Very good. They might have quarrelled with Paul, urging how wrong it was to go up to Jerusalem, but they were too much in the unity of the Spirit for that.
S.J.B.C. Can the unity of the Spirit be broken?
J.T. It says "to keep" it. Abstractly it is fixed and eternal.
J.J. What link has the unity of the Spirit with the body? The passage goes on to speak of the body, so there would seem to be some very intimate link.
J.T. Surely. There are the three circles as was remarked; the first connected with the Spirit, "one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling"; that is the inner thing. The next is the unity connected with the Lord: "one Lord, one faith, one baptism"; that is a wider circle, as has often been remarked. Then you have "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all"; that goes to infinitude.
D.L.H. Are there not three concentric circles spoken of here and the Spirit the centre controlling all three?
{263}
J.T. I should say that. The unity of the Spirit would enter into all three; that is, it runs through whatever you are dealing with, the secret relations with one another run right through; you never give that up.
E.S.H. Divine principles are to be maintained, but it is a question of *how* you maintain them.
J.T. Yes; there is something peculiarly fine in the unity of the Spirit; it implies the affections being in action.
Ques. Why does it say, "one God and Father of all", not Christ or the Lord?
J.T. I think it is to bring in the universal idea. The Father is in the supreme place of Godhead and the circle in that connection is widest. Hence one *God* and Father.
A.S.L. How far does 'all' go?
J.T. It is universal, but refers only to christians.
D.L.H. Has that not a reference to chapter 3:15? "Of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named".
J.T. The apostle is dealing with the present position, the unity of christians, so he brings it down to "over all, and through all, and in *us* all" limiting the idea in the last clause. I suppose the expression does involve the supremacy of God as the Father in the whole created sphere, but the apostle limits the bearing of it to christians, those in whom the Father is.
F.H.B. Does not this agree with what will be brought to pass in the eternal state? It will be seen then that there is "one God and Father of all" and all will recognise Him in that way.
J.T. God will then be "all in all", (@1 Corinthians 15:28).
G.W.W. Do you think the unity of the Spirit in this wide universal aspect has any connection with what the Lord said, that "*he* is good to the unthankful and wicked", (@Luke 6:35)? That is the attitude of God towards men generally which has to be maintained by the saints at the present time.
{264}
J.T. I am sure that should enter into our exercises as in the unity of the Spirit.
After this we enter on the subject of gift. "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ".
H.H. Would you mind explaining that verse?
J.T. It is grace for service. @John 1:16 says, "of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace". In that passage it is not measure; it seems to be one wave after another coming to you; He gives more and more. But here in Ephesians it is measure, as if the Lord in giving, takes account of the vessel, for each vessel is capable of a certain thing and He knows the measure: "according to the measure of the gift of the Christ".
F.H.B. Is all this about gift connected with the proper working of the body?
J.T. I think you come to that in verse 16 where you have the joints and bands which are the outcome of this. The human body is another figure that the apostle uses. But first the principle of giving, as we have it here, is according to measure, and the measure must be in relation to the person to whom the gift is given.
Ques. Is the measure seen in the bowl full of water? (@Judges 6:38).
J.T. Just so. The vessel was full.
Rem. The grace is commensurate with the gift.
J.T. The gift here *is* the grace. The first reference here is not a specific gift such as an apostle; it is a question of what everybody gets. Every one of us gets something, but it is according to the "measure of the gift of the Christ". It is His measure and He would take account of what you can use.
Ques. What about the measure of faith in Romans?
J.T. It is the same idea. "As God has dealt to each a measure of faith", (@Romans 12:3). Romans of course is the initial thing, and faith is necessary, but here it is grace. Then he goes on to speak about Christ ascended. The
{265}
One who gives the gifts, who is He? The same One that "descended into the lower parts of the earth", and He has "also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things". Well now, He is going to fill me. But then He gives gifts unto *men*; that is not to everybody. We are coming now to something distinctive and specific, because the specific gifts are to men.
J.R.S. Why is it "far above all heavens" in connection with giving gifts?
J.T. I think to show the supremacy of Christ's power; He has "ascended up above all the heavens", so that the gift being received from Him there, means that I have something that no power in the universe can overthrow. You will find in 1 Chronicles that when David is anointed, the names of the mighties are given at once, because it is a question of what they will do for him. In 2 Samuel they are given at the end of his reign. 2 Samuel would indicate that the gifts come down to the end and that all are included in the record.
In this second part of the scripture (verses 8 - 14) the apostle is not dealing with what is general to believers, as in verse 7, but with what is specific. These gifts are not contemplated as being given to what is immature; he is not dealing with children. Every believer receives something from Christ, but when you come to these great powers from "above all the heavens" it is men that are in view. Not men who make playthings of them but who will use them for Christ, as the 'three' broke through the camp of the Philistines and drew water for David. That is the sort of service that these gifts are for, so that Christ may have in the assembly a full result. "For the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ".
J.J. As the apostles are put first in the list here, would they belong to the first category of the mighties, the mightiest?
{266}
J.T. I think they are in the order of wisdom. The apostle brings in authority; he establishes his testimony in authority, and the prophet shows that the mind of God is in it, that it is not of man, but the mind of God. The evangelist is to make God known through the gospel, to secure material for the assembly; and the pastor and teacher is to adjust the minds of the saints by teaching. The order is authority, the mind of God, the heart of God, and then the adjustment by teaching.
F.H.B. The teacher and pastor seem to be identified together.
J.T. That is how it stands; it is one gift. The teacher instructs the saints in power. As pastor he looks after the sheep.
Rem. It says, "until we all arrive".
J.T. 'All' is put there; this is characteristic of Ephesians.
H.D'A.C. Is not maturity the point here -- that we are not to be children? Pastors may have to give their lives for the sheep.
J.T. Was not that spirit with David when he took the lamb out of the lion's mouth? He rescued the lamb; he did not merely take out a pair of legs or a piece of an ear, but he secured the *whole* lamb and slew the lion and the bear; he put himself in jeopardy for the flock.
Ques. What is the thought of leading captivity captive?
J.T. I think Goliath's head is the symbol of it. David took the head of Goliath to Jerusalem, answering to "having ascended up on high". In the type, I think, Jerusalem is on high; it is the place of power, and then, I believe, the mighties are the gifts, and what wonderful men they were!
A.S.L. Would you say one word on the remarkable expression, "the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ"?
J.T. I think it refers to the gospels. That is where you get the "measure of the stature of the fulness of the
{267}
Christ". This epistle is very near to the elevation of the gospels.
J.J. Especially John?
J.T. All of them. Each one presents some feature of Christ.
A.S.L. So you think the "measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" is what is set forth in the four gospels?
J.T. Yes. So in each of the four gospels the Lord has need in regard of what we are speaking of: "The Lord has need of it". I do not mean that in each of the gospels that is stated. In Matthew He has need of *them*; but it would be in relation to Matthew's presentation of Christ. The need of the Lord would be in that relation. There were two there, an ass and a colt. The Lord has need of those for the assembly, to set up new meetings. That is what Matthew would promote; He has need of the two, the old and the young brother. But in Mark it is one colt which would be in relation to the ministry, the preaching; He has need of preachers. Then in Luke He has need of priests, persons that can pray. In John He finds the colt *Himself*. He does not use the disciples to find it. I think this is the position now. He indicates that He can get one Himself and get on without us; but in each of the synoptic gospels He uses two disciples.
F.H.B. Is the general thought in this scripture that the Lord has made adequate provision for carrying the testimony through according to His own mind?
J.T. That is so; hence you come to full growth, and that is the "measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ".
H.D'A.C. Each one must come to that.
J.T. "Until we *all* arrive". The fulness of Christ is what has come out in Him. It is not a question of His deity, but what has shone out in Him as a Man.
A.S.L. Would it connect at all with chapter 1? "The assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all".
{268}
J.T. That is the church. The church is His fulness as His body, but this fulness is what has shone out in Christ in His ways and ministry, seen in the gospels, as a standard for each of us. It has all in view however.
{269}
ETERNITY TO ETERNITY (5)
@Ephesians 5:22 - 33
J.T. There are two main subjects in the chapters still to be considered -- the church and the conflict; we might concentrate on these. It was thought that the details in the exhortatory part of chapters 4 and 5 might be left as time does not permit of going into them. The assembly in a peculiar way is brought to our attention in the verses read, and this affords an opportunity for briefly looking into the whole subject. There are, however, two features in chapters 4 and 5 that might first be touched upon; namely, the "new man" in chapter 4 and the "beloved children" in chapter 5. On these two features hang, practically, all that is said in detail, the "new man" having reference to what we put on, being more public; and the subject of "beloved children" bringing us into very close correspondence with Christ. Certain conduct is treated as hinging on these two features.
Then another point in chapter 4 is the "unity of the faith" which was scarcely noticed yesterday. We were engaged generally with the "unity of the Spirit"; but the "unity of the faith" as having a bearing upon full growth, is a very important matter in its setting in chapter 4 leading up to the self-action of the body, which implies the absence of the babe condition (verses 1 - 16) and involves each being in his place in intelligence and affection. The chapter speaks of both the unity of the Spirit and the unity of the faith, the latter implying that those who compose the assembly should never assume that there *must* be differences existing. The saints being fully grown should surely be able, in the presence of the Lord, to see the right and wrong of everything. I thought it would be well, perhaps, to mention these general features in
{270}
chapter 4 and the early part of chapter 5 before we take up our definite subject which is the assembly.
N.McC. Do you connect the unity of the faith more with intelligence than affection?
J.T. Yes. The unity of the Spirit, as we had yesterday, is properly linked up with the affections. The unity of the faith having reference to our minds, our intelligence; but it is not simply a matter of doctrine, as I understand, but what is *held in faith*. Christianity is not a system of doctrines; there are doctrines, but it is a question of what is held in faith, therefore it is called "the faith".
M.W.B. Is that why the unity of the faith is linked with the knowledge of the Son of God?
J.T. Yes; the Son of God, in the passage, refers to what He is on God's side, and the "measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" is what He is on our side.
J.J. Would there be a connection between the "one new man" of chapter 2, the "inner man" of chapter 3, and the "full-grown man" and the "new man" of chapter 4?
J.T. I think there is an interesting link in those passages.
J.J. How would that bear on the assembly? I suppose it is material for it.
J.T. It leads up to it. The assembly is found in each of the chapters up to this one. In chapter 1 it is spoken of as the fulness of Christ; in chapter 2 as the habitation of God; then twice in chapter 3, first as that in which the all-various wisdom of God is seen by the principalities and powers in the heavenlies, and then as the vessel of divine glory in eternity; then in chapter 4 it is referred to as the body and as self-edifying here, the saints set together in full growth so that there is self-acting. It is an organism in which all the members are in their places.
Eu.R. We have looked too much at this thought of full growth as being future, and that to which we are moving on.
{271}
J.T. I think it is clearly present, with a view to the increase of the body, to its self-building up in love. You find the church in each of these chapters up to this one; we have a greater view of the church here than in any other epistle. Above all subjects a knowledge of the types is essential to a right understanding of the church as presented in this epistle. In Genesis we have three types. There are others, but the principal ones are Eve, Rebecca and Asnath. In the wilderness we have Zipporah and the Ethiopian (wives of Moses); then in Joshua we have Achsah; and in 1 Samuel we have Abigail. There are other types in a lesser way, but I think these are the great types. The first, Eve, is really the greatest type, as I understand it, because it is a type of the church viewed apart from sin, and was given before sin came in. All the others contemplate the existence of the moral question, but Eve is the church viewed apart from sin, and was a type given before the moral issue was raised, and therefore she sets forth the idea of "eternity to eternity", so to speak. "Eternity to eternity" would mean that the church in the coming eternity has no reference to a past sinful history at all. It has a life out of death; not death as penalty, but death illustrated in sleep and as expressive of love. Then Rebecca would be the church as *brought to* Christ, being of equal family dignity, to replace Israel; Asnath would be the church as seen in Colossians -- Christ among the gentiles; then Zipporah and the Ethiopian viewed together, would be the church in the wilderness, suggesting peculiarly, Corinthians. Achsah is the church viewed as laying hold of the inheritance, valuing and appreciating it; and finally Abigail is the church militant. I mention all these, because I think they enter into the subject before us, as essential to a right understanding of it.
W.J.H. In what way would you connect the church as "from eternity"?
J.T. Well, Eve coming in before sin, indicates what
{272}
was in the mind or purpose of God. She was needed; it was not good that man should be alone; and she is brought in for Adam before sin came in. That is, Eve would represent purpose. But by way of contrast, you cannot think of Zipporah in the same way, nor the Ethiopian woman who was a sort of counterpart to Zipporah. Those types suggest wilderness features. What is said of them is brief and would indicate there was nothing attractive. Of the church in the wilderness you cannot say much; it is a question of what it proves itself to be, but it is there.
Eu.R. Is your suggestion that Eve illustrates the assembly as wholly spiritual?
J.T. Quite so, as taken out of Christ. You cannot apply that to Zipporah. Adam says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh", (@Genesis 2:23). Eve is the church as entirely spiritual, and as we have it in its highest feature in this epistle.
J.J. Would not that be seen in the first six verses of chapter 1?
J.T. Yes, and in the beginning of chapter 2. It includes union; we are quickened *with the Christ*.
Ques. Would Eve as a type suggest to us the manifold wisdom you spoke about yesterday morning?
J.T. Well, I do not know that you could limit that to this type. What the saints are down here *now* is alluded to there: "in order that now to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God". I think the idea of the church as typified in Eve, in an abstract way runs through this dispensation, to shew what was in the mind of God from eternity, and the church as seen in her -- goes into eternity.
F.H.B. It is important to see that what God is doing now, is not merely with a view to meeting man's need, but to carry out what was in His mind for eternity, for His own pleasure -- the building of the woman.
{273}
J.T. That is what I had in mind. Eve is the greatest type, I think, and, as we were saying about the basket, she must be understood as abstractly existing. There is, however, very little known amongst us of the concrete idea of the church seen in this type. But she is there; the thread runs right through. She is out of Christ, not as having died under penalty, but in the character of sleep, so that the moral question does not enter into it. That comes in later, and enters into the fibre of the church. The fibre gives lustre; but Eve is the church of purpose, to which we come when we are clear in our souls of all that refers to the moral issue.
Ques. If no sin is attached to Eve as "from eternity", in what way does the cleansing come in here in chapter 5 the "washing of water"?
J.T. You cannot limit these verses to that type. The type is alluded to, but the church is presented here in other relations besides. The subject comes in here as confirming the apostle's instruction as to wives.
C.A.C. Would you say it was the thought of God that the Eve character of the assembly should come into concrete evidence now, and would the cleansing have that in view?
J.T. I think the cleansing frees us, so that we might enter into what the church is in purpose. Was not that the great burden of the ministry of J.B.S. -- to bring us to apprehend that the church has come out of Christ, and that all that goes to heaven comes out of heaven?
Ques. Would the Eve type be suggested in @John 20 where the Lord showed them His hands and His side?
J.T. I think that is right; it fits properly there because it is the chapter in which the first day of the week is in evidence; it is mentioned twice. His *side*, alluding to Adam, is the link, I think. The first day of the week being emphasised in John is important. It is not the day after the Sabbath; it is the first day. John has in view, not a development from the ways of God in the Old
{274}
Testament, but a wholly new thing, the 'first' having no reference to anything earlier. Rightly understood, it would therefore suggest the entrance into what is of eternity; that is what is there. The church has come in that way, from the side of Christ. The fact that it is not formally mentioned does not affect the general idea conveyed in the chapter.
M.W.B. With reference to sleep or death do you think it would help us as to the Supper -- the Lord's love seen apart from penalty?
J.T. I think that is right. John's gospel hardly presents the death of Christ as penalty. There is no forsaking -- nor is there in Luke. Not, of course, that it is not there; but the truth is presented in John's gospel from a different side.
Eu.R. Is @Matthew 16:18 the Eve character? "I will build my assembly".
J.T. Somewhat, but I think that includes Abigail, that is, the church militant -- "hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it".
A.M.H. Would you connect the thought of His flesh with the character of Man in Luke, and His bones with the order of Man in John?
J.T. John it is that speaks about the bones being unbroken. John refers to flesh too. I think John makes more of the flesh of Christ than any of the evangelists. "The Word became flesh" in chapter 1 and in chapter 6 he makes a great deal of it. The food in John is His flesh, but the food in Matthew and Mark is the *body* of Christ.
J.H.B. What is the difference between the flesh of Christ and His body?
J.T. The flesh is *condition*, but the body conveys a *whole* idea and suggests unity. I think this is what is prominent in the synoptic gospels. The church is reached there more from the standpoint of the wilderness, and the Lord's body is spoken of so that we should have a whole idea. We come into the assembly in connection
{275}
with the body as presented in the Lord's supper, which we do not get in John. The body is to present the church as a whole idea, a complete thought, as answering to a complete thought in Christ; so that the food in Matthew and Mark is His body: "Take, eat: this is my body", (@Matthew 26:26). But in John, the eating is the flesh, that we might be imbued or built up in a constitution answering to the condition that a divine Person has taken. It is a marvellous thing that He has taken that condition and died, so that the blood is spoken of as separate from His flesh. It is "drink indeed".
J.H.B. That helps. You have referred to the way in which the assembly is spoken of in the first four chapters of Ephesians, would you say in what way it is regarded in chapter 5?
J.T. It is presented as "subjected to the Christ"; that is the first thing. It is to be noticed that the passage begins the instruction relative to wives, children and bondmen. That is to say, the apostle has in mind that the enemy would take advantage of persons in a subjected condition. In the position of subjection there is great liability to irritation and a consequent giving place to the devil, so that the principle of subjection is introduced in regard of the wives, and then he immediately says, "but even as the assembly is subjected to the Christ, so also wives to their own husbands in everything". That is the first thing. Then you have the love of Christ as the incentive for it: "as the Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it".
F.S.M. Would the deep sleep of Adam suggest to us the impression of the love of Christ, that aspect of His death which was the deep expression of His love?
J.T. The type fails as to love. *God* caused the sleep. Notice it was a *deep* sleep; it was not an ordinary sleep. But you can understand how Eve would speak later of what Adam entered into in order that she might exist. No doubt they had much communion on that point. The
{276}
Lord would impress us with that too, of where He has been in order that we might have an existence. The very existence of the church depended on it. But here, the moral side is added to that: "in order that he might sanctify it, purifying it by the washing of water by the word". So that the Lord is seen as dealing with us in this tender way; it is "washing of water by the word". "The word" carries with it something very sweet if we consider the relation that exists between the One who is speaking and the one who is being washed. It seems as if it ought to call forth active affections. And the Lord would remind us that the water was due to His death as well. He was actually dead when it flowed.
Ques. And is it not the same kind of love with which the Lord serves the church now, as expressed in the gift of Himself?
J.T. That is right. You cannot get anything more expressive of the love of Christ than this passage. He "loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it, in order that he might sanctify it, purifying it by the washing of water by the word, that *he* might present the assembly to himself glorious, having no spot, or wrinkle, or any of such things; but that it might be holy and blameless". The effect of this service is to touch our hearts with the love of Christ, so that our affections are active while in the process. It is no irksome process; it is by the word, but it conveys that He delivered Himself up, that He was actually dead, and that He would have the church in full keeping with eternal thoughts, "having no spot, or wrinkle, or any of such things". It is the ability He has of clearing her of all the effects of sin, so that she answers to Eve before sin came in.
E.S.H. Would "holy and blameless" link on with the opening verses of chapter 1?
J.T. I was just thinking of that: "that we should be holy and blameless before him in love".
Rem. So in the Eve type you have the thought of "from
{277}
eternity to eternity", and all the service of Christ in love that she might be made suitable for eternity.
J.T. That is so; she is taken out of the scene in which moral things have been wrought out, so that she answers to Christ. Hence, while the purpose of God implied the life out of death seen in the church, it also anticipated the moral question that she should go through that, and that gives a certain lustre to her, for the question of holiness arose, not in innocency, but as a consequence of sin.
F.H.B. When he speaks of the washing and the cleansing, I wondered whether he was not looking at the assembly as composed of individuals, and whether that was not the reason he brought in the idea of washing?
J.T. She needs it as formed of those who severally have had part in sin.
F.H.B. But Eve did not need any washing.
J.T. We are not limited to the type here. The Spirit of God does not confine us to Eve in innocency. The church having had to do with the moral question, it has acquired a lustre that answers to Christ, because *He* has had to enter into the moral question, and we should hardly correspond with Him if *we* did not. Eve does not typify holiness, whereas it appears in the church, as, of course, it does in Christ.
C.A.C. There would be an absence of reality if we were to enter into the purpose of God without a reference to the moral side.
J.T. Surely! That is right.
W.R.P. But why should it be necessary for the Lord to go into death if in this aspect of His death it was not the moral side?
J.T. If God intended to have a life seen in the assembly altogether apart from sin and death as its penal consequence, He could surely bring in that figure to indicate it. He intends to have the church in the coming eternity altogether free of any sinful connection, and I think the figure in @Genesis 2 is to show that, and to
{278}
represent God's mind. Not that He had ever such a thought as that Christ should die, save vicariously, but if He had a thought of having the church in a life altogether apart from sin, He is entitled to use a figure to show what was in His mind; and there is ability with Christ to bring the church into a condition and status, in which there is no sense of a past sinful shameful condition. It is "from eternity to eternity", as I was saying, but if it has come down here into the region where moral questions have arisen, this brings it into accord with Christ, because He also came down into that region -- but the primary thought of God is never lost sight of, and that is presented in @Genesis 2. It speaks of a life out of death; that is what God intended, but not death as penalty, though it was that as a matter of history, and God foreknew the necessity for this, but if He has in His mind to have something entirely clear of that, He can bring in a type setting that forth. God alone could work out the two things together and maintain them as distinct.
Ques. Then is the love of Christ set forth in that aspect?
J.T. We have just been saying that. It is in the passage here; He "loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it".
Rem. That is the Adam aspect.
J.T. I think it runs beyond it. The moral question is added to it, in order that Christ might take the church out of the effect of sin and present her to Himself altogether according to Himself, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing. She is wholly free as the bride in the beginning of @Revelation 21. She is adorned for her Husband.
Ques. Is that the view of the love of Christ we should have in the Supper?
J.T. Yes, I think it is.
J.H.T. What bearing has "his wife has made herself
{279}
ready" on this? Does that suppose she has understood the moral question?
J T. I think so. She is the Lamb's wife, which would mean that she is in accord with the suffering Christ, and it gives lustre to her. Do you not think it is the Colossian side? "I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly", (@Colossians 1:24). She has to go through sufferings, for we would not miss anything of these things in their result. It is the result we have in view.
J.H.T. I should like help as to the 'word' as you spoke of it. Is the service of Christ through the gifts in relation to that?
J.T. I think so. He acts mediately now, but I think we should notice the "washing of water by the word". It is a suggestion of intelligence, and He makes us know what He does. "What *I* do *thou* dost not know now, but thou shalt know hereafter", (@John 13:7). He intends you to know what He does, and that gives great place to the assembly, that what is being done is understood. It is not arbitrary. No husband would act arbitrarily with his wife unless will were in action. The 'word' is to convey intelligence, that what is being done is understood, and that greatly helps in ministry.
C.O.B. Do you connect this with @John 13?
J T. Yes. The Lord would convey to Peter and to them all, the meaning of what He did. "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me", (verse 8).
M.W.B. The word is the expression of the mind.
H.W.S. Do you connect the thought of subjection with the moral side, or would that go on into eternity?
J.T. The idea of subjection must go on into eternity, even in Christ; "then the Son", it says, "also himself shall be placed in subjection", (@1 Corinthians 15:28). Eve in innocency was under Adam; he was her head.
A.S.L. Do you think the deep sleep and the waking out of it would foreshadow in any way what was in the mind
{280}
and intention of God that it was to be Man of a new order, not the man that came out of dust, but another kind of Man altogether was to be the One in whom all His purposes were to centre?
J.T. That is right, and so @John 20 brings before us the "last Adam", and the church, in its members, is seen there also.
W.J.H. The moral side in Mary Magdalene had already been solved.
J.T. Yes; out of her had *gone* seven demons.
G.W.W. I would like to get more clearly what is meant by the "washing of water by the word". Is it the bringing home to the soul morally, of what was set forth and is true in Christ?
J.T. It is what is set forth in His death -- not the blood, but the water. But it is connected with the 'word' here. So that we understand the process.
G.W.W. The bringing us to it, is what is involved in the "washing of water by the word". That is what our brother had in mind when he said that otherwise we should have unreality.
J.T. We should; and therefore we should not be too hasty as "in assembly" to go on to the purpose of God as a matter of light. I think we acquire lustre and power and tone as intelligently bringing in the moral side. But on the other hand, one observes that the brethren often remain too long, in occupation with Christ as Lord; that is, after the Supper is eaten, they remain too long before headship and companionship are reached. When we are alongside of Him all the references are to the Father.
G.W.W. Does not that indicate the necessity for ministry on that line? If souls are not really up to the thought of companionship, is not that a special indication for ministry?
J.T. That is what ministry is for: "for the work of the ministry ... until we all arrive", (chapter 4:12,13). I believe the Lord uses ministry to enlighten the minds of brethren, but if you
{281}
get light, the thing is to act on it. As apprehending Christ as Head it is wonderful to be alongside of Him so as to be led of Him to the Father.
Ques. Would that mean that there is intelligent love that enables the saints to be in His presence?
J.T. Yes. When you are with Christ in companionship, there is no thought of any past sinful history, but you must reach that point in the power of the Spirit.
G.W.W. You cannot bring in the question of moral state there.
J.T. You are past it. The Lord's supper implies what is moral; but at such a time as we have referred to we are past that, so that, as scripture says, "both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren", (@Hebrews 2:11). I think if we were occupied unduly with the moral or responsible side, there would be a sense of shame, and you would hardly be equal to the thought of companionship.
M.W.B. You said the moral side was involved in the Supper; do you see the combination of the two sides there?
J.T. I think so, but I do not know that we should bring in the penalty. It is more the principle of the *boiling* of the sacrifice, the indirect action of judgment. It is that aspect.
M.W.B. That is what I wanted you to make clear. It is not death as penalty in the Supper, but rather the expression of love. Would you distinguish between the two?
J.T. The Lord's supper conveys that He gave Himself, and of course we do not wish to shut out what that meant, but both Luke and John leave out the forsaking, and we are entitled to do so under certain circumstances.
J.J. Is that not what the Lord meant in @John 15:13: "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his *friends*". There was nothing of penalty in that.
{282}
J.T. No indeed; you could not in ordinary circumstances, get anything more expressive of love than to lay down one's life, and that is all you need at the Supper. Not that you wish to shut out penalty, but if Luke and John leave it out, we can; we need to be occupied more with the *love* side. Matthew and Mark would impress us with the *evidence* of love, but this is not necessary if we are *enjoying it*.
J.H.B. Referring again to @Genesis 2, what are we to understand by the words in verse 18: "It is not good that Man should be alone; I will make him a helpmate, his like"?
J.T. The words "*Ish*" and "*Ishshah*" indicate correspondence between the two, correspondence in mind and in affection and intelligence.
J.H.B. Would that lead on to the thought of standing before God the Father in association with Him?
J.T. Yes, there is correspondence, as in @John 20.
G.W.W. Would you say a little more about the boiling and the roasting?
J.T. I think boiling is to convey to us the indirect action of the fire; the heat reaches the oblation indirectly. If a thing is cooked in a pan the same is true, only that it is more direct than boiling. Boiling is in water; it is to reduce the evidence of the fire. You do not want to leave it out, but to reduce the thought, and I think Luke and John have that in mind. Death is there, of course, as the evidence of love. But Matthew and Mark do not reduce; they give the full bearing of the judgment -- the forsaking.
G.W.W. You have the fire direct.
F.H.B. The penalty is more connected with the passover.
J.T. It was "roast with fire". You find complaint sometimes because brethren do not emphasise the forsaking at the Lord's supper, as if it were leaving out something that should be there, but they ought also to
{283}
complain of Luke and John. If Luke and John did that, we may do it on the same principle.
Ques. Would boiling bring in the idea of apprehending the moral question because of what God is?
J.T. You can never leave that out while we are in our present condition, and Luke and John do not leave it out. It is there, but they do not formally mention the forsaking, and I think this helps as to the Lord's supper.
T.R. It is noticeable in Luke that whilst the penalty, the forsaking, is not found there, we have the Spirit of God bringing in the three hours of darkness.
J.T. There is no question in any of the gospels that the judgment of God entered into the death of Christ. We are speaking of how the truth is presented.
A.S.L. In John's epistle propitiation is spoken of as the perfect expression of love: "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son a propitiation for our sins", (@1 John 4:10).
J.T. Like Matthew and Mark, that is full testimony, but as in the *enjoyment* of the love we need not bring that side forward.
A.S.L. So that we do not want to be occupied with our sins or past history; we rest in perfect love seen in propitiation.
J.T. Love is thus known and all fear is cast out. Matthew and Mark are the framework of christianity, meeting the moral question, but not meeting the love question, as formally dealing with it. Luke and John deal more with this, which is important. Luke and John are founded on Matthew and Mark, but they are really the fulness of love. In them you get the Lord coming into the midst of His own after He rose and showing the tokens of His love, but it is not so in Matthew and Mark.
G.W.W. Would you say a word as to the difference between the passover as first partaken of in @Exodus 12 and as partaken of in Luke in the upper room?
J.T. In Luke you have much more than you could
{284}
have in Exodus. You have the judgment expressed in Exodus and the shelter of the blood. They ate the lamb roast with fire in view of the exit from Egypt. The passover that the Lord partook of included additions which He accepted. You find two cups; there is nothing said about them in Exodus. And you find a hymn; there is nothing said about that in Exodus. There was no suggestion of singing in Exodus until chapter 15. It is said that a certain selection of the Psalms were sung at the passover. All this would be of the nature of wealth added, and which the Lord recognised.
G.W.W. So when we take up the expression, "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed" (@1 Corinthians 5:7), we have to take it up from the standpoint of all that accumulated wealth, and from Luke's standpoint, not from the standpoint of @Exodus 12.
J.T. There was something there in connection with which He could link Himself on with them. There were additional elements that He could employ to convey Himself, not in what He was to Israel, but in what He is to the church. There was a certain richness in that passover which does not appear in Exodus.
Eu.R. Do we need in that way to seek to get accumulated wealth in relation to the Supper?
J.T. I think so. Whatever wealth there is we should see that in our localities we are not behind. It is a poor thing for the brethren to come and sit down in an impoverished state, with the spiritual elements wanting, that the Lord would use to enhance Himself.
D.L.H. With regard to the cup, I notice that it says as regards the passover, that He took a cup, but when the cup is referred to in the Lord's supper, He took *the* cup. I apprehend that means that He took the cup which had already been used in the passover and gave it a further application in the Supper.
J.T. At that time there were several cups used according to historical accounts, so that the article being
{285}
affixed to the cup of the Lord's supper makes it all the more important. There was a vessel there for His use, and practically as coming together we must see that there is nothing absent that the Lord might use.
Ques. Would you say a little more about being by the side of Christ in view of the Father?
J.T. That all enters into this. As headship is apprehended, the idea of the assembly comes into evidence. The apostle goes on here to refer to Eve again. "For no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ the assembly: for we are members of his body; we are of his flesh, and of his bones. Because of this a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be united to his wife, and the two shall be one flesh. This mystery is great, but *I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". As we come into the sense of companionship with Christ, we understand that He is not ashamed to call us brethren; we come to the idea of the church as of Him. Then there is no sense of previous sinful history. That is a point to be reached as we come together in assembly.
Ques. Would Mary Magdalene standing by the side of Christ immediately He came out of death be a nucleus of the church?
J.T. I think so. She calls Him, 'Rabboni', meaning that she needs instruction. That is essential here. 'Rabboni' is 'my teacher', and presently He says to her, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God. Mary of Magdala comes bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her", (@John 20:16 - 18). I think there you have, in principle, the church. She is in subjection to Christ as taught. She does not assume the place of a teacher with the disciples, but simply tells them that He had said these things to her. There is no idea of authority
{286}
with her, but simply that she is the bearer of a message. The Lord comes and He says, 'Peace', and shows them His hands and His side. There is a clear indication that they were the objects of His love, and that, so to speak, they had come out of His side; and then He breathes on them.
H.H. Does not that indicate that the saints should be viewed as risen as the Lord comes into the midst?
J.T. The platform is ascension. "I ascend" is not historical there, but characteristic, so that He enters in that light. The church is really the product of an ascended Christ. It comes out of death with Him, as of Him, taking its character from Him as risen and ascended.
H.H. I was thinking of the first part of the meeting for the Supper, which allows for the wilderness side of things, and in that connection you do not exactly regard the saints as risen, but to join Christ in companionship you do have to appreciate them as risen, that is, Christ comes into the midst as One who is risen.
J.T. You must add the thought of ascension. That is important because it gives the church its place as we have it in Ephesians. I think Matthew, Mark and Luke, have in view the church as in the wilderness; the Lord's supper is in the wilderness. The position answers to the type of Zipporah, I think; it is a question of what she makes herself to be. In Exodus she is brought to Moses after deliverance is effected at mount Horeb, and her two sons are referred to there. There is only one son mentioned in chapter 2 whose name meant that Moses was a 'stranger in a strange land'; but the second son's name means, "God ... has delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh"; that is, deliverance, realised in the wilderness. But in Numbers, the official class represented in Aaron and Miriam, complain against Moses because he had married an Ethiopian woman. That is what comes out in the wilderness. It shows the responsibility that attaches to the church in the wilderness, and what
{287}
opposition may arise in these circumstances. But while beginning thus in the wilderness, in the assembly, we go on to Canaan.
Eu.R. Did I understand you to say the church is derived from an *ascended* Christ?
J.T. Quite so; it is heavenly. It comes out of heaven and goes back to heaven. There is no thought of Zipporah going into the land; Achsah is that side; she wants the inheritance, and she wants it in the most favourable relations. She had a south land, but she wanted springs of water to maintain her in the full height of her blessing. Coming back to Moses and the wilderness, it says in @Song of Songs 8:5, "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?" We may think little of the church in the wilderness, but the Lord will bring her through. Who is she? She is leaning upon Him; she is dependent upon Him, and she is not out of keeping with Him either. He brings us through, and therefore it is a serious matter to be complaining because of the unloveliness of the brethren, as Aaron and Miriam did with regard to the Ethiopian woman. Of course it is a humbling thing if they are unlovely, but the complaint is against Christ. He has taken us on, and He will bring us up out of the wilderness.
N.McC. Would coming up out of the wilderness bring us to the point of companionship?
J.T. Well, it is not quite so far. She is *leaning* on Him. It is not exactly companionship; it is in the land that we join Him as His companions, and the ground is thus completely changed.
F.H.B. I think our weakness is in the lack of the consciousness of companionship with Christ. We speak a good bit about Him and to Him, but we have not the *sense* of companionship. As you said, if we had we would speak to the Father.
J.T. And we should be conscious thus of being equal with Him. Not of course having part in His deity, but
{288}
"he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren", (@Hebrews 2:11). They come up with Him out of death, and there is no other history. He has been down, and they come up with Him, and I think that is where we touch what we have here, that we are "of his flesh and of his bones". It speaks in the psalm of our being curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth.
J.H.B. What is meant by the expression 'union with Christ'?
J.T. It means that I am *of Him* and so united to Him. "The two shall be one flesh". It is mysterious; I doubt whether it could be defined in words.
J.H.B. It is a little different from the thought of companionship.
J.T. It goes beyond companionship. "The two shall be one"; it is a remarkable thought.
J.J. Is union greater than unity? I thought the Lord would not unite with Himself what is not united here. We are united together and then union follows.
C.O.B. Is the presentation of verse 27 future?
J.T. "That *he* might present the assembly to himself glorious, having no spot, or wrinkle, or any of such things". I think it would enter into our relations in the assembly now; but properly, it is future. It is the Lord looking on to the presentation of the whole church to Himself.
"This mystery is great, but I speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". We are left with that here, the almost inscrutable thought of Christ and the church. You are cast on the Lord and the Spirit to understand it. It is really more for understanding than for definition; it is called a mystery, but he says, "I speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". That is what the Holy Spirit would leave with us.
{289}
ETERNITY TO ETERNITY (6)
@Ephesians 6:10 - 24
J.T. The subject this afternoon is the conflict. It seems fitting that this subject should be found at the close of this epistle, for whilst opening up to us the counsels of God culminating in the coming eternity, the epistle contemplates us as here, where the enemy's power is. That is, if God would entrust all this precious knowledge to us, we should contend for and stand in it. As we have noted already as to the subjects in our several readings, the types serve well in unfolding this subject to us. Whilst the Old Testament is but little alluded to in the epistle, yet it stresses spirituality, and spirituality will avail itself of all that there is in the way of spiritual help and furnishings. So that the subject requires for the right understanding of it in detail references to the Old Testament, particularly to Joshua as the typical military man, and to David too. Joshua is not only a type of Christ as the Leader of His people militarily, but a type for young believers as to how they come into the conflict and learn to fight. That is, after the gift of the Spirit according to @Exodus 17, the enemy attacks at once, so that the idea of spiritual warfare is seen in that chapter. The Amalekites attack and you have the initial idea of spiritual warfare, the leader in the conflict, Joshua, being still young. It may be advantageous that we should begin with this part of the subject, so that the young brothers present may follow, and see that the idea of military service and conflict begins at once, as they receive the Spirit of God.
H.D'A.C. Military service begins at once.
J.T. Yes, as we receive the Spirit according to @Exodus 17. Then in Numbers we are marshalled in relation to the standard of our fathers¬ houses, having something definitely to protect. But in @Exodus 17 the young believer
{290}
is pictured as coming into the conflict with Amalek. For christians this is individual and inward.
D.L.H. In connection with the conflict with Amalek, was not the effort of the enemy to keep the people immediately from the purpose of God?
J.T. That would be the thought, the Holy Spirit being given as the earnest of the inheritance.
A.S.L. Does Amalek represent Satan?
J.T. Satan working in the flesh especially in young believers. Spiritual conflict begins there. Joshua is the spiritual leader. Moses says, "Choose *us* men". The conflict is not to be on party lines in any way; it is in relation to *all*.
A.S.L. And success depended on intercession.
J.T. It is a hidden matter, and there is a measure of uncertainty about it. Victory is not immediately granted, because we are to *learn* war. When victory is not immediately granted we become dependent. We have a wily foe. There was a swaying and uncertainty, all hinging on Moses¬ upheld arms. That would not allude to any weakness in Christ now as interceding for us, but weakness in our reliance on Him.
A.S.L. In our chapter our conflict is "not against blood and flesh, but against principalities, against authorities, against the universal lords of this darkness, against spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies". It is satanic power.
J.T. It is not Satan in the flesh here; it is spiritual wickedness in *heavenly* places, but in order to have part in this great universal conflict in the heavenlies, young brothers have to learn war, to meet Satan himself in contending for the truth. We must understand how to deal with spiritual opposition. Joshua in @Exodus 17 represents the spiritual leader, that is to say, Christ known in that small way first. In learning war we grow in the apprehension of the intercession on high, and of the Lord as our spiritual Leader in the conflict.
{291}
E.S.H. So that you know where to turn. It says of Joshua that he "broke the power of Amalek", (@Exodus 17:13).
Rem. It is not the believer that takes the initiative with Amalek. As soon as the believer has the Spirit, the enemy attacks.
J.T. He forces it on you, and that is of God.
Rem. So it is intended that every young believer should be a man of war.
J.T. The great progenitor of faith had "trained servants" in his house -- that is the idea, and he used them to rescue his brother. They were trained, and there were three hundred and eighteen of them. I think the training for war begins in Exodus, and then in Numbers, we are marshalled and set up locally, in relation to the testimony. Now we have something to defend.
J.H.T. Do you get the idea in Paul in @Acts 13:9? He was filled with the Holy Spirit in meeting one whom he calls "son of the devil". John Mark goes back at that point.
J.T. Mark was unequal to the conflict then.
A.S.L. This conflict is not exactly reserved for those far advanced in the faith.
J.T. No; and so I thought it would be advantageous to the young, to see that we are brought into it at once. It is forced upon us, and God uses it, that we might learn war, for He has a great deal for us to defend and protect, as the sequel showed in the books of Numbers and Joshua. Numbers is rather a defensive warfare, but Joshua is attack. It is to take the inheritance and stand in it; but Numbers is to protect what is set up in the tabernacle.
A.S.L. So it would be young believers who have been granted some apprehension of their place in the church.
J.T. Yes. I think @Exodus 17 is very much like Romans; but Numbers is more Corinthians, what there is in a collective sense to be defended in the wilderness.
Eu.R. And does not Joshua accept a kind of training under Moses?
{292}
J.T. He does. As a young man he was lacking in a good ear for *sounds*. Coming down from the mountain in @Exodus 32 with Moses, he thought it was the sound of war, but he was mistaken. Military operations require a good ear and good eyesight.
Ques. Was the apostle teaching Timothy war in the second epistle?
J.T. He was calling upon him to be a "good soldier of Jesus Christ".
A.S.L. Is there a difference between Joshua and Ephesians in respect of conflict, that in Ephesians we are exhorted to stand as being there, whereas Joshua, as you said, had to be aggressive, to go forward and attack?
J.T. We have to be aggressive, but I suppose this epistle contemplates the land as already taken; the territory was all taken by apostolic service, and it is for the saints to hold the ground.
M.W.B. There was warfare in connection with Sihon and Og. What is the difference between that kind of conflict and the conflict in Joshua?
J.T. That is still wilderness conflict. I think that Sihon and Og have allusion to the territory that Moses gives us. It is a question of the authority of the Lord. There is territory given to us on the principle of authority, that is by Moses; and then there is territory given to us by Joshua which is rather spiritual leadership. Rahab spoke of what the people did to Sihon and Og. She knew what Jehovah did at the Red Sea, and what the people did to Sihon and Og. I think it alludes to the believer as himself belonging to God, that God has rights in him. It is what occurs in the believer after he *recognises* the Spirit. It is the overthrow of the 'big I'; that is one of the greatest struggles. That is not in @Exodus 17; which is rather the way I am troubled by Satan interfering and working through the flesh before I understand @Romans 7. But the victory over Sihon and Og, is after the Holy Spirit is formally recognised. That is to say, it is @Romans 8,
{293}
and the great battle then is whether it is to be Christ in me, in His rights over me, or whether it is to be the 'big I', that is to say, the big man, Og. His overthrow is a great victory.
M.W.B. It is all in relation to the wilderness, and to self in some form. But the warfare in @2 Corinthians 10 "the overthrow of strongholds; overthrowing reasonings and every high thing that lifts itself up against the knowledge of God" -- does that go further or is it still some element of the 'big I'?
J.T. That goes beyond the battle with Og. Paul speaks of the weapons of *his* warfare; they were not carnal. They had not overcome the 'big I' at Corinth; that was the difficulty with the leaders.
M.W.B. Then the question of self coming into the wilderness sphere, shows that that question might arise even after taking up a military position in respect of the testimony in Numbers.
J.T. Yes, quite so.
M.W.B. Do you think that affords the testing circumstances for the exposure of this 'I'?
J.T. I think it does. You get a brother who attends the meetings, he is so far set for the testimony, but in how many of us is self overthrown? One can speak feelingly, because the fact that I am in fellowship and contend for the truth and the principles of the house of God does not prove, in itself, that I have overcome Sihon and Og, because it is a question of the rights of the Lord in *me*. He would be in me instead of myself. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead" (@Romans 8:10); that is the overthrow of Og.
A.S.L. That comes after the brazen serpent.
J.T. It does; the overthrow of Sihon and Og is after that.
Ques. Do you get that in spirit in @Matthew 18 where you humble yourself to come into the kingdom?
J.T. Exactly. You can see how self stood out even after
{294}
all the light of the mount of transfiguration. They were talking of who was to be greatest in the kingdom of the heavens. So the Lord called a little child to Him and set him down and said, "Unless ye are converted and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens".
W.C. How does Phinehas come in here? @Numbers 25?
J.T. That would be priestly zeal, as Paul came in at Corinth.
The issue at Corinth was Midianitish. It belongs to the conflict in Numbers. It is a question of worldly associations.
Phinehas was later sent out against the Midianites with twelve thousand of Israel. It was a continuation of the principle of warfare in Phinehas; it is priestly. You are concerned about the holiness of the people of God, that they should be saved from worldly associations. To Phinehas the priesthood was established for ever.
Ques. Does the expression here, "Be strong in the Lord", suggest that self has been abandoned for Christ, and you have taken up a new position?
J.T. I think so. The Lord is now dominant; but in this chapter it is not the Lord, as in Romans. It is not a question of the kingdom, but a military title; He is Lord militarily. It corresponds with @Acts 19. In chapter 18 where we have the wilderness in view, that is, Corinth, it is God -- "the word of *God*" -- but in @Acts 19 where the land is in view, it is the Lord -- "the word of the *Lord*". The latter is what is in view in this passage: "be strong in the Lord, and in the might of his strength".
F.H.B. Does Joshua represent the Lord Himself or the Spirit of Christ m the saints?
J.T. He is Christ apprehended in a spiritual, military way. Joshua is the spiritual leader as we have seen, introduced in Scripture in a military way. His ministry corresponds with Ephesians, whereas the ministry or leadership of Moses enters into Romans and Corinthians.
{295}
That is, it is a question of Christ's authority over the saints, whereas Joshua is a question of spiritual power and leadership in warfare, placing us in Canaan.
Ques. Where does Caleb come in on that line?
J.T. Caleb represents the faith and energy in the believer that takes possession of the inheritance. He valued his own portion, Hebron, a portion divinely given to him, and he dislodged the enemy there. In Caleb we see sustained military ability to an advanced age.
Ques. What about Othniel?
J.T. Othniel would be Christ obtaining the church through warfare.
Eu.R. Where does the "captain of the Lord's host" come in? (@Joshua 5:15).
J.T. He refers to this epistle. The great military service in Joshua begins as the people are set up at Gilgal. The conflict begins at Jericho. Here a man stands over against Joshua with a drawn sword in his hand. Now this is for Joshua's education; he is to be on new ground in the warfare; he is to understand it is not partisan, but a question of *Jehovah's* host, so that when Joshua says, "Art thou for us, or for our enemies?" the man says, "No; for as captain of the army of Jehovah am I now come". The position in Joshua therefore, is that there is a captain of Jehovah's host, and He is no less than a divine Person, because Joshua was to take his shoes off his feet before Him. Holiness was to enter into the warfare; selfish thoughts were to be excluded.
F.H.B. Is the object of the warfare here to maintain the full testimony of the Christ, and not simply to secure our inheritance? The Man with the drawn sword said He was captain of the army of Jehovah.
J.T. Exactly; so in the next chapter in Joshua the *ark* is prominent. Having the captain, you have also the power in which the conflict is carried on. So that the ark, accompanied by the blowing of the trumpets, is carried
{296}
round the city, and on the seventh day it encircles the city seven times, when the shout brings the wall down. We are taught in all this "that the excellency of the power may be of God" (@2 Corinthians 4:7); that is, we have no strength at all in ourselves. In the ark and trumpets, there is a definite presentation of the testimony in Christ brought into view. The Lord said, "I have overcome the world", not only Satan, but the world, and I think the apostles in their testimony overcame the world. In principle it is overcome for us.
J.J. Would the four gospels help us in connection with putting on the whole armour of God? You see the Lord invulnerable there.
J.T. Yes. The armour of God is seen there. The Lord overcame by the manifestation of the features we have here. We do well to weigh the facts at Jericho because they put us into our place; the power is of God. It is in the clear sounding out of the testimony and the presentation of Him who is the subject of it, that the world is thus brought down. But in the bringing down of the world you look after those that are to be saved. Rahab represents them.
H.H. Do you mean the world as a system?
J.T. Yes, and the things by which it is kept going, such as the books and the seven sons of Sceva, that is, the perfection of spiritual wickedness in persons who have apostatised from God.
H.H. We have, of course, to judge all that for ourselves; much has thus to follow in our souls¬ history after we receive the gospel.
Ques. Does the apprehension of the truth of the Son of God help us in overcoming the world?
J.T. Scripture says so. "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith. Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5:4,5). I apprehend that this epistle is specially included in "our faith",
{297}
which faith has overcome the world. It involves another system, and moral superiority over the present one; so that, although I move about in it, the world has no influence over me. That seen in a number of christians shows what God has effected -- there is something set up here that has overcome the world, "our faith".
W.J.H. Do you think that "Jesus is the Son of God" would be a conception of the ark, so small outwardly, yet infinitely great and powerful? I was thinking of what the demons said in regard of the sons of Sceva: "Jesus I know", (@Acts 19:15). Jesus is His name in the lowly conditions He took and yet He is powerful enough for them to know Him.
J.T. "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that *Jesus* is the Son of God?" -- that lowly One, all power being in Him.
Ques. Would that be illustrated in the way they brought their books and burned them at Ephesus?
J.T. Exactly. Othniel took that city, the "city of the books"; that was a particular feature that Caleb had in his mind to be overcome. It is a formidable element of the world -- 'the power of the press', as men say. Very few of the people of God are free from damaging literature. It is sometimes said that there is so much ministry printed that brethren have not time to read it, but one large daily newspaper contains more reading matter than one of our books.
S.J.B.C. I suppose Kirjath-Arba would be the city of human power; and Kirjath-sepher would be the *wisdom* of the world.
J.T. Yes. Kirjath-sepher would be the Greek world, and Kirjath-Arba the Roman, the world of power. I refer to the period when the world was overthrown by the testimony of the apostles.
Ques. Would you mind saying a little more about the Man with the drawn sword in His hand? One feels a little difficulty as to the distinction between Him and Joshua.
J.T. I think Joshua, there, represents any one of us as
{298}
in the warfare. Warfare tends to taking sides by those engaged in it. I have something in my mind that I would like to attain and I crave for some one to help me. What happened at Jericho, is to remind us that the Lord will have no part in that at all. I get no help from Him in that relation. Joshua asks, "Art thou for us or for our enemies?" The first time Joshua is told to take the sword to lead in a battle, Moses says, "Choose *us* men" (@Exodus 17:9), meaning for *all* the people of God, not for any section of them. I do not believe Joshua was free from partisan bias in his early life; in @Numbers 11:28 we are told that when God would extend the Spirit by bringing a greater personnel into the ministry than one man, and Eldad and Medad were actually prophesying, Joshua said, "My lord Moses, forbid them". He did not wish anybody to prophesy but Moses. Apparently he was not clear of partisan tendencies, even at Jericho. He enquires, "Art thou for us, or for our enemies?" The Man with the drawn sword answers, "No; for as captain of the army of Jehovah am I now come", (@Joshua 5:13).
Ques. Does Peter come to that when he says, "our beloved brother Paul" (@2 Peter 3:15)?
J.T. Yes. After the incident at Antioch, where evidently partisan spirit existed, it is very beautiful that he could refer to Paul in that way.
J.J. Would you bring David into this chapter as well as Joshua -- he took the stronghold of Zion? He moved on from Hebron to do that. Would the Jebusite (@2 Samuel 5) refer to spiritual wickednesses?
J.T. Yes. Joshua places us in the inheritance, but, after we are there we find enemies. Some were allowed to stay in the land. David's work involved subjugation of internal and external enemies. David's service was imperial; he was king of kings and lord of lords. He foreshadowed Christ as seen in @Revelation 19.
C.C.E. Is there any distinction spiritually between Jericho and the rest of the seven nations?
{299}
J.T. Jericho is representative of all, I think, it represents the power of the world. Israel were faced with it immediately, so that the coming down of its walls, as they did without Israel having to strike a blow, would mean that the power in the conflict was of God and not of men. I think it was, in principle, the whole entrenched power of the enemy. It typifies what is before us here -- "The universal lords of this darkness ... spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies". Jericho was evidently very well fortified.
Ques. Were not the seven kings in Jericho? Would not @Joshua 24:11 indicate that?
J.T. I do not think it means that they were actually in Jericho, but rather that Jericho represented, as we were saying, the whole territory of the seven kings in the land of Canaan. The conquest of the land is in view there, as the context shows.
F.H.B. What would be the difference between the overthrow of Jericho and the five kings that he destroyed afterwards?
J.T. The curse came on them; the captains put their feet on the necks of those kings and then they were hanged. In the book of Joshua all the conquered kings were enumerated. Hazor was "the head of all those kingdoms" (@Joshua 11:10), it is said. Rome was in the same position at the time of the apostles. Hazor was burned with fire. Instead of Rome being constituted the head of christendom, the type would teach us that it was overcome. Nothing that marked the world's city was to be incorporated in the city of God, the church answering to this. The whole system of Romanism is developed out of Rome the head of the nations, the empire taking on a spiritual garb; and I suppose the burning of Hazor would mean that that which it represents must be utterly repudiated by the people of God.
J.H.T. It says, "they left none that breathed", (@Joshua 11:14). It is a striking expression.
{300}
J.T. It is. Hazor later recovered strength, as we learn in the book of Judges, with remarkable rapidity; we read also of Jabin its king and Sisera the captain of his host living in another place (chapter 4:2). There was great confidence between them and mutual reliance; that was the power Deborah had to deal with. He was "king of Canaan" answering, I think, to what Romanism has become. But Deborah says to Barak, "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded? Go and draw towards mount Tabor", (verse 6). This indicates the way we overcome that kind of evil; it is by recognising the commandment of the Lord. "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" Deborah says. She was a remarkable woman in a military sense, and her song with Barak shows the great military energy that filled her soul. She was dealing with an intrepid enemy, one in the place of head, which Rome has always arrogated to itself. Sisera was overthrown by obedience to God's commandment: Barak with ten thousand men should draw towards mount Tabor, meaning that now it is a question of military manoeuvres or tactics, so that you have the advantage in the battlefield; a very important matter in warfare. The Lord selected the battlefield, and it is important for young believers to understand that the battle is the Lord's and victory is sure as we are obedient. God says to Barak, "I will draw unto thee, to the torrent Kishon, Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, and his chariots and his multitude", (verse 7). The army of Sisera had thus a great disadvantage, and the issue in favour of Israel was certain. We are taught in all these incidents what is meant here, how *we* are to be in the conflict, because we have a wily foe operating in a very wide sphere. By and by he will come up "on the breadth of the earth", after the millennium, as we are told in @Revelation 20:9. Satan will have a free hand on the earth, on the whole breadth of it, to encircle the camp of the saints. But fire from heaven consumes his army. Now it is not the earth but the heavenly
{301}
places, because it is a question of the conflict of the church.
H.H. Is there not a striking allusion to the apprehension of headship in Judges? Are not the facts in the light of the headship of Christ? Outwardly things are in disorder, no king in Israel. Deborah was a woman, but she got Barak to move, and Jael was the *wife* of Heber the Kenite.
J.T. Yes; and it is said of Deborah that she was the *wife* of Lapidoth. They were both in subjection, but Deborah had evidently gained a moral victory over herself. She dwelt under her *own* palm tree. She refers to Jael as preceding her, mentioning her with Shamgar. In their days the highways were unoccupied, that is, the principles of God had not been attended to. So it seems Jael was not on the same spiritual level as Deborah, but she slew Sisera, and Deborah magnificently renders tribute to her.
J.H.B. Does the conflict in @Ephesians 6 go on together, or is it what we do individually?
J.T. I think it is collective. It is universal and I believe involves the "unity of the Spirit" and the "unity of the faith", (chapter 4:3,13). I do not see how we can meet this combination of darkness unless we hold universally the "unity of the Spirit" and the "unity of the faith". The Lord would have us drop all localism and nationalism, and move together in the light of the assembly and its heavenly places and privileges.
M.W.B. Is that the link with @Psalm 68:18 from which the verse is quoted in @Ephesians 4: "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts in Man"?
J.T. I think so. The Lord having gone on high leading captivity captive, the power is in His hands, and His giving gifts to men implies the power of the Spirit specifically expressed. As we were saying the other day, and which I think is worthy of notice, the mighty men
{302}
come in immediately after David's anointing in 1 Chronicles; but in 2 Samuel they come in at the end. I do not think we should minimise what there is in the last days, for they are in a certain way equal to the first days, and I think the mighties go right through. Samuel would show that they go right through, that no one of that character is omitted from the list. Whatever they were at the beginning, as in Chronicles, they also have their place at the end.
M.W.B. So that links on the days of @Acts 19 -- the overthrow of the power of evil at Ephesus -- with the present time; and our exercises today should have the same end in view.
J.T. That is the way to bring this chapter into the present time. The same circumstances exist -- Christ is in heaven and the Holy Spirit is on earth, and the gifts are here; there is the possibility of mighty men to lead on the people of God, and to hold the ground that God has restored to us.
P.L. Are the mighties found in @2 Timothy 4:11,19 "Only Luke is with me"; "take Mark"; "Prisca and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus".
J.T. They are mighty surely.
H.H. You get a good list at the end of Romans of church material.
J.T. Yes. The many salutations of Paul would give those mentioned a status in Rome that would greatly assist in leading them into the inheritance. Immediately after the salutations the apostle goes on to speak of the assembly.
J.H.B. Then if in Ephesians the enemies are viewed in the heavenlies, where are the saints viewed as standing?
J.T. In the light of our calling -- the church's place. A comparison with @Revelation 12 will show that the final conflict is in the heavenlies, Michael leading, to drive out Satan and his army. That would be to make room for the church literally there. Now it is a faith period, so that we
{303}
are contending on the principle of faith for all these things. The heavenlies belong to the church; we have prior rights there. Satan should not be there; it is a question of holding in faith the heavenly position -- and unitedly too.
H.H. Do we not combat with the influence of wicked spirits on the minds of people through bad doctrine. This might get in even amongst the saints?
J.T. Yes surely. That is how the enemy is working. He is operating from a great central spiritual position on the minds of men here; he reaches us in that way. It may reach us in a multitude of ways, but we are to have on, not only the armour of light, as in Romans, but the whole armour of God. Thus the whole position is held.
H.H. We know our place on high.
J.T. And your walk and ways are in keeping with it; you are *standing* in the full light of the calling.
H.H. The armour would protect you there.
J.T. It would.
M.W.B. You referred just now to the "unity of the Spirit" and the "unity of the faith" in special connection with this. Would you say a little how that works out?
J.T. I think that is very important because it is a universal thing here; it is universal and collective. Of course we are in the greatest weakness, but the chapter is light for us as to how we are held together in the overthrow of all that marks the world. The world is being led on to the idea of a head and a central position, which is working out now on the Continent. The most potent opposition is organised opposition, and God meets that by organisation. Matthew shows that the Lord met *two* demoniacs, *two* blind men, and so on. It is a question of organisation. Chapter 4 of this epistle is divine organisation. That is to say, we are bound up in spiritual affections -- which would mean that I cannot afford to lose my brother. And so you have the word to Paul on the ship, (@Acts 27), that God had given to him all that sailed
{304}
with him. That ought to be the desire of every one of us -- not to lose one. Well, that implies the unity of the Spirit; it is a question of affection. As we saw yesterday, Absalom's kingdom was thus overthrown in Jerusalem. For that you have the unity of the Spirit, but then there is also the unity of the faith, which would mean the superiority of christian truth, the truth that God has restored -- the wonderful unfolding of the mind of God before which no philosopher could ever stand. The books were burnt because they were shown to be fallacious. This was because of the great superiority of the truth. Paul's ministry at Ephesus involved the most wonderful unfolding of the truth and counsels of God, so he says, "I have not shrunk from announcing to you all the counsel of God", (@Acts 20:27). Hence the intelligence the Ephesians had, and that I think is what is involved in the unity of the faith; so that you have the unity of the Spirit, and the unity of the faith, and the self-action of the body. Instead of being overcome you have a system of things that is invulnerable. Walking in the light and practical acceptance of all this, God gives us the victory in the conflict.
Ques. "Having accomplished all things, to stand"? What are the "all things"?
J.T. Whatever was obligatory on them; they were to *stand*; not give up any ground, but hold what was secured for them.
J.H.T. Is there time to say a word about the panoply of God?
J.T. It is the *whole* armour, what has marked God in coming into this world in which Satan was entrenched. How in Christ He met the evil. The gospels show how Christ met all opposition. I think we learn in that way; but these varied parts of the armour are most instructive and practical. "Stand therefore, having girt about your loins with truth"; that is the first thing. Then the breastplate of righteousness, and the preparation of the glad
{305}
tidings of peace on the feet; and then, besides all this, the shield of faith "with which ye will be able to quench all the inflamed darts of the wicked one". "Have also the helmet of salvation". Those are all armour; and then, the "sword of the Spirit", by which you defend yourself and also go forward in attack.
Eu.R. You referred to the captain of the Lord's host as suggesting a divine Person; do you connect it with the title 'Lord' in this chapter, and that it is a divine Person who has the situation in hand?
J.T. That is exactly the truth.
{306}
THE SELECTION AND FORMATION OF SERVANTS
@Acts 9:15,16; @Matthew 4:19; @John 13:23
I have in mind, dear brethren, to speak about service, and to show, in so doing, how it entered into our dispensation and became diversified there. The best features of everything are seen in this dispensation, and so, whilst service and servants appear throughout the Old Testament, they do not rise to the level of our times. In our dispensation we have the idea presented in perfection in our Lord Jesus Christ, "who", as we read, "subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form", (@Philippians 2:6,7). So that we have One here in whom the idea of service is fully and perfectly presented, according to the prophetic word, "Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth!" (@Isaiah 42:1). I commend that word at the outset, for it conveys to us how deeply divine feelings were engaged and moved as Jesus appeared here as a Bondman.
I wish to show from the three servants mentioned in the passages read, the prominent varieties, such as were intended to give character to the dispensation from the beginning to the end, the first representing election, for the Lord in answering Ananias says, referring to Saul, "Go, for this man is an *elect* vessel to me", (@Acts 9:15). I wish to dwell on the Lord's word as to this servant before he began to serve, as conveying what I may call the most unique feature of service, namely, that it is the outcome of divine selection. But then to go over the other points briefly; in Simon Peter we have one who was *made* a servant, which is the second point; the Lord saying to him with his brother, "I will make you fishers
{307}
of men"; the third feature as seen in John, being *lovability*.
I wish to speak to you under those three heads, because they enter importantly into service, and must combine if service is to be effectual; the first corresponding strikingly with Christ Himself, who is formally said to be Jehovah's elect One, in whom His soul delighted.
Election as to the servant is not the same as election for eternity. The latter refers to all believers. The former is very special and has the testimony in view; but it implies great forethought on the part of the Lord and preparation of the vessel, the word 'vessel', in this sense, being peculiar to Paul. It implies that the Lord has gone a long way up the stream, so to speak, and looked after the forefathers, the training and the environment of the person selected. So that the apostle Paul was in the Lord's mind long before He called him. He had elected him, and He had elected him with a view to a certain use, in which only he could be employed, and He had in mind that no one should displace him. In the course of his testimony, he became very much disliked by many, even some whom he had served at the cost of his life. They might not object to his ministry and teaching, but they would in time prefer that some one else should be doing the teaching and the preaching. But the Lord had elected this servant. He had a work for him to do which was special, and He was determined that no one should displace him. So, at the end of his ministry, he says that the Lord stood by him -- to deliver him from the lion's mouth, but not only that, but rather that *by him* the preaching might be *fully* known. Some might think that others could preach as well as he, but this was not the Lord's mind; He determined that the preaching should be fully presented in this great vessel that He had elected. No one else could have done it; there was not a man in the whole world that could preach like Paul. I do not say that as a gratuitous statement, but that we might
{308}
see that his preaching was peculiar to himself, a preaching that the Lord intended to use, so that the thing preached should be fully known. I do not believe that in any address of Paul's there would be anything to detract from the preaching. In fact, so emphatic is he about this that he says, "But if also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost"; and he says further, "we do not preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus Lord, and ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake", (@2 Corinthians 4:3,5).
Those first mentioned by the Lord to be served by Paul are the *nations*; then *kings*, and then the *sons of Israel*. He was to bear the Lord's name before nations. The world under the government of God is composed of nations. God intervened according to @Genesis 11, early in the history of mankind, after the flood, to separate it into nations, meaning that a centralised combination as at Shinar, would hinder the testimony. Then you find with the nations thus formed, that the Spirit of God returns to the posterity of Shem, that being the line in which the testimony should come to the nations. It is as if God were to say, 'I have created circumstances in My government, which will admit of the nations, in due course, being reached'. But each of the nations had its own interests and aspirations, and so it required skill, that the preaching, in the name of the Lord Jesus, might be carried to each of them. Paul used the utmost care in preaching to the nations, so that there should be no prejudice aroused, and yet that he should be able to take out from each of them, a people, detached from its own national traits, so as to be linked on with those taken out of the other nations. It was a wonderful piece of work, and he speaks of it as "the offering up of the nations", (@Romans 15:16). He was carrying on a kind of sacrificial service, "that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit". It was no question with him of numbers; you will not find specific
{309}
numbers in connection with Paul's converts, whereas you do find numbers specifically mentioned in connection with the preaching of Peter and the others at Pentecost, for numbers have reference to the 'treasure' (@Matthew 13:44). When you come to treasure, then the idea of counting comes in, and this came out at Pentecost. The Lord had secured the field, and He was now asserting His right to take the treasure out of it, and so you find numbers -- one hundred and twenty first of all, then three thousand, and so on. But with Paul, it is one idea; it is not a question with him of numbers, although of course there were numbers. What is in mind with him is the pearl, that is, *one* idea. How little we know in service about one idea; but I can see that a man governed by one idea, is sure to be effective. There was with Paul this controlling thought, to secure one thing -- the church -- for Christ. That involved great care in preaching to the nations, that those taken out of each should be detached from it and linked up as one, with all believers from the other nations. All this is a feature of Paul's ministry.
Then in regard of *kings*, you see how he bore the name of Christ before them. I do not know how one would do in the presence of a king, but I believe that the Lord never intended that the gospel should come in among men by the back door, so to speak. This is very practical, because if we are to bear the Lord's name the idea is not to go to the servants or to the poor *only*; the idea is to go to influential men, and that needs courage. Hence you find in the types that Moses is directed to go down by the river in the morning, the Lord telling him that Pharaoh is going down there. The morning thus mentioned would mean that there was much to be done in the day opening up, and the instruction to Moses was to "stand ... in front of him", (@Exodus 7:15). Now look at that scene! There is a man classified as a Hebrew, under reproach, and he is to take up this attitude before the
{310}
King. Indeed no one is any good in the service unless he is consciously under reproach. I should never approach a king on the ground of my identity in this world, however great it might be. A man might be called out of great dignity in this world, and think he could go and preach to a company like himself, but that is not the divine thought. The divine idea is that the preacher is under reproach -- the reproach of Christ. This Hebrew is by the river with the word in his heart to stand in front of the great monarch of the world!
That is the second feature of Paul's service mentioned by the Lord -- that he was to bear the name of Christ before kings. Mark, it is "the name", but what a Name! It is the Nazaraean, involving reproach, but also of Jesus Christ, the name in which salvation is (@Acts 4:10 - 12). I do not know how many kings the apostle Paul preached to, but I do know he preached to one, and I do know too what he said to him, and I know also the spirit in which he said it, and I think it was magnificent! The spirit and substance of his address before Agrippa forms one of the finest incidents of Paul's service. He was in conscious dignity, not a dignity that he acquired at the feet of Gamaliel, or as a Pharisee of the Pharisees, but a dignity that flowed from the consciousness of his election as a minister, and of his calling as a christian, so that he says to Agrippa "I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds", (@Acts 26:29). He was the greatest in that hall; no one could compare with him; he was truly bearing the Name before kings.
Then too, the apostle had to bear the Lord's name before the sons of Israel. These require the greatest care in the preaching. They were full of prejudice, although referred to by their Messiah in this respectful way. It is not "the Jews" here, but the "sons of Israel". How would he approach them? He would approach them, as we know he did at Antioch in Pisidia, as 'Israelites', a
{311}
term involving dignity, and in keeping with the Lord's reference; he was one of them and he could speak to them. But, as entering the synagogue, before addressing them, he sat down; I wish to note this because it is very practical. In the fulness of his apostolic mission he might have brushed everybody aside when he had something to say, but he sat down until he was asked to speak. It is well in service to await opportunities and not force ourselves. It is wise to wait to be asked to speak and then to address the hearers in such a manner as to inspire confidence and not provoke prejudice. Paul's manner of service at Antioch of Pisidia had good results for God.
Then the Lord also speaks of sufferings. The Lord says, "I will shew to him how much he must suffer for my name". The Lord, showing him the sufferings, would not deter him from the path of devotedness.
The next feature of my subject is based on @Matthew 4:19. The Lord says, "Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men". The Lord can *make* a servant in spite of crudeness, in spite of roughness, in spite of crookedness, in spite of ignorance, in spite of prejudice -- in a word, in spite of everything that attaches to an uncultured, unlettered, uninstructed, unsophisticated man -- the Lord can make out of him one to whom He can give the first place in His service. Now that is Peter! I connect it with Peter because the Spirit gives us his full picture in this respect. It applies to Andrew, it applies to Paul and to every true servant, it is a second feature. It is therefore a question now of whether I am '*makeable*', for the Lord can do nothing with us whilst will is active, whilst personal motives are active, whilst prominence in the ministry is the motive. All these things stand in the way. We are told in @Proverbs 26:10, "A master roughly worketh every one", so that He can take one like Peter and make him something in His service. I would say that the Lord wishes to take each of us into His hands and make something out of us. "I will make you", He
{312}
says, "fishers of men". So you find, one may say, a life-sized picture of Simon Peter, in Matthew. I think Matthew has in view the service for which the Lord intended him, that is, the circumcision, and Matthew gives us the man in his roughness and then the making process. The finished product is properly in the Acts. The Lord has great pleasure in a finished product, and I would especially speak to my young brethren here, to those who are in the making time. It is a time when the Lord is *making* servants. Each one of us may rightly ask, Am I in His hands?
You get here in chapter 4 the first mention of Peter by Matthew. He is Simon, but he is called Peter, that is to say, Matthew is looking backwards; it is the well-known Peter he is speaking about. The well-known Peter as seen in the Acts is the finished product. He is finished as a minister. The next prominent thing you get in Matthew about Peter is that he is *first*; "first ... Peter" (chapter 10:2). He is the only one who is called first in the ministry; and if he gets that place in the Lord's mind, the making has this in view. The Lord is going to produce a minister who will occupy *that* position to His glory. "First ... Peter", it says, and so you find in the Acts, that he is in every way first. There is nothing forced about it. If you saw Peter in his service you would discern that he had the lead among the apostles. Who made him first? The Lord. He intended him to be the leading man amongst the disciples. So you find that in the first position mentioned in the Acts, the upper room, Peter is first; and then in ministry to the brethren, Peter is first; also in preaching the gospel, Peter is first. Look at him standing up there in Jerusalem! God gave him not only the gift, but also the audience. We find there were dwelling in Jerusalem, people from almost every nation; and they are all marvelling at the effect of the Spirit's presence. There are some mocking, and Peter begins with them. Standing up with the eleven he so speaks that three
{313}
thousand were converted. Comparing the great minister seen here with the rough fishermen of @Matthew 4 we may well exclaim, What hath God wrought!
So Acts shows that Peter was first, and he is so perfectly made of the Lord, that he can be in unjealous obscurity when others, like Stephen and Philip, come forward. But he is there to be called upon, which is a fine feature; hence in @Acts 8 he is actually *sent* by the apostles with John. Peter and John were sent down to Samaria by the apostles that were at Jerusalem. I mention that, because it shows that whilst he was first, he was ready to be merged among his brethren, his fellow apostles, and to be subservient to them to do their bidding. That is the workmanship of Christ. How elastic, so to speak, it is in the subject of it. The body of spiritual wealth and experience seen in Peter in the later chapters of Acts is a further but most important feature of the making power of Christ in His servants.
The next thing is the lovability of the servant, and that is John. And what I would mention first about John is that he can take a *second* place. Now it is a hard thing with some of us to do this, but John is almost invariably seen in that position, and he fits it beautifully -- "Peter and John". It is a very fine quality in service, to be able to take a second place, or, if necessary, a third place. Of course, in a sense, you do not want a place at all, but I am speaking of the Lord's ordering. If Peter is first, then somebody must be second; there are not two firsts. That is a test. So it is "Peter and John", and I think the Lord greatly honoured John because of this quality. I look at him in that well-known chapter in @Acts 3, how he went up with Peter to the temple at the hour of prayer. I suppose since the walk of Jesus on earth, heaven never saw anything so beautiful as that, the one that was set 'first' as the workmanship of Christ in the service, and then the one that was second. There they are; what a pair for heaven's eye! It was the hour of prayer; it was
{314}
the ninth hour. Need I comment on the sentiments that governed those two hearts as they moved up that day to the temple at *that* hour? It was the hour in which our Lord Jesus Christ died. Peter says to the man, "Look on us". It was Peter that spoke; John does not say anything.
I think John would bring forward persons who *can be* silent in the service. It seems to me he has in mind something of that kind in the way he mentions Lazarus. Lazarus never says anything, as far as Scripture records, but in spite of this people *are believing on Jesus because of him* (@John 12:11). Now that is a very fine thing. What kind of man must he be -- he is not saying anything, and yet people are believing on Jesus because of him! Others sought to kill him because of this. The next thing you get after that is that the Lord found a colt and sat on him; the *Lord* found him. Can we say in fairness that the Lord had Lazarus in mind when He got the colt? It was His own finding. Lazarus was the Lord's immediate product. He raised him. He was the Lord's friend. Is it not lovely to be the Lord's friend? "Our friend Lazarus", He says, (@John 11:11). Moses called his firstborn, Gershom -- "I have been a sojourner in a foreign land". That is what the world was to Jesus. He made it: "the world was made by him, and the world knew him not", (@John 1:10). How strange it must have been that there was no response -- but now He had a friend in it. Lazarus is a friend of Jesus in this strange place that He had to do with. I believe the conditions He found in the world caused the Lord constant sorrow; the whole scene was blighted and opposed. Every step He took aroused strange opposition. It was most unfair and uncalled for, as He says: "They hated me without a cause", (@John 15:25). How valuable was a friend in it! That is what Lazarus was, and what the disciples were according to John: "I call you not servants ... but I have called you friends", (@John 15:15). Wonderful, indeed, to be a friend to Jesus in a strange
{315}
place like this! I wonder if all our dear young brothers and sisters look upon the world as strange, or is it just what you like and where you aspire to be? When Jesus came into it, it was a strange place to Him. Ah! it was very strange, but He found a friend and He *finds* friends. The colt He found and on which He rode into Jerusalem is in keeping with this.
Well, I am speaking of taking a second place and how one shines in it although another may be speaking. It really works out in the assembly when the brothers speak and the sisters are silent. The sisters cannot say anything, but Lazarus did not, and yet people believed on Jesus because of him. The point is not speaking; it is a question of what the person is. Sometimes in the wilderness the church is not at all lovely typically. Moses married an Ethiopian woman, and she would not be lovely. I think she is a type of some of our meetings, which are not always very lovely. Miriam and Aaron persecuted Moses because he had married the Ethiopian woman, but the Lord rebuked them and Miriam became a leper. It is a solemn thing to turn away from the brethren because they do not seem lovely to you. The Lord bears with them in their unloveliness, and you may find perhaps that your judgment is not quite right, that what you consider is unlovely is lovely in the eyes of the Lord. At any rate, if He is pleased to go on with His people I must go on with them. All this shows the importance of being lovable. In John's gospel Jesus is seen as lovable from the outset, and so Lazarus is testimony without speaking or without preaching, and that testimony is effective. It is a very important and searching word for persons who cannot speak in the assembly, and the women are enjoined not to speak there, but they are to be in such an attitude and manner and spirit that they are a testimony, and others believe on Jesus because of them.
Lovableness is the feature stressed by John in his gospel. He is mentioned by name, of course, elsewhere,
{316}
but he is presented in his own gospel, in this way, and that he had access to the bosom of Jesus. That is the thing; I am not preaching, I am not teaching, I am not speaking -- I am in a second position, but I have access to the bosom of Jesus, and there I am loved by Jesus, and that is worth all the dignity, and more than all the dignity of what might accrue to us from speaking and preaching and teaching. I do not say John did not speak and preach and teach. Every one of the apostles had a gift, and every one of them used it too. You may be sure of that. In fact scripture speaks of it, that with great power 'the apostles witnessed' -- every one of them. After Peter and John had fulfilled their great service in @Acts 3 and 4 they returned to the place of meeting, and merged among the other apostles. But John represents, as I say, the feature of lovableness and the ability to take a second place, and in that place to bear testimony, for he was, in that way, essential to Peter's service at the temple gate: "Look on *us*". The lame man would not have seen the same in Peter alone, as he saw in the two, and he discerned this, for he 'held' them *both*. He held Peter and John, and on account of his presence the opposers could not say anything. He was a testimony, an evidence of the result of their testimony.
Well, that is what I had to present to you, and I commend this three-fold feature of service as converging necessarily in every servant, so that our testimony should be effective. We were seeing here this afternoon, that the mighty men of David in 1 Chronicles are mentioned immediately he is anointed king over all Israel, and they helped to establish him in the kingdom; but in 2 Samuel they come in at the end of his reign, meaning evidently in a typical way, that every mighty man from Pentecost to the coming of the Lord is included in the list. If there are to be such today what I have been calling attention to must have a great place with us. The Lord has gone up on high, and having led captivity captive He has given
{317}
gifts to men; but there must be the qualification of the vessels. Gifts will continue to the end, and every mighty man will appear in the list. He has had something distinctive to do; every mighty man did something distinctive, and so comes into recognition as God writes up His people.
May God bless this word to us, and all that we have had before us in these meetings, for His name's sake!
{318}
Pages 318 - 343 "Priesthood as in Numbers", London, 1931. (Volume 110).
PRIESTHOOD AS IN NUMBERS (1)
@Numbers 8:19; @Numbers 17:6 - 13; @Numbers 18:1 - 7
J.T. The consideration of the subject of priesthood as seen in Numbers, will, I believe, be of service. It is not a question of their service inside, in Numbers, but outside; to a large extent it is in regard of the levites. So that it brings out the relation of the saints, viewed as priests, to those who minister. The book contemplates the tribes set in relation to the tabernacle according to their position on the breastplate; and the levites are set relatively to it on the south, on the west, and on the north; whereas Moses with Aaron and his sons, are at the door of the tabernacle which was eastward. The whole position is expressive of the will of God as to His people here on earth, in their local settings, and the levites are set in that relation. The type sets forth the place we have in the affections of Christ before God, and our public position corresponds with it, and so is according to the will of God. All that should be taken into account as to the functioning of priesthood, centring, of course, in Christ. Aaron and his sons had supervision of the levites, these being given to them. Then in chapter 18 they are *united* to Aaron, so that there is no divergence between them and the priesthood; all this would work out in detail, in the saints maintaining the priestly state and discernment, the spirit of judging what is said, so that we have the truth, not only in the letter, but in the spirit of it. I was thinking also of the priesthood as coming in in the way of *life* shewn in Aaron's rod, after the great rebellion of Korah, Dathan and Abiram. That brings us down to our own times in the history of the church.
{319}
H.H. Is priestly service in relation to God, and levitical service in relation to one's brethren?
J.T. Priestly service has both aspects. Levitical service is on lower ground. In Numbers service directly to God, inside, is scarcely in view at all. It is the bearing of priesthood externally, and is therefore a question of Christ and His feelings manifest in the saints, taking account of the levites and understanding their service. That is what I understand to be the bearing of priesthood in Numbers. Aaron and his sons with Moses are at the door of the tabernacle. That would mean the authority of Christ as allied with the priesthood to keep guard of the sanctuary. That was their position as encamped. It is important to take account of the respective positions when Israel were encamped.
H.H. Yes. I think you have said elsewhere that the arrangement of the names on the breastplate corresponded with the arrangement of the tribes in their wilderness setting.
J.T. Yes; it is a question of the tribes on the breastplate -- as is said, "according to the names of the children of Israel ... for the twelve tribes", not according to their birth (see @Exodus 28:21). Their names were obviously written in the light of the position of the tribes according to the divine arrangement. In other words, it all works out from the place love gives us within. Our places externally are correlative to our places inside. Note the emphasis on 'names' in @Exodus 28:21.
H.H. We make a great feature of our place inside, but we have not been quite so much exercised about our public position, but the two stand in proper relation to each other.
J.T. Therefore, the priesthood within, would maintain the will of God without; that is the object of it.
J.J. What epistles would you refer to to illustrate those two things?
J.T. I think Romans and Corinthians lay the basis for
{320}
Numbers. @Romans 12:2 speaks of "the good and acceptable and perfect will of God" for the individual believer, and that would work out in Corinthians as to one's local setting, whether one is in his position according to the will of God. That raises the whole question of one's movements, where one lives, and so on.
J.J. So 1 Corinthians has very little about the inside place, as you were saying.
P.L. In @1 Corinthians 3:22,23 it says of Paul, Cephas, Apollos, "all are yours; and *ye* are Christ's, and Christ is God's". Are those the levites?
J.T. Yes. The understanding of that would have saved the Corinthians from putting forward party leaders. The position of the levites is determined by the will of God, as is the position of the tribes. The Corinthians were making way for the clergy, by setting up local leaders; *all* were theirs. But then in chapter 12, the gifts whilst they belong to the saints, are regulated primarily by God. God *sets* them in the assembly (verse 18), which would imply that they are under restriction. They are not only under the hand of the Lord, but as set in the assembly they are surrounded by spiritual intelligence.
M.W.B. Would that be the priestly influence that would regulate their service?
J.T. Well, exactly; so that in chapter 14:29 we have formal allusion to the service of the levites; they come in for the judgment of those who hear: "let the others judge".
M.W.B. Is that what you referred to as the sensibilities of Christ in the saints?
J.T. I am thinking of that, of the great need for discernment in regard to what is ministered, so that we have not only what may be literally correct, but the *spirit* of truth.
W.C. Would that apply to all the part taken in the meetings as such?
J.T. I think it would. Of course, when you come to the
{321}
assembly proper, the ministry is on somewhat higher ground as priestly, but all ministry must come under criticism. The Bereans were commended because of that; it is a principle set down.
S.J.B.C. Why does Paul say, "Christ is God's", not Christ is yours?
J.T. We cannot place Christ within our possessions as we can Paul. Christ possesses us, as the passage states; verse 23 gives the order of possession.
H.H. In @Malachi 2:7, it says, "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they seek the law; for he is the messenger of Jehovah of hosts". It is responsibility.
J.T. That fits in with the second part of Numbers, the priesthood being asserted at the end, in its bearing towards the people; they "keep knowledge". All was really in the custody of the priests, the law, etc. Viewed as priests, we are trustworthy; that is, God entrusts us with things, and that saves us from the clerical element.
P.L. Would this critical faculty appear in the way the inward parts of the sacrifices were treated by the priests?
J.T. I think that is right: "truth in the inward parts", (@Psalm 51:6). If we have truth in the inward parts it will come out in what we say.
Ques. Does this mean that the responsibility for the truth rests on the priests and not on the levites directly?
J.T. Of course the levite is responsible, but final responsibility would rest on the priests. They are the custodians of it. They keep knowledge, and the law is heard at their mouth. That is what is emphasised in Malachi; and hence the need for cultivating priestly sensibilities and discernment, so that we may judge rightly of things. What I notice is that one's casual judgment is exceedingly unreliable. One goes to a meeting and hears an address, and is casual and not critical; (I do not use the word 'critical' as being objectionable but in
{322}
the sense of judging) -- and something is said that is new and it strikes him. Well, he is not critical and goes away with the thought of a novelty something that is particularly striking, but which may not be just the truth, whereas if a man is critical, in all probability he will discern what is right. I mean that the judgment of the saints is reliable if their attention is specially called to the thing to be judged; if something is put to them specifically it is almost a certainty that we will get a right judgment from the brethren; if not immediately, certainly in time. But if we remain in a casual attitude towards what is ministered, what is new is apt to strike us, what we have not heard before, and if we fail in having this critical spirit, we shall perhaps carry away and accredit something erroneous. There is much being ministered, and the Lord would call into action the priestly *discernment*, not now the service towards God in the assembly, but what Numbers contemplates, the priest's relation to the levites, so that there should be nothing but what is in keeping with the Spirit of truth. The Spirit ungrieved in the believer is sure to teach him; He will not be quiescent if things are not right; and so the more sensitive we are, the more likely we shall be to discern.
C.H.W. Would you say the apostle lays the onus of this on the saints in Thessalonica? "Do not lightly esteem prophecies; but prove all things, hold fast the right", (@1 Thessalonians 5:20 - 22).
J.T. Yes, that is an excellent confirmation of what we are saying. "Do not lightly esteem prophecies" would mean that we ought to listen to every brother, even although he may not be of special repute; for how are we to get the latent ministry amongst us save as we give opportunity to the younger men to speak? But then, "prove all things, hold fast the right", is the guarantee for the preservation of the truth amongst us.
J.O.S. John recommended Gaius for holding fast the truth.
{323}
J.T. Very good. He was a true priest.
J.J. I suppose you see the principle of the rebellion of Korah at Corinth, and the using of the rod in Paul holding things in life.
J.T. The elements of rebellion were setting in there. They were checked by God, so that you get Aaron's rod in the second letter; but the rod of authority had to be used in the first letter. The position according to the types was that Moses and Aaron and his sons were at the door. It is the combination of authority and grace, and these come out beautifully in the two letters to Corinth. But the great rebellion contemplated in @Numbers 16, came in afterwards, that is to say, the uprising of Korah, who was situated on the south side of the tabernacle. He had a very favourable position, along with the tribe of Reuben, so that it was a local uprising that spread. That is the position in chapter 16 and what came out was that the cloud covered the tabernacle. That is, God came in and extended His wing over the *whole* position attacked. I think we should notice that -- that the great uprising in christendom continues, and God has indicated the whole bearing of the testimony in what is recovered; the cloud is on the whole tabernacle. Then chapter 17 is to bring out what can be entrusted with the care of that, so as to silence rebellion, and there is no other way of silencing rebellion save by the principle of life in resurrection; that is what I think we may see as bearing on our own position now. The principle of life has come into evidence, as in chapter 17 in Aaron's rod, and life in itself, not merely in a potential way, but in what is beautiful. There was the bud and the blossom and the ripened almonds, there was positive fruit, the almond denoting the faithfulness of God. That is what comes to light; and there is the charge to Aaron and his sons, and Levi is to be 'united' with them. This refers to the meaning of Levi (see @Genesis 29:34). It would mean that the service is not to be carried on in an independent way.
{324}
One's gift is to be used of course, but the uniting with the priest, is a very balancing thought. It would be a guarantee, not only against rebellion, but for the unity of the faith. You cannot think of divergence among the levites where the principle of union in service with the priest is recognised. Now that is something that may well raise a question with us, as to whether it enters into our service.
H.H. I was thinking a little of Abiathar, one who though a priest, was badly carried away by the rebellion of Adonijah. I thought it was something analogous to the present day, shewing how one who may have been devoted in service, yet through losing priestly instincts, may be carried away by what is popular; united indeed, but on the side of lawlessness.
J.T. Yes. If I am required to be united with Aaron, it is priesthood normally as in Christ. Then the sons of Aaron come into evidence, and I am in relation to them too, but apparently here union is with Christ as Priest: "they shall unite with thee", (@Numbers 18:4).
H.H. There is a saying, that union is with the exalted Man and association with the Son of God. Would that have a bearing on what you are saying?
J.T. This is not the union of the church with Christ, but of the levites with Him as Priest. It is not Christ representing us in heaven, but the priestly quality in Him as bearing on the levites; that I am united with the priest in my service.
J.J. Would not Paul express it perfectly in @Romans 15:16: "carrying on as a sacrificial service the message of glad tidings of God, in order that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit". He was united with the priest.
J.T. That helps. Throughout all his epistles you will see how he is united with the priest in his service. It was a question really of Christ speaking in him. It rises to that level and the saints were to recognise that.
{325}
P.L. You get this principle in the Lord speaking to the disciples in @Luke 24:46 as to handling the Scriptures and the truth: "Thus it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer". Is that the spirit of the truth? Luke presents things "from the beginning"; what he was "accurately acquainted" with "from the origin", (@Luke 1:2,3). Would the Lord prepare us thus for our place at the door of the tabernacle?
J.T. Exactly. One has felt for years that the volume of ministry is considerable, always thanking God for it; but I think Luke is aiming, not only at volume, but *quality*; and he begins with being "accurately acquainted from the origin with all things". The word 'accurately' would imply that there had been the opposite, and as a matter of fact, the history of the church shews that inaccuracy and even gross error immediately succeeded the ministry of the apostles; there was a rapid drop from the spiritual ministry marked by accuracy, down to inaccuracy and absolute error; so that the writings of the so-called 'fathers' are painful to read. Well, Luke, both in his gospel and in the Acts would bring out this very feature. He brings in Apollos, for instance, a man "mighty in the scriptures" (@Acts 18:24), which would mean, not only that he could preach from a text in the Old Testament, but could convey the spiritual import of it. He was "accurately acquainted" as far as he went; but "knowing only the baptism of John" was not instructed in the truth as a whole; and Aquila and Priscilla "took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly". That is where Luke would help us; he would, so to speak, unite the levite to the priest, he would bring us so near to Christ, that He Himself is speaking through us. One of the greatest things a minister should desire in his service is, that his voice should be the voice of Christ, and his words the words of Christ.
H.H. Do you think in that incident you get the discernment of priests in Aquila and Priscilla, and then an
{326}
illustration of union with the priest in the subsequent service of Apollos?
J.T. Just so. Aquila and Priscilla might rightly criticise Apollos and say that he was not equal to Paul, but they "took him to them", that is, they acted as priests. Their service corresponds with Numbers. The took "him to them, and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly". I am sure he would never forget the service thus rendered to him by a man and his wife.
H.H. We must always be exercised in regard of adjustment on these lines. "We know in part, and we prophesy in part", but the proper balance between what is priestly and what is levitical, must ever be maintained amongst us.
J.T. I think what we ought to see in this enquiry, is the relation of the priesthood to levitical service, involving discernment, to the end that we get the most out of this service, so we must prove all things and hold fast that which is good. There may be much that is extraneous. The only thing worth treasuring, is that which is good. It is the idea of having a treasure.
J.J. What is the meaning of bearing the "iniquity of the sanctuary" and bearing the "iniquity of your priesthood"?
J.T. Of course, we have to make some allowance for the types, but it means the serious obligation resting on the priest. How am I regarding the iniquity of the church, of what has come in since Paul's time? I cannot ignore that; it is an important thing to see the extent of evil there is abroad in the profession. A true priest will not fail to do this. So that he should take in the sin of the public body in its completeness in Babylon: the angel says to John, "Come here, I will shew thee the sentence of the great harlot", (@Revelation 17:1). That would mean that he gets a divinely given view of the evil in all its enormity; and then later it is said that heaven is to rejoice, and the saints and apostles and prophets, "for God has judged your judgment upon her", (chapter 18:20). It is *our* judgment; it is an
{327}
immense thing to be with God as to the evil. Although morally clear of it as separated from the evil, yet we accept a certain responsibility as to it as before God.
J.J. Would it have any bearing on the local company as well as universally?
J.T. Certainly. We should take account of the iniquity existing locally and generally.
T.R. And in association with Christ; it is "thou and thy sons with thee".
J.T. Just so; it is the saints related to Christ. If you take up the epistles of Paul, Peter, Jude and John, you will see there is no ignoring of the conditions with them. All those epistles are Christ speaking; it is the Priest taking account of the evil. The Lord is not quiescent in regard of it. When you come to Revelation, John hears a voice as of a trumpet behind him; that would call him back to take account of the evil. The trumpet means that attention is called to something urgent, first to the state of the seven churches. So the Lord's general appearance speaks of what He thinks about these things. That is, the true Aaron is taking account of them, but, am I with Him in this? The book of Revelation brings me into accord with Christ in His judgment of the seven churches and all else in this world.
T.R. We are not so familiar with that side of priesthood as we are with the privilege side.
J.T. I do not think we are, and the Lord helps us in taking up our privilege, but if I sit down in the light of the assembly, properly speaking, I must be in the light of the book of Revelation. That governs the position *now*, so that I have a judgment of all that is around me.
M.W.B. Would Ezekiel help us there in the way he is directed to note the evil which compelled God's retirement?
J.T. I think that is important. Perhaps you will say more about it.
M.W.B. I was only thinking of how he was taken from
{328}
one place to another, and how he has to lie on his side and bear the iniquity. Is that what is in your mind?
J.T. Exactly. I doubt very much whether we have taken that side of the truth much into account. First, I would take account of the evil in the locality, but the more I am with God, the more I take account of the evil in the whole of christendom.
Rem. That needs sustained consciousness with regard to what is within.
J.T. I am sure it does. Leviticus -- our place inside -- underlies Numbers. But then, to go further into Numbers, chapter 18 shows that the levites are to be united with the priest, with Christ; so that, as we were saying, He speaks through them and they share His judgment about things here. That is what it would mean; we are so near to the Lord and so sensitive, that our judgment is His, and He ratifies it; so that our judgment is the basis of the wrath of God being poured out upon Babylon, a very remarkable thing. So, passing over chapter 19, the "red heifer", a subject that bears on what we are saying, chapter 20 brings out the official failure in the most reputable ministers, and becomes a warning to those who are in an official position. Moses and Aaron both fail in regard of the rock. Moses is directed to take the rod, without saying which rod, as if God was saying, You know there is none other now; you can only meet this opposition by priestly grace. Moses took the rod he was directed to take, and everybody would have thought he was in the mind of God, but at heart he was going to do something else; he had another rod. That is, what we are doing ostensibly may not be really what we are going to do at heart, and Moses used his own rod -- the rod of authority -- instead of Aaron's, the rod of grace.
S.J.B.C. Moses¬ rod would take away the murmurers, but Aaron's rod took away the murmurings.
J.T. The murmurers drink, and not only they but also their cattle.
{329}
C.H.P. Do you think @Acts 13 would bear on the relationship between what is priestly and levitical? It is said, "they ministered to the Lord, and fasted", and then Barnabas and Paul were sent out to serve.
J.T. That is good. The priestly element was there, the persons mentioned ministering to the Lord, and they laid their hands on the levites.
{330}
PRIESTHOOD AS IN NUMBERS (2)
@Numbers 25:6 - 15; @Numbers 31:1 - 6, 21 - 24
J.T. We are occupied with priesthood as in the book of Numbers, especially in its relation to levitical service. We have noted that the levites were given to Aaron and his sons for the service of the tabernacle, and that in the great rebellion of Korah and his company, priesthood was brought into evidence by life in Aaron's rod; it was not resurrection as a matter of doctrine, but the actual fruit of life; then in chapter 18 it is said that the levites were to be *united* with Aaron. We have also seen the bearing of Aaron's rod as typically governing the dispensation in relation to the Spirit. The rock was to be spoken to, the rod being in the hand of Moses, and we noted that the official element -- typically represented in Moses and Aaron -- would deny and falsify the dispensation in using the rod of authority, when it should have been the rod of grace. Moses should have spoken to the rock instead of smiting it; but notwithstanding the water flowed. So that we have God acting in the presence of the rod of priesthood maintaining the dispensation in its full character. The water flowed, and the people drank, and their cattle. That was the point we reached; and I think it may be remarked that priesthood is seen first in a general way, in its normal relations in the early chapters, and then, as meeting the rebellion; the latter, typical of the way God has met the great rebellion in christendom, the levitical rebellion, which is seen in the clerical system as having assumed priesthood. That is met in life, and finally, in the continuance of priesthood, as I hope we may see now.
One would stress that side, the *continuance* of any feature of the testimony. Here it is the continuance of priesthood in Phinehas; he is not acting officially as
{331}
priest, but he continues in a remarkable way the priestly element, in dealing with a great effort of the enemy. The work of God is seen in its continuance; it is seen thus in any feature of it. I thought we might look at that phase at this time. The continuance of the priestly element in meeting an attack here implies that it goes through, its bearing is toward the end; it is an "everlasting" priesthood.
E.J.McB. Do you think it is a special difficulty arising that brings this kind of priesthood to light?
J.T. That is what I thought. We must see the character of the circumstances in which it appeared; that is, the dual effort through Balaam, first, as representing a great religious system having a prophetic character, and owning God, yet opposed to His people in the most deadly way, and the effort against them carried on secretly. But failing on that side, there was a great sensual effort. It is a dual attack; Satan attacking on the side which he considers the most likely to succeed, and which would be the most overwhelming, but failing in that, he attacks through our natural propensities.
P.L. Have you the two thoughts in @Philippians 3:18,19? "Enemies of the cross of Christ", would that be the spiritual attack? And then, "whose god is the belly", would that be more the sensual side?
J.T. I think that is right. We were speaking of the evil as seen in its entirety in the way it has developed and headed up in what is known as christendom; it is important to bear this in mind as drawing near to the end, because the attacks will become more severe. As God works, the enemy will work accordingly; and it is well to bear in mind the period in the wilderness in which Balaam appears. God had wrought wonderfully in bringing the people into the recognition of the Spirit, and the intelligence that accompanies it, so that the enemy's effort through Balaam is spiritual. It refers to the great
{332}
spiritual system headed up in Rome, claiming great prestige for relations with God and prophecy, speaking the mind of God, and yet marked by the most deadly opposition that exists, to what is of God. Most of us perhaps are oblivious to it or do not think much of it, but we suffer from it every moment.
E.J.McB. Have you any thought why Moses was to be gathered to his people after this? (chapter 31:1 - 2).
J.T. I think the overthrow of Midian, as seen here, marks the end of Moses¬ ministry, which is a question of authority. Henceforth the Spirit controls. So that we are dealing now in this last phase, with a great spiritual opposition, and one which is secret. It takes the form of secret counsel -- and that may of course appear amongst us; it is a great secret counsel attempting to circumvent this work of God, that which God has brought about. Balaam is made to say "What hath God wrought!" and we want to be sure that the work of God is not circumvented. It is a secret working here, and I believe it may be thus even amongst ourselves. Any of us moving in a partisan way is on this line. Satan's object is to establish a certain spiritual atmosphere in certain relations, through which he can interfere with the work of God. That is the position at this juncture, and it is the continuance of the priesthood that I think we should notice in connection with the act of Phinehas. He does it of himself; it is not a question of his being sent in chapter 25, as in chapter 31; it is priesthood acting of itself, to meet the emergency.
H.H. It says in connection with Pergamos, referring to Balaam, that he "taught Balak to cast a snare before the sons of Israel, to eat of idol sacrifices and commit fornication", (@Revelation 2:14). There are the two things you have been speaking of, the one against God setting up idolatry, and the other what is more connected with the lusts of the flesh.
C.H.W. How would you say the jealousy of God is
{333}
learned? It says that "he was jealous with my jealousy".
J.T. God is resentful of anything that turns away the affections of His people from Him. As was remarked, the strategy was two-fold. There was the combination in secret counsel and all that was connected with a great profession of piety in Balaam; and then that attack failing, recourse is made to the second through the lusts of the flesh, which was successful. But it is *this* that brings out the continuance of active priesthood. I think it is specially an appeal to young brothers, because it is the principle of continuance -- Aaron, Eleazar, Phinehas, the latter obtaining an "everlasting priesthood", that is, it goes through to the end; it is final.
E.J.McB. Now is the thought that God meets the first attack Himself?
J.T. That is what I thought. It is secret. We may not know what is going on, but God does, and He turns the attack into blessing; so that Balaam is forced to speak *His* mind -- a remarkable thing. It shews how much we can count on God in the conflict, for He can turn to blessing the most wicked attack, and even make the vessels of it convey His mind. It is a remarkable victory for God, that He compels the instruments of the enemy to speak His mind, and in the most beautiful language. You can hardly get anything finer than the prophecies of Balaam.
Ques. Would you link that with the intercession of Christ?
J.T. Yes. "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us". He is at the right hand of God; He wields all the power of God, but He also intercedes for us. This passage in @Romans 8:33,34 refers to such an attack as Balaam's.
{334}
Rem. I was thinking of the way you have spoken of the arrangement of the tribes on the breastplate, corresponding with what Balaam sees.
J.T. Balaam is made to see them dwelling in their tents, according to their tribes.
J.O.S. Would Caiaphas be speaking the mind of God in the same way?
J.T. That is the same idea. It is a question of our seeing what God can do at the end, because, as far as I see in going about among brethren, the prayer meetings are very local. Local prayers never touch this matter of Balaam. It is a universal attack, and if we are with God, we shall be universal in our prayers, as conversant with the tactics of the enemy, and God will act accordingly. The nearer we get to the Lord, the more universal we shall be.
Rem. The Lord could say, "I knew that thou hearest me always", (@John 11:42).
J.T. Quite so. It is very comforting to hear the Lord say, "I have heard thy prayer", (@1 Kings 9:3). With Solomon it was a very extensive prayer; and not only extensive as to territory, but as to time.
H.H. The Lord's prayer in @John 17 was very universal.
J.T. That chapter has to be taken account of in the light of the breastplate.
J.J. Where would the shoulder pieces come in?
J.T. The shoulder pieces have to do with the saints viewed in the family, according to their *birth*. It is a subdivision, but just two. It is not quite so precious a thought as the four sets of three each in the breastplate; the latter refers to the counsels of God.
H.H. In the breastplate the names were set in twelve precious stones. In it we have an apprehension of what the saints are down here under the eye of the Lord.
J.T. That is right, and there is the corresponding position outside round about the tabernacle. The order is fixed; Judah is in his place, and Reuben is in his place,
{335}
and Ephraim at the rear with his two tribes, and Dan at the north with his two tribes; and then the three sets of Levites, south, west, and north, in the encampment. So the order agreed with what was inside, and the intercession would secure that that order should be maintained.
H.H. All that is on the heart of Christ, as well as what is on the onyx stones on the shoulder pieces.
J.T. And He never went in without them, which is one of the most comforting things you can think of.
Ques. It was said of Cornelius, "Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God", (@Acts 10:4). Do we not owe a great deal in that sense to Cornelius, as the movements then were westward?
J.T. You mean that he represented the gentiles. Then the prayer of the man of Macedonia is another example. He would have been a Greek, and no Greek ordinarily would ask Paul's help; he would despise Paul, as was the case at Athens. So the Macedonian man is potentially the man of the west that God had in His mind, and that man wants help. Wanting help from Paul is a principle, we may say.
M.W.B. Would you link the four groups of three with the "administration of the mystery" (@Ephesians 3:9), the working out of things according to eternal purpose?
J.T. It is not only His will as in @Romans 12:2 -- "the good and acceptable and perfect will of God" -- but the change from Reuben to Judah in the lead would mean sovereignty. Therefore, what is working out down here is according to the "counsel of his own will", (@Ephesians 1:11).
M.W.B. That makes the working out very important.
J.T. And that each should hold his position. How serious it is for one to change his position if it interferes with the working out of the ordering of God!
M.W.B. So the Macedonian man would have his place in the development of the working out of things down here in relation to the apostle of the gentiles?
{336}
J.T. That is good; I think the Macedonian man is seen in the epistle to the Philippians, that is the kind of man that is worked out from the descending mind of Christ. Such a man seeks help.
W.W. In what way can a man so move that he interferes with the thoughts of God?
J.T. It is a question of the will of God as seen in the ordering of the tribes in relation to the tabernacle of witness as seen in Numbers. Of course, there is such a thing as a brother moving when the Lord indicates it. The Lord left Nazareth, we are told, and went and dwelt in Capernaum. But, if I move, what is my motive? I think of the breastplate inside there and my name on it. Does my movement reflect what is in the breastplate?
H.H. A Philippian is dressed in the garments of that epistle, and the Spirit corresponds with that. As conversant with the heavenly position I have to represent it down here.
J.T. I think Philippians is the heavenly man down here. It is the complement of Ephesians, and that would follow the request of the Macedonian man.
Now to come back to our chapter, it is particularly for the young men -- the *continuance* of the priesthood. It is continued in the presence of great opposition, not by command or direction, but of itself; it acts of itself. Phinehas moved of himself to meet the emergency. It was a dreadful thing to see that man in the presence of Moses and the elders, after the plague had set in, acting in such a flagrant way, and it stirred to the depths the feelings of the true priest.
Rem. He is mentioned in the last verse of Joshua: "And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in the hill of Phinehas his son, which had been given him in mount Ephraim".
J.T. "Phinehas his son"; that is good. And then he is found again in @Judges 20, but not immediately, as Israel moves to avenge and deal with the sin that had been
{337}
committed, but he appears as soon as Israel is in a suitable state before God, as they weep and offer sacrifices. So that he is maintaining the priesthood here of himself, and in Joshua the portion of the priest is with him, like the "portion of the lawgiver", as with Gad in @Deuteronomy 33, and in Judges, he is a continual priest, you might say. That is the way Phinehas stands, shewing the continuance of the element of priesthood.
P.L. It says in @Psalm 106:31 "That was reckoned unto him for righteousness, from generation to generation, for evermore".
J.T. That is a fine stimulus for the priestly activities among the young men. He had the opportunity of seeing Aaron, and Eleazar his father, and now he is acting on his own initiative.
J.O.S. Is Paul's charge to Timothy on this line -- the continuance of the service in the young men?
J.T. I think it is; the things that were committed to Timothy in the presence of many witnesses were to be committed to faithful men who would teach others also. It is a question of continuance.
J.J. So in the first epistle he says, "God who preserves all things in life", (@1 Timothy 6:13). I suppose Phinehas is the answer to the rod that budded.
J.T. Yes. The covenant with Levi was of life and peace.
J.J. What would be the point in Midian being the opposition, because he came from Abraham by Keturah?
J.T. It is a people of equal status; it is a social matter. If the enemy cannot attack on the spiritual line, he will attack on the social line, by bringing in the element of the world and social distinctions among the people of God. The man and the woman were persons of equal rank, and what you find in connection with the kings of Midian is much mention of title and distinctions. It is the social element, a very subtle element amongst us, especially as young people grow up and begin to make affinities; the social comes into evidence and is allowed
{338}
at times beyond what is seemly. It is the priestly element in the young men that I believe the Lord would specially use against this.
M.W.B. Do you think if one has rebuked the element that would curse, he may fall under the danger of worldliness?
J.T. I think that is just it. There is a good deal of light and the position is clear enough. We are drawing near to the end; but then it is remarkable how subtle is this snare of social amenities and distinctions. The example set here is that the priest comes forward of himself to meet the evil. He cannot endure it; it is abominable to him; it is affecting Moses and the elders, indeed the whole position of the testimony. That is what comes to light.
M.W.B. Why is not the gracious rod and the priestly manner seen in an action of this kind.
J.T. It requires violence. What is meant is that you have to do violence to your feelings and the feelings of others. Perhaps you are entertained in the households of the brethren and you do not like to speak about them; it is therefore a question of faithfulness and courage.
Ques. Paul withstood Peter to the face; is that a similar kind of thing?
J.T. Quite so; there is the courage that faces the evil. In itself it is a peculiar service, as was remarked; there is no rod of priesthood in sight; it is a javelin, a thing that you can smite with even at a distance. There is nothing official in this action. The instrument used was not officially attached to the priesthood. It would mean that I turn aside and sacrifice any dignity I may have in my service, to meet an emergency. You would meet it at all costs, even if you have to be a common soldier, instead of a priest.
W.W. Would it be using the word in the way of conviction?
J.T. The only weapon is the word of God, and that must act on yourself as well as on the other person. It is
{339}
well to notice that it is an unusual service of priesthood, but a most effective one; and then, what we may see in chapter 31 is that the thing is so important and the service so acceptable, and so effective, that Moses sends the military -- a thousand from each tribe -- with Phinehas to complete the matter. It is promotion. The service begun by Phinehas becomes universal, and so there is a thousand from each tribe and he with them. All the saints, as it were, are brought into the war against Midian. Not one element that caused the trouble is allowed to survive, and yet there are things that must *not* be destroyed. With certain brethren, although there is worldliness amongst them, there is also gold and precious garments, and those things must be preserved.
Ques. Is that the preservation of Benjamin in the end of Judges? There is nothing effective until Phinehas is brought in.
J.T. Yes; the *tribe* is preserved.
J.J. Was that what Paul was trying to preserve in Corinth?
J.T. Quite so. The result is that you get all this material brought through the fire or through the water. That is to say, a brother's house is defiled by these Midianitish, worldly things, and judgment being executed on this condition, all the saints are brought into conflict with this character of evil. Well, what a time we are going to have! A thousand from each tribe -- the whole church, so to speak, is brought into this warfare, and then all that is of God is saved -- brought through the death of Christ.
E.J.McB. Do you mean that if one brother was to rise up in faithfulness in his own locality and act for God in relation to some evil, the principle would spread throughout the people of God?
J.T. Exactly, Phinehas is sent with the men of war. I think that God promotes one if he is faithful. Attention is called to some evil by an action taken against it, and
{340}
interest becomes widespread; the saints begin to think about it, and a general judgment of it ensues. And God gives a lead to him who primarily acted. Phinehas is sent with the army with the holy instruments of God.
S.J.B.C. And not a man is found lacking (verse 49). Would you connect that with the verse in @Romans 8:37, "more than conquerors"?
J.T. Just so; and you see the wonderful spoil they took in this war, and how it was apportioned. Everyone gets something; it is a remarkable victory.
S.J.B.C. It is a remarkable thing that not one of the Israelitish warriors is slain.
J.T. After the success of Phinehas, the others do not do so well; (see @Numbers 31:13 - 20). The military men failed, but there is nothing said about Phinehas failing. He had the holy instruments of God, which meant that he would keep on sounding out the testimony and others did the military service; but the military leaders failed in some particulars. Moses and Eleazar come out to meet them and there is reproof. Then we have Eleazar acting by himself, meaning that through the action of Phinehas we come back to the official priesthood which is in Christ. That becomes recognised in this way, Eleazar enjoins an ordinance which was commanded to Moses; it has reference to materials.
F.S.M. Would you tell us how men of such type as Phinehas are developed? I was wondering whether it was a question of being the son of one who was the "prince of princes of the Levites" (@Numbers 3:32) and the grandson of Aaron, so that he would come under the influence and power of both those men, and be developed in that atmosphere.
J.T. I think that is right; but that brings up another question -- that Eleazar is called the "prince of princes of the Levites" whilst Aaron lived; which would refer not to the high priest, but to what is spiritually right, the great body of spirituality amongst the saints; all that enters into such a man as Phinehas. That is to say, he is
{341}
the product of what he sees of the great spiritual discernment and power among the brethren.
F.S.M. Yes. I think it would encourage us to keep in the company of those who are spiritual.
J.T. That is very good, because it is what Eleazar represents whilst Aaron lived.
F.S.M. Many of us have been encouraged to keep the company of those who were spiritual as being an atmosphere that would be safeguarding.
J.T. To return to Eleazar, I think verse 21 is to be noted: "And Eleazar the priest said to the men of war that had gone to the battle, This is the statute of the law which Jehovah hath commanded Moses. Only the gold, and the silver, the copper, the iron, the tin, and the lead, everything that passeth through the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean; only it shall be purified with the water of separation; and everything that cannot pass through the fire ye shall make go through the water". That is the law; that is the thing that we come back to. It is not something from Phinehas nor from Eleazar; it is the law of Moses; it is a *statute*. In the results of the victory we come back to first principles, and see how the spoils of war may be used. We do not make something new with them; we set them up in relation to what existed.
J.O.S. How does that work out?
J.T. As I was saying, in many of our houses or in a group of brethren's families, you may get this Midianitish evil; but then the truth of God may be there also, and you cannot afford to lose one bit of it, but it has become defiled. They may have the most precious doctrines, may keep to the meetings, and hold divine principles, but they are defiled. I think that is what is meant; but where the end is reached, all that is of God must be preserved and brought through the death of Christ, and set up again on that principle. I think this incident shews that nothing is lost.
{342}
F.S. Why is the aspect of the water of separation brought in?
J.T. That refers to chapter 19 to bring in the importance of the red heifer and the water of purification, because it entered into the matter; there having been affiliation with the world.
Ques. What is the difference between the effect of the fire and the water?
J.T. They both refer to the same thought, only some things have to go through the fire, that is, the death of Christ in a more drastic way.
M.W.B. Then is it possible to hold divine truth in such a way that the truth itself becomes practically defiled through affiliation.
J.T. That is what is evident here. In the gross sense, we have men holding the truth in unrighteousness, but it is "the truth" still.
M.W.B. Yes. I think it is intensely exercising. The question with us, generally speaking, is not bad doctrine but weakness in the application, and maintenance of the truth.
J.T. That those things were there and yet this flagrant sin is what is so sorrowful. It is only true priestly energy that detects evil and deals with it, and then all is brought back to a normal setting. That is, it is not now Phinehas, because he is not yet the high priest, but serves to shew the continuance of the energy. Eleazar was still high priest, so you come back to the normal setting of christianity, and everything is set up again in relation to first principles, what Moses ordained.
P.L. Would you get all those three things in relation to the Lord's dealings with Peter? He had prayed for him -- would that be like the intercession of the priest; then He looked upon him -- would that answer to the holy rebuke of jealous love in Phinehas; and then the appeal to Peter, "lovest thou me?" "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I am attached to
{343}
thee" (@John 21:15 - 17) -- is that the gold and silver secured out of the recovery?
J.T. Yes. Really, Peter according to the mind of the Lord, is now set up again and the Lord has confidence in him and commits His sheep and lambs to him; it is very beautiful.
Ques. In @Ephesians 5:26 you have not the fire, but "washing of water by the word". Why is that?
J.T. I think it is just as we were saying the application of the death of Christ in a less drastic way.
{344}
Pages 344 - 453 "The Servant, His Support and Continuance" Readings and Addresses, Belfast 1932. (Volume 111).
SERVICE IN THE ASSEMBLY
@Exodus 34:1 - 8; @John 12:1 - 8
J.T. I was thinking of service in the assembly as seen in Ephesians, the vessel of divine glory. That begins now; as the apostle says, "to [God] be glory in the assembly" (chapter 3:21). Ephesians contemplates that it is continually there. I thought that the Lord would help us to see, in these passages, a little of how service on our side flows out of the manifestation of God and of His glory to us.
The actual service in the assembly, as far as one has observed in the gatherings, is somewhat irregular, and wanting in the intelligence proper to it. The section from which we read in Exodus is between the showing of the pattern of the tabernacle, etc., to Moses and the actual structure itself. It comes in between these parts including also the account of the great breakdown in Israel. The breakdown in chapter 32 leads to the character of Christ -- typically, and in some degree substantially -- coming out more fully in Moses. He is directed here to hew for *himself*; "Hew for thyself two tables of stone like the first". It is left to him. So that he is the mediator on our side, and in a more pronounced way than on the first occasion of his ascent to the mount. We might begin with that, so as to have a little thought of the order of man that goes up.
W.H. Do you mean he would set forth Christ in that way?
J.T. Yes; but I think he also sets forth the kind of man in which we are before God, having acquired through the great sorrow that had occurred, an increased likeness to Christ. From the outset there were certain features, but
{345}
they were not so accentuated as here, for, in the previous chapter it is said, "Jehovah spoke with Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend". That precedes, and what follows in chapter 33 brings out the desire of Moses to see the glory. All this shows the kind of man that was there.
J.H. Does this kind of man become subjective in the saints, so that we may be suitable to the assembly?
J.T. Yes; it makes way for that. Moses is to be hid in the rock, according to chapter 33, as Jehovah's glory passes by; which alludes typically to the position "in Christ". It is the desire to see the glory that indicates what Moses represents as typifying the believer, but what comes out generally in chapters 32 and 33 makes Moses more fully than before a type of Christ as mediator.
F.R.B. Would you say what was in your mind in drawing attention to "for *thyself*"?
J.T. That it was wholly on his side. Whilst the covenant is from God's side, the material for the 'writing' is on ours. The man in whom God had confidence; and the tables would be as *his* production, and God would take them and write on them. That is, God had confidence that the two tables would be equal to the two He had already written. So, it says (verse 28), "he wrote on the tables the words of the covenant, the ten words".
F.R.B. Would that bring out the glory of the mediator?
J.T. Well, I think it brings the mediator into greater evidence as to what he was. The Mediator is "the *man* Christ Jesus" (@1 Timothy 2:5), not simply Christ Jesus; we have to keep that in view. So that in hewing out for himself it is the man that is in evidence.
P.P. Do friendship and confidence go together?
J.T. Friendship precedes confidence. Moses acquired a great place with God. He acquired great moral power with the people, but then that is the outcome of the place with God which he acquired through the breakdown.
{346}
So that God spoke to him as one would speak to his friend. "Hew for thyself" would indicate what the saints are abstractly as in the Lord's hands -- what we are as His production.
J.H. It would cost Moses exercise: "*Hew* for thyself". He would go through pressure to prepare the stones.
J.T. As this thought enters into the experience of the saints it involves intelligence. We would know what was required -- dimensions, etc.
W.C.G. Moses was distinguished from all others here. No other man was to be seen on the mount with him.
J.T. It is different from the first ascent, because evidently he had Joshua with him then. Now it is to be this man alone, so that he stands out. We have the idea of "the man" associated with Moses; "the man Moses".
J.H. As understanding this, we would be on his side?
J.T. Yes. Of course, the new covenant comes in here in type -- the love of God being in our hearts, there is power through which we come in with Christ. @John 12 would show how thoroughly those at Bethany were in accord with Christ. They made *Him* a supper. It was a feast marked by quiet dignity. There is not a word said by anybody, except when Judas breaks the silence, and the Lord corrects that; it is a matter for correction. It is a scene of great spiritual power. So that we do not need to keep speaking; on the contrary, it is the ability to keep silence that often indicates spiritual power. Judas complains; and the Lord rebukes him to *justify* the *worshipper*, Mary. This is an important point.
R.McB. The writing goes on in silence?
J.T. Well, what marks the assembly proper is not necessarily what is spoken. I do not say there is not speaking, because there is, but underlying the speaking there is ability for silence.
F.I. Making the supper for Him -- are you viewing that as corresponding with "Hew for thyself two tables of stone"?
{347}
J.T. Yes, in the sense of confidence. The Lord did not give any directions, made no comments, no criticisms. There is no speaking at all.
J.H. When you speak of service in the assembly, do you mean when the people of God are come together "in assembly"?
J.T. Yes. When we come together in assembly our intelligence and spirituality are tested.
Ques. Is that service Godward?
J.T. I am thinking of that entirely. But I thought of dwelling for a little on what transpires here, for whilst God has confidence in Moses in the hewing of the stones, He gives him directions; for the assembly must be under directions.
W.W. It says, Jehovah commanded him to go up the mountain.
J.T. Yes. He says also to him, "be ready for the morning". If we had this before us on the first day of the week, we would have better meetings. "Be ready for the morning", it says in verse 2, "and go up in the morning to mount Sinai, and stand there before me on the top of the mountain". It is a very great occasion. Moses needed this instruction.
W.W. He is found at the top of the mountain.
J.T. He goes to the highest point.
H.C.L. Are you setting Moses forth as the pattern for us to come to?
J.T. Christ takes us -- prefigured in the stones -- up, and as there we know how to act in the presence of the glory. @John 12 corresponds. Those at Bethany were equal to the presence of the Lord.
E.McK. Would that be indicative of the mount of Olives in the sense of praise and worship?
J.T. Quite. The mount of Olives, I think, alludes to what is spiritual. But we do well to take note of these instructions. Whilst confidence underlies assembly service, we also come under divine directions. It is said
{348}
that the law perfected nothing. There was nothing perfected in the Old Testament days; but a feature of christianity is perfection, and what underlies perfection is the relation and sense of sonship. "For it became him ... in bringing many *sons* to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings", (@Hebrews 2:10). We have the idea of perfection there.
W.C.G. Do you think the verse in @1 John 2:5 is on that line: "whoever *keeps his word*, in him verily the love of God is perfected. Hereby we know that we are in him"? Are not these persons brought to the top?
J.T. Very good. There can be no elevation according to God without that.
P.P. Referring to the Supper, do you think when the brethren come together we should be ready?
J.T. Think of the magnitude of the assembly! The Supper is provisional, but that into which we are introduced by the Supper is eternal. "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", (@Ephesians 3:21).
The two tables necessarily enter into the Corinthian epistles; the question of the will of God -- the kind of man in which that is set out -- so that the body of Christ is involved. The spirit of the two tables would be @1 Corinthians 11.
J.H.C. It says, "Jehovah came down ... and stood beside him there". Is this the answer?
J.T. Yes. We are to have the full height of the divine thought before us; the top of the mount. You go up as in accord with the two tables. The two tables are the prominent thing first of all; the idea is of that in which the will of God is maintained here; material capable of taking divine impressions.
J.H. It is a poor thing to go up apart from this?
J.T. Yes. The mediator takes us up.
F.I. At the top of the mount you "apprehend with all the saints the breadth and length and depth and height", (@Ephesians 3:18).
{349}
J.T. Yes. You get the idea of height here, and yet it is not *all* the way up, because Jehovah comes *down* to us. I mean to say, we never come into the realm of Deity; we are not equal to that. It is said of Jesus that He has "ascended up above all the heavens", (@Ephesians 4:10). That is beyond us. It is beyond the created sphere. The top of the mount, I think, is symbolical of the height of the created sphere, and Jehovah comes down there; He comes into that. We do not go out of the created sphere, but God, being outside of it, comes into it.
Rem. The first two tables were shattered beneath the mountain.
J.T. Yes; typically that sets out the whole position under the first covenant.
H.B-t. Why *two* tables? Why would one not do?
J.T. I think it is the idea of *testimony*; one could be made as large as two, but God is pleased to write on one and then on another. In many instances throughout Scripture, "two" signifies *adequate* testimony; as the Lord says, "the testimony of two", (@John 8:17).
W.C.G. Would the "fleshy tables of the heart" in @2 Corinthians 3:3 correspond?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. It is like the mediator bringing in what God could write on; so that it is the saints, as was remarked.
H.B-n. Why is Moses told to stand *there*? "Stand there before me on the top of the mountain".
J.T. Well, it is the appointed place in which man is to stand before God.
W.H. It requires spiritual energy to go up -- spiritual desire. Is that what you refer to?
J.T. Quite so. There is every evidence that that was in Moses. He wanted to see the glory. He would not lose any opportunity for this. It will be noted that the energy here is in the mediator; the saints are seen only abstractly in the tables, as was remarked.
F.W.W. Do you suggest that what is seen in Moses is
{350}
the attitude of heart we should come together in on Lord's day morning?
J.T. Yes. "Be ready for the morning". Keep in mind that it is not simply the breaking of bread: that is introductory, as a memorial. What we have in mind is more eternal. Of course the *love* that is presented in the Supper is eternal too, but the thing itself is necessarily for time. The assembly is for eternity.
R.McB. You would be prepared to be moved by the Supper, would you not?
J.T. There is that in it that tends to set us free, so that we should move with the Head, but we should always keep before us the assembly viewed as in Canaan. The first day of the week is the day of the assembly.
H.B-t. Would "the morning" here suggest the beginning of a new day?
J.T. It would. It involves, also, that there is freshness and vigour. You get it several times in Exodus, and usually there is special instruction attached to it.
P.H. So that it says, "Moses rose up early".
J.T. Verse 3 says, "let no man go up with thee, neither shall any man be seen on all the mountain; neither shall sheep and oxen feed in front of that mountain. And he hewed two tables of stone like the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning and went up to Mount Sinai, as Jehovah had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone". That is how he stands there. We have to keep our eye on the two tables of stone, they suggest, as we have said, the kind of man in which the will of God was down here, and therefore qualified to go up: but there is to be no man or beast near; that is to say, the scene is to be apart altogether from *the natural*.
J.H. When you spoke of the created sphere, you meant what is spiritual; the spiritual order of things?
J.T. Yes. The heavens and the earth are the created sphere; that in which God intends to set out His thoughts,
{351}
and is setting them out. But there is what is beyond that. Jesus went beyond all heavens; involving what is evidently uncreated.
W.S.S. The prayer in Ephesians, suggests that the power to go up was there; the power that was in Christ when He raised Him up. Is it the thought that the power is available, and we are to use it?
J.T. That is right. The first chapter is the exceeding greatness of God's power towards us, the power in which He wrought in Christ; but in chapter 3 it is the Father's Spirit working in us, strengthening us in the inner man. It is what operates in the inner man, that enables us to go up.
J.P.G. Does this require our being in condition to ascend God's holy hill?
J.T. Of course it is the mediator here, the saints are seen abstractly -- in the tables; but practically those who ascend must have "clean hands". The moral requirements are seen in @Psalm 15 and @Psalm 24.
F.W.W. In the gospels the disciples were taken up; here Moses goes up with the tables.
J.T. There is correspondence. Here there is nothing of what is natural -- no man and no cattle were to be on the mountain. Oftentimes we bring the man and the cattle with us; that is to say, the natural, or the things that attach to the natural. Of course Moses was a man, but when men and cattle are connected in this way, natural relations are in view.
J.B. "They saw no man ... save Jesus only with themselves", (@Mark 9:8).
P.P. Natural personality is no good in the assembly.
J.T. No good at all. The first book of Corinthians puts the natural man out. The natural had got in there and clogged the service of God.
E.G. Would the sheep and the cattle be the support of that man?
J.T. Yes, the things in which he lives. Something like "household stuff". (Compare @Nehemiah 13:4 - 9.)
{352}
F.W. Do you not think that the man and the sheep and cattle are often brought along with us?
J.T. I do, indeed.
F.I. Moses was to "stand there" before Jehovah. If the sheep and cattle are brought up, you do not stand.
J.T. They would divert your mind -- we are not before God suitably if these natural things fill our minds or have any place there.
Ques. "Henceforth know we no man after the flesh", (@2 Corinthians 5:16). Would that be standing on the top of the mountain?
J.T. That is the idea. You are clear of them. The two and a half tribes spoke of how much cattle they had. That type of believer would be apt to think more of the grass on the side of the mountain, than the glory of God which passed before Moses.
W.W. If the passover had been kept, and all the opportunities for sacrificing taken advantage of, there would have been less cattle, they would have been sacrificed.
J.T. Just so.
E.G. "Seek those things which are above, where Christ is, sitting on the right hand of God", (@Colossians 3:1).
J.T. The sheep and the cattle, and the man that looks after them, are on the earth; the cattle are legitimate belongings in their place, but they cannot be brought on to spiritual ground.
G.F.C. Is the principle expressed in the reference to Lazarus in @John 12:1: "Where Lazarus was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead"?
J.T. That is just it. There is correspondence with Christ at Bethany.
Our chapter says, "Jehovah came down". To get the link with @John 12, we have to get the glory itself. The glory shone -- "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it", (@John 11:4). What shone at Bethany was the glory
{353}
of God, and the glory of the Son of God, because the Father is brought into it. He lifts up His eyes on high to His Father. That is, He was occupied with the high things, and with His Father on high: the glory would shine and radiate thence. "But I knew that thou always hearest me; but on account of the crowd who stand around I have said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me. And having said this, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth", (@John 11:41 - 43). There you get divine Persons occupied in taking a man out of death, and the glory shone. It is the Father and the Son acting. You see the moral elevation in the Lord's look. That corresponds with Jehovah coming down, as it says, "Jehovah came down in the cloud, and stood beside him there, and proclaimed the name of Jehovah". The mediator goes to the top, and Jehovah comes down.
G.F.C. The Lord came down, as it were, to Bethany.
J.T. Yes. The position was that they all had seen the glory -- Lazarus had been raised. Mary and Martha were present too when the Lord "lifted up his eyes on high". Their service would bear character from what they had experienced. We have to follow the Lord's movements, not only what He says, but also what He does, to understand headship. If He lifts up His eyes on high, He means to convey the idea of high things to us. It is the Father He is speaking to.
L.M. What is setting our minds on things above? What are the things above?
J.T. You get a list of things in @Hebrews 12:22 - 24 "mount Zion ... the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; ... myriads of angels, the universal gathering; ... the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven; ... God, judge of all; ... the spirits of just men made perfect; ... Jesus, mediator of a new covenant; and ... the blood of sprinkling". That is an array of glory we have come to, and corresponds pretty much with the "things above". It is not simply "things in heaven", but,
{354}
the things *above*. We have to distinguish between the idea of what is above, and what is in heaven. "Above" has a moral thought in it.
F.I. As Head, does He bring His influence to bear upon that which is already prepared?
J.T. That is right. That is what @John 12 brings out. I think it is well for us to take note of the silence; not that heaven is a place of silence, far otherwise; but silence is an important element in the assembly; to know how to be quiet, not in a listless way, not as a member of a congregation, but to be quiet in spiritual power: that enters into the assembly. Here Jehovah came down, "and stood beside him there, and proclaimed the name of Jehovah. And Jehovah passed by before his face". I think that is very wonderful. It somewhat depicts what is in the assembly; how God comes in -- in conditions according to His mind, and stands beside us *there*.
J.H.C. Moses "bowed his head ... and worshipped".
J.T. I think that synchronises with what we have in @John 12. The glory shone in @John 11, and now the Lord comes in; He "came to Bethany"; it is where Lazarus was, the dead Lazarus whom *He* raised. "There therefore they made him a supper, and Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those at table with him"; and then we have Mary's action of worship. It is a scene of spiritual power, in which Christ is supreme, and in which, we may say, He is worshipped. It is well to bear in mind that Moses sometimes typifies the believer, though generally he is a type of Christ.
F.W.W. While we have the thought of the Supper in connection with this, would you say that the atmosphere of it should be found in all our comings together during the week?
J.T. Well, I think that is right; it will be especially so on Lord's day afternoon. The Lord's day is the most auspicious day for meetings. The atmosphere is better on the Lord's day than any other. That is obvious. @John 12
{355}
is a scripture that we constantly turn to; it never wears out, it is so full. And what strikes me, too, is the spiritual power seen in silence -- silence that makes everything of Christ.
Ques. I suppose you would say that is true worship?
J.T. Well, I think it is the power in which there is intelligent worship, because Mary is the special feature; but that special feature comes in where you have this environment. This is the environment that yields such worship as Mary can give. Had she brought it out in different surroundings it might not have filled the house, because the house really means the saints, and in this sense it may be there is no space to fill.
F.W.W. In that way, do you think, there should be a carry-over of the odour?
J.T. Yes. If the house be filled -- that is, if all the saints are filled -- they are sure to carry it with them; and so it affects meetings that follow.
J.H. So your thought is that we should reach this place and stand there; Jehovah appears, and makes His name known. We reach the assembly.
J.T. Well, there is an analogy.
W.C.G. Do you suggest that the "tables" are the work of God in the soul?
J.T. Yes, in the sense of which we are speaking. It is the kind of man that does the will of God. "Hew for thyself". We are on the side of Christ as the Mediator; He brings us up.
W.C.G. We appropriate the Mediator, and the mind of God is in Him.
J.T. So that the tables are essential to the scene; they are the particular things that he was to bring up. In Deuteronomy he is told to make an ark of wood, but here it is the tables, so that I think it is more the writing material that is in view, rather than Christ Himself as the ark. It is what God can write on. What is illustrated is the elevation of the assembly, and that in its members,
{356}
it comes down here in testimony according to the divine impressions received.
Ques. Does the lack of power which you speak of lead to utterances such as Peter's in @Matthew 17?
J.T. Just so; he did not know what to say. But at Bethany they did not say anything; not that they did not know what to say if speaking were needed. The one who broke the silence was a wicked man, alas! It is a most sorrowful consideration that he was there, but it only brings out that it is the assembly as it is *de facto* down here which is in view.
J.H. You speak about our being down here in testimony. What about @John 20? Is that a further thought?
J.T. Well, we have not got as far as that. What we might finish with today is this great sphere of spiritual power as seen in silence, and yet Christ is supreme in it. "There they made *him* a supper". All is done by them; this does not go as far as chapter 20. In chapter 20 *He* is active as in the midst. In chapter 12 He only speaks to protect the worshipper.
F.W. Is this more how we assemble ourselves together, than what happens when we do?
J.T. It is more the *power* in which we are together in assembly.
F.I. Each member of that company had already been under His hand in adjustment.
J.T. Yes; Lazarus, Martha, and Mary. He came to Bethany, where Lazarus was. And the question of time is important; it is not a set religious time; the assembly is not governed by current religious custom. It is six days before something else which is a fixed Jewish feast -- the passover. It comes before; and it is in connection with a risen man, the dead man that He raised.
P.P. Is worship the result of wonder? (Compare @Judges 13:19,20).
J.T. Well, here it says that "Moses made haste, and bowed his head to the earth and worshipped". He made
{357}
haste to do that in the presence of the glory. The scene at Bethany somewhat corresponds. "Then took Mary a pound of ointment" -- her action was in excess, because it was no part of the supper; it went beyond the supper: the scene in which she was, enabled her to do this. The occasion had arrived, it was before the time she intended to do it; she intended to do it later on -- at His burial.
H.E.F. She was "ready for the morning".
J.T. Quite so. She took advantage of the opportunity. The scene was equal to it. That is what I think is meant: she intended to do it later, but this opportunity offered and she seized it. Ability to take advantage of opportunities marks those who are spiritual.
F.I. Is that why you lay emphasis on the fact that it was not a set time.
J.T. She had a set time in her mind; that is, the day of His burial; but she did it before. I think it shows the latitude there is in the spiritual realm; it is not governed by times or seasons; it is a question of what is spiritually suitable.
F.I. It is really what comes as a result of Christ being Head, with us; the movements that He produces.
J.T. Quite so. Whilst, as we were remarking, we are not told that He said anything, you may depend that much had passed that drew out this from Mary. She might not have another opportunity. As far as we know, she did not. But the Lord regarded it according to what was in her mind.
W.G. It says, "As often as ye eat this bread" (@1 Corinthians 11:26) -- there is no set time.
J.T. Just so; there is no set time governing the assembly viewed spiritually. Luke mentions the day (@Acts 20) and the hour (@Luke 22), but he is referring to the public position. But even here the spiritual touch appears, for the Lord gave no direction as to time, but simply, "this do in remembrance of me". In @Acts 20 it says, "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break
{358}
bread" -- not that they were told to do it, but they acted spiritually. And the first day of the week is the most auspicious time for it. The day enhances the Lord's supper.
E.C.R. Why does it say, "six days"?
J.T. Well, I think to show that where spirituality exists there is readiness. Had it been seven, there would have been the suggestion of completeness of preparation.
D.McG. Would the odour of the ointment be a preservative in regard to the breaking of the silence? What I thought was, that the one who broke the silence had no apprehension of the odour. It was spiritual.
J.T. It is very humbling that Judas is the one to break the silence. It is always the flesh that breaks in on the holy, spiritual silence that marks the assembly, where every whit speaks glory! Every whit says glory! (See @Psalm 29). It takes great power to take part in audible suitability there.
H.B-t. 'Till, blest fruit of deep devotion, Voice by voice, in silence fails'.
W.C.G. How is spirituality brought about?
J.T. The history of Bethany helps. Luke gives us the initial idea of Bethany. It says that the Lord came to a certain village, and a certain woman received Him into her house; and she was cumbered about much serving. She was not gaining spirituality in that. Then you find in spiritual education that there is some person that the Lord would call attention to. He has worked beforehand in that person, so that there is a concrete example of what is in His mind. Hence, it says that Mary sat at His feet and was listening to His word, and she is persecuted by a sister: "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone?" That is, Martha is really persecuting the Lord as well as Mary: "Dost *thou* not care?" That is the beginning of Bethany -- "*this*" is the end of it.
{359}
It shows what God can bring out of a state of things such as Luke describes (chapter 10:38 - 42). So that now we have no persecution by Martha; on the contrary, she is serving happily. It is Judas who is the persecutor.
H.C.L. Why is it the preparation for His *burial* that Mary is occupied with?
J.T. I think it brings out her spiritual intelligence. She knew He was going to die. I think she saw He was on His way, and she anointed His feet: His own feet were carrying Him, and she anointed them.
F.W-n. Was it at His feet she learned the dignity of silence?
J.T. No doubt. Mary had learned silence; she had learned how to listen to His word. Those feet had a great place with her.
Rem. She had *kept* His word.
J.T. Quite so. She represents the intelligence of the occasion. Lazarus represents the *dignity* of the occasion; he "was one of them that sat at the table with him".
R.D.H. There is no box mentioned here; just a pound of ointment.
J.T. I think that would mean it was well kept *by her*; it was kept from contamination *without* a box; an alabaster box is that by which the contents are kept pure. I think it is a tribute to her own person. Spiritually she had the pound in herself; she loved "our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption", (@Ephesians 6:24). "*All* that is within me", says the psalmist, (@Psalm 103:1). Let us look into what is within us, and see if it is clear of corruption.
E.G. "A meek and quiet spirit", (@1 Peter 3:4).
J.T. Exactly. But can you call on all that is within you to worship God? It challenges us as to the purity of our thoughts, whether the water has been effective?
P.P. Is it a question of our ability to appraise and maintain in ourselves for Christ that which is truly valuable -- in contrast to Judas?
J.T. Quite so. Mary knew the value of the ointment
{360}
and used it accordingly. It was not too precious for Him. The Lord also knew the value of it. Judas valued it -- I would not take *his* valuation!
W.S.S. Mary's worship goes on in spite of Judas.
J.T. Yes, showing the great power that was present. In heaven everything will accentuate praise, but now there is opposition, and the service seen here shows that the worship of God may proceed notwithstanding this. God takes account of that fact, of the adverse conditions that we are exposed to, and yet His worship goes on. We are to be able to worship in spite of low conditions; one person may have power to rise above such conditions and lead the saints in worship. That is what Mary does here.
G.M. That would be a sure evidence that you had been "on top of the mountain".
J.T. Yes, it would. Another thing comes out -- Lazarus is a witness without speaking. People believe on Jesus because of him. He is not said to speak. That goes with what we are saying. It is the effect of spiritual power in the person.
{361}
THE SERVANT, HIS SUPPORT AND CONTINUANCE (1)
@Daniel 2:1 - 49
J.T. The brethren will, no doubt, discern that the proposal in taking up the book of Daniel is not to make prophecy our subject, but rather that we might see the moral teaching that stands related to prophecy, which this book specially furnishes; for the servant is prominent throughout the book, and the service is definitely connected with his state -- a very practical suggestion, for it shows that if the Lord is to continue His service the younger ones have to see that the service of God stands related to moral conditions; a condition indeed so pleasing that, as in Daniel, it rises to the divine approval in the words, a "man greatly beloved". The service must be in such a vessel, if it is to be pleasing to heaven.
With regard to the setting of the book, we might also see another feature: that God acts governmentally: the people of God, however devoted, come under His government. Those used here are described as captives: "I have found a man of the sons of the captivity of Judah", Arioch says; and then it is said at the outset that Nebuchadnezzar came to Jerusalem and besieged it, "And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, and a part of the vessels of the house of God; and he carried them into the land of Shinar, to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure-house of his god" (chapter 1:2). Jehovah allowed this. We may perhaps begin with that thought that the service viewed in this book is under these circumstances, having in view the *vessels* of the house of God.
W.W. Do you link up Daniel with Moses, as you referred to him last evening?
J.T. I was not specially thinking of that. I was thinking
{362}
of the service that the Lord would continue, that those who are engaged in it are to observe the present governmental position, so that we might have a true apprehension of where we are, and that some of the vessels of the house of God are actually in captivity. "And he brought the vessels into the treasure-house of his god": that is the terrible moral depths to which the vessels were carried.
W.W. Do you suggest that there are divine limitations at the present moment, but God will see that there are opportunities for His service even in these limitations?
J.T. Yes; and the service is in line with certain moral conditions. That is what the book teaches, and it is a very humbling and sorrowful consideration that part of the vessels of the house of God are carried away, carried to such moral degradation; "into the land of Shinar, to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure-house of his god" (verse 2); christians are valued in the captivity, but they are set up in the treasure-house of idolatry.
W.H.M. All this happened in the reign of Jehoiakim, who despised the word of the Lord. He cut it up and burned it (@Jeremiah 36).
J.T. He was son to Josiah, which makes the matter very solemn.
He had thus a godly father, and so was brought up in the light. He had the sorrowful experience of seeing his brother captivated. It is said that the king of Egypt put down Jehoahaz, and made Eliakim, his brother, king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. He had that solemn spectacle before his eyes, and yet he pursued the same course; but he was captivated for his rebellion, that is, for not submitting to the government of God. The divine service is to be carried on in those who submit to the government of God.
F.R.B. Do you regard Daniel and his companions as the true vessels of the house of God?
J.T. Certainly. We have the way of recovery in them,
{363}
in the refusal to partake of the king's meat, and then God helping them in that. We shall find that as there is a moral constitution shown with us, God's hand is with us for gradual deliverance.
W.G. Does this coincide with what Paul writes to Timothy about the great house, vessels of honour being brought to light?
J.T. Well, I think that passage fits in here, distinctly. We are all in the great house, but vessels to honour are such as are indicated here.
L.M. Those that are subject to the government of God are not carried away, are they?
J.T. Not exactly, but such may be carried away because of general conditions, and it is in the acceptance of these circumstances involving the government of God that we begin to get deliverance. These were actually captives. It says in chapter 1:3,4, "And the king spoke unto Ashpenaz the chief of his eunuchs, that he should bring of the children of Israel, both of the royal seed and of the nobles, youths in whom was no blemish, and of goodly countenance, and skilful in all wisdom, and acquainted with knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the language of the Chaldeans". They are in the mind of the king, not as captives, but in a certain dignity, showing that God is behind this action of the king. God is moving those whom He may employ providentially; He puts it into their hearts to look at His people in their true light. The king may not have meant much by it, but there is much involved in his words.
J.B. It would have a humbling effect, too, on the vessels.
J.T. And the record shows that they came to the point of death, as if awaiting slaughter. The decree had gone forth, and they were included, not because they were sons of Israel, but because they were numbered with the
{364}
astrologers of Babylon. But what the young ones among us ought to see is that if the service of God is to be carried on, these conditions have to be accepted, intelligently and spiritually; and as they are accepted and the moral element begins to show itself in them in refusing the king's meat, God's hand is with them.
J.H.T. Is the service undertaken in this character?
J.T. I thought so; perhaps you might say more about it?
J.H.T. I was thinking about John in Patmos accepting the Lord's government relating to the assembly, and then suggesting the way out: "Come out of her, my people", (@Revelation 18:4). Would that be in line?
J.T. That is very helpful; in Revelation the vessel used accepts the governmental position and circumstances.
J.F.C. Would you mind saying a word about the king's meat?
J.T. It says, "And the king appointed unto them a daily provision of the king's delicate food, and of the wine that he drank, to nourish them three years" (verse 5); that is, they were to have the very best, it is Babylon's best, it is what the king himself ate.
W.W. Why is it that God took up such a man as Moses and put him into the house of Pharaoh, and why did He take up these men and put them into this special position when He was going to use them for Himself?
J.T. I think it was to get the light into high places. It is a feature with God that He would place the light in high places as well as low places, so that there is a testimony for Himself in a universal way. During last week we were engaged with the Lord's remark "for a testimony to them", (@Matthew 8:4).
One great feature of this book is that God, in taking up the gentile authorities, rendered a testimony to them. They set out on their career with divine light, they are not simply taken up as so many monarchies, they are furnished with divine light, they had a really wonderful
{365}
start, and Daniel was principally used in this. God Himself spoke to Nebuchadnezzar in the visions, but then Daniel was the vessel of interpretation. Before he was to minister to Nebuchadnezzar for a testimony, he went through this education, beginning with the refusal of the king's meat. It is a very important matter, that God should set gentiles, as the governors of the world, on their course, going on for two thousand five hundred years or so, with His own mind about them. And the first of them becomes an evangelist, under His gracious teaching. How little the Caesars, and the great leaders of the Western world, would have thought of the fact that the head of this great image, of which they form part, was himself an evangelist, and that because of God's gracious dealing with him! I think it ought to enlarge our own thoughts of God; how great He is! how He rises above man's wickedness! for Nebuchadnezzar had a wicked heart, but God brought him to the point of preaching to the world.
G.W.W. Is there not rather an interesting point in connection with Paul? Through him light reached the court of Caesar: as Daniel was to Nebuchadnezzar, so Paul was in the great Roman court.
J.T. The Lord has not left them without witness. The greatest rulers have had the testimony presented to them. Then there were "those of the household of Caesar" (@Philippians 4:22); saints that Paul could refer to.
W.W. It all sprang from the refusal of the king's meat.
J.T. That is where it began. They had a respectful recognition by the king, being designated as "children of Israel, both of the royal seed and of the nobles, youths in whom was no blemish, and of goodly countenance, and skilful in all wisdom, and acquainted with knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace". That was a very respectful way of designating them; that is what you might call potential; whatever the king may have thought.
{366}
God was behind it, they were taken up on these lines. Every one of us should remember, as taken up with a view to service, that from the very outset there is that which indicates our ability, our distinction. Service is to be carried on in such persons. They are brought to this subjectively afterwards, I mean in a spiritual way.
J.T-l. Would you say that while these four accept the governmental position from God they come out as sons of the kingdom, and are free? I was thinking of the closing verses of @Matthew 17.
J.T. Quite so. We shall see in chapter 2 how they approach the matter, and are tested in their service. But chapter 1 shows their state of soul in regard to the world, and before there is any mention of Daniel's service it is said that he "continued unto the first year of king Cyrus". That is a thing we ought to bear in mind in our enquiry as to how long a servant is to continue. One would not think otherwise than of continuing to the reign of Cyrus, which is finality -- Cyrus viewed as foreshadowing Christ. We want to continue until that; we have no other thought. It is a tribute to Daniel, that he continued until the first year of Cyrus.
W.S.S. Would it also be an encouragement to us that the testimony will continue?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, and you want to be in it, you do not want to drop out. If we look back, alas! we see that many have dropped out, how many derelicts there are! Of course, the Lord may take us, but we have no other thought than continuance until the reign of Cyrus; I mean that is the bearing of all your service.
F.S. It says in @Proverbs 22:29, "Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings".
J.T. That is good. Chapter 1 is the moral state, the refusal of what would damage them, and chapter 2 brings out how they approach their service. Before we enter on any service there must be this moral element -- how to
{367}
deny what is very attractive naturally, the very best that Babylon can afford.
Ques. Would divine sensibilities come out in them, in suggesting what they *could* feed upon? Not only did they refuse, with purpose of heart, but they knew what to ask for, what would build them up according to God.
J.T. Well, apparently they knew the value of this kind of food; it certainly was not to be compared, as men would reckon, with the best of Babylon, but *they* knew its value, what it would bring about. It was apparently very ordinary food. It says, "Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not pollute himself with the king's delicate food" (verse 8). Such food, notice, was God's creature, as was the wine, but it was *the king's*, that was its association. "And he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not have to pollute himself. And God granted Daniel favour". That is what we should seek. When we purpose what is right, God is with us.
Ques. What would the king's meat and the king's wine suggest, or the refusal of it, for the saints today?
J.T. It is the world's best; it appeals to man naturally. It is not simply the creatures by themselves, but in relation to the king as head of the system. It builds you up in distinction and refinement in that system and so is very attractive.
H.B-t. Would not the portion of the meat that the king ate and the wine that he drank stand in relation to his gods and idols?
J.T. They would be idolatrous in that way.
W.S.S. Would the acceptance of the captivity be a necessary condition to this service?
J.T. I think so. It should humble us. The present outward circumstances of the saints are marked by judicial acts of God. God has allowed all this governmentally.
W.S.S. We might be inclined to think that we had escaped from this captivity, but we are part of it.
{368}
J.T. We are outwardly. Daniel was still in that position, but he was morally clear. The point is to be morally clear. But we cannot avoid certain results of the captivity.
Ques. Why did you emphasise Shinar rather than Babylon?
J.T. Because of its ancient connection with rebellion, (@Genesis 11).
Rem. In the prophet Zechariah they were going to build a house in the land of Shinar, and set it on its own base (@Zechariah 5:11).
J.T. I was thinking of that passage "its own base". Idolatry has its proper base *there*.
J.C. With regard to this service, is not prayer a very necessary feature?
J.T. Well, we shall come to that in chapter 2 that is to say, the priestly side, because it is the leading feature of this book. There is this moral element, the refusal in the soul of what is so attractive, what would set you up in relation to the greatest system on earth at the time. That is the idea, that we should be set up in distinction, such persons as would stand before the king, and have a constitution fit for that. It would take in all the training, social and religious, of the present time.
Ques. With regard to what our brother said about the acceptance of the captivity, is that what was in your mind when you spoke of accepting the government of God?
J.T. Yes, I was thinking of that; we ought to accept it, and these are the conditions. It is the time of captivity, but this book shows how there is moral recovery, whilst outwardly the captivity remains; the vessels to honour are clear of the surrounding evil, and so meet for the Master's use.
G.W.W. Has not the thought of food in Scripture a moral import, that partaking of the food of that system they would have been built up according to that system, and that would have been destructive to the position they were in as captives?
{369}
J.T. Yes; 1 Corinthians shows that the creature of God is good in itself, but if it is offered to an idol it is defiling; it is the setting of things that we have to consider. What is good in itself is abominable if it is set in certain relations. So that in the different creatures described in Leviticus you have clean creatures, then there are others which are called abominable, because of certain relations, indicated typically.
G.W.W. I was thinking that food, in that way, indicates the building up of certain moral constitutional principles in the soul.
J.T. I am sure that is important, so that the subject begins in Scripture with the herb, what the earth yields; then the beasts of the field are given, but up to the flood there is no mention of idolatry, it is when the creatures of God become related to idolatry that they are unclean. The king prescribes the food here, but it was his, and he stood for the world-system. We have already had the fact that he took the vessels and put them into the house of *his* god, so that all stands in relation to idolatry.
J.B. The appearance of their countenance would really be on account of the refusal on the one hand of the king's dainty meat, and on the other of the partaking of what had come from God.
J.T. It goes on to say here, "God granted Daniel favour and mercy before the prince of the eunuchs. And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king who hath appointed your food and your drink; for why should he see your faces worse liking than the youths who are of your age? and ye would endanger my head with the king. And Daniel said to the steward, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink; then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the youths that eat of the king's delicate food: and as thou shalt see, deal
{370}
with thy servants. And he hearkened unto them in this matter, and proved them ten days" (verses 9 - 14). Now, it is to be noticed that whilst it was only "ten days", yet there was a certain danger involved in the action of the prince of the eunuchs. When God begins to act for us, men come into line. There is the idea of endangering himself in this, and when one endangers himself for the will of God he evidences something of the Spirit of Christ. When we resolve to refuse the world, God begins to move, and even those around us are affected. Daniel is already acquiring what is so needed in service, that is, moral power, the spirit of suasion. The Lord says, "make disciples", (@Matthew 28:19). It is that principle.
J.T-l. Is this then a public side of things, involving the confession of the name of the Lord publicly, as under reproach?
J.T. Yes, and those you are outwardly related with brought into accord. If you endanger yourself in the smallest degree for what is of God, it is the Spirit of Christ; it leads on to spiritual sympathies. Like Rebekah, who said, "Upon me be thy curse", (@Genesis 27:13). This man was endangering himself to some extent, and that was on account of the power that Daniel was acquiring; and I doubt very much if there are any of us of any value in service until we begin to acquire this moral power; not only that I can speak well, or entertain people, but I have influence for good with them. What do you say to that?
J.H.T. It is very important.
J.T. What tells is not only what you *say* in ministry, but the *power* you have with people.
F.I. Would you link "pulse" with what you get in @Genesis 1 the herb that produced the seed?
J.T. Yes, it is that kind of food, the herb of the field.
F.W.W. Daniel seems to have influenced the eunuch by his manner of life.
J.T. Yes, it is very remarkable that he should have
{371}
such power with him. It is a great thing to get a man to go your way even for ten days, especially if it involves sacrifice. It shows your moral suasion for good.
W.S.S. I was thinking of verse 17 in connection with that; these moral conditions had to be there before it could be said, "As for these four youths, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom".
J.T. That shows how God was working with them. I believe that the whole gospel of Matthew, as regards service, is bound up in this chapter. In @Matthew 28:19 it is not a question of preaching only, but influence: "*make* disciples". The Lord begins with Peter himself by *making* him a fisher of men.
Rem. It only says of *Daniel* that he "purposed in his heart". The other three came into the benefit of that.
J.T. Yes, and he brings them in beautifully in the tribute of worship at the end. The thing was made known to him, but he brings them into it, saying "thou hast made known unto *us* the king's matter". That is an important point in chapter 2; how a man of spiritual influence becomes a leader, and brings all who are with him into what God gives him, making it a mutual matter.
Chapter 1 is important to get clearly into our minds, the moral element that says "No" to what is naturally attractive. How God is with those who do that! They begin to acquire influence, and then there is the tribute to them in verse 17, "As for these four youths, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams". Now, that is the general position as regards the servant, based on the moral element in these young men. The next chapter is their service, and how they approach it, that is to say, they approach God first (verses 17,18). That is what we get in chapter 2.
F.W.W. Would you just say a word as to continuing until the first year of king Cyrus?
{372}
J.T. It was Cyrus who issued the command to restore and build the house, and restore the vessels. He is a figure of Christ. It was to him God opened "the two-leaved doors" (@Isaiah 45:1) and Ezra records that he issued the command to build the house. If Daniel is taken then it is all well, because evidently all is in good hands.
H.C. It would be like Simeon in @Luke 2.
J.T. Yes, he was ready to go as Christ had come.
J.H.T. And the spirit of Daniel is continued. Ezra prays and says, "We are bondmen", speaking in the present tense.
J.T. That is very good. His whole prayer and confession in chapter 9 are in the spirit of Daniel and his companions in our chapter. So that, when the king's decree had gone forth, it says, "Daniel went in, and requested of the king that he would give him time, that he might shew the king the interpretation". There is no doubt in his mind, it is all a question of *time*. If we bear that in mind, it helps; because this prophet makes a great deal of time and dates. And then it says in verse 17, "Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions; that they would desire mercies of the God of the heavens concerning this secret; that Daniel and his companions should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of the heavens. Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever; For wisdom and might are his". Now, notice what he says in poetic form (verses 20 - 23): "Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever; For wisdom and might are his. And it is he that changeth times and seasons; He deposeth kings, and setteth up kings; He giveth wisdom to the wise, And knowledge to them that know understanding. It is he that revealeth the deep and secret things;
{373}
He knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him. I thank thee, and I praise thee, O God of my fathers, Who hast given me wisdom and might, And hast made known unto me already what we desired of thee; For thou hast made known unto us the king's matter".
Now, what one would venture to point out is that in service (because we are approaching it in this chapter), God gets His portion *first*. Daniel has it all settled. It is settled by prayer, but before there is any action taken there is a tribute of praise and worship to God. That, to my mind is, very fine. God is a sanctuary to His people wherever they are. This is a sanctuary, it is a scene of praise and worship to God in the enemy's land. Would you say that?
J.H.T. I would, indeed. John approaches it in the same way, does he not? We get the doxology in @Revelation 1:5 - 6, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father: to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages. Amen".
J.T. That is very good, and it fits in here.
F.W.W. Would service spring out of true assembly conditions?
J.T. That is how it stands in @Acts 13:2. They were ministering to the Lord and fasting, and the Spirit said, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". Is that what you had in mind?
F.W.W. Yes, keeping service relative to the assembly. Do you think that is important?
J.T. It is most important that God should have His portion before man. Before Nebuchadnezzar is ministered to, God is ministered to. That is very beautiful. We have it in poetic form. Poetic form invariably implies *feeling*; here, holy feeling Godward.
{374}
F.W.W. So a servant should have before him, glory to God "in the assembly in Christ Jesus", (@Ephesians 3:21).
J.T. The one who is most effective in service is marked by that. Paul, both in Romans and in Ephesians, his greatest epistles, worships God.
F.W.W. So you start your service from the top of the mountain, as we saw yesterday?
J.T. That is the idea. Moses did that. He worshipped on the mount, and came down from the scene of glory with his face shining.
Ques. Did Samuel have a good start in that way in Hannah's prayer?
J.T. Quite. He prayed himself, too, offering up a whole burnt offering at the outset of his ministry.
E.G. You suggested the thought of mutuality with Daniel and the other three. It is interesting to see that there was no independency with Daniel. It says he "went to his house, and made the thing known" to them.
J.T. Yes, it is to be noted that he had a house, and "companions". I do not know how we should get on without our brethren, they are *our* companions; you are sure to come to grief if you ignore them.
Ques. When Daniel mentioned the matter to these three friends, he asked them to desire mercies of the God of the heavens that they should not perish with the wise men of Babylon. Why is it put in that way?
J.T. It is the acceptance of the government of God. It is not the God of Jerusalem, nor the God of Israel, it is the God of the *heavens*. The rule of the world had gone out among the gentiles, but it is a question of showing that heaven ruled. It is very beautiful; he is in the mind of God.
Ques. Using the word "mercies", would that suggest that he acknowledged that if God gave them light in regard to the matter, it was entirely on the ground of His own sovereign mercy?
J.T. Quite so.
{375}
W.H.M. "In thy light shall we see light", (@Psalm 36:9). You were speaking of the sanctuary; Daniel goes right into God's presence.
J.T. Yes, and he says, "the light dwelleth with him". Elsewhere we are told that He dwells in light unapproachable, but here the point is that light is dwelling with Him. That is light which He *gives*.
R.A. Would you say that God took account of what Daniel purposed in his heart, that he would not defile himself, and on that account he is a model as a true servant?
J.T. That is chapter 1 where the moral feature appears toward the world, and God honours you there. But now, in chapter 2 it is what is priestly, and the sanctuary, because you have the worship of God.
L.M. You mentioned Matthew earlier; would it come in with, "when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber",(chapter 6:6) that is the individual side, and pray to One who is in secret and sees in secret, and He shall reward thee?
J.T. Very good.
L.M. Well, I was wondering where the companions would come in. Would that be in @Matthew 18, where you get "two or three"?
J.T. Yes, that would come in very nicely. It says, "if two of you", meaning two who were companions in exercise as to divine interests.
L.M. Therefore we would really value companionship, and, as our brother was saying, bring in what is mutual.
H.C.L. In connection with the house, would you connect it with Jeremiah's letter to the captives? -- he told them to build the houses, plant gardens, etc. (@Jeremiah 29).
J.T. Yes, that was the word of God, that they were to accept the action of Nebuchadnezzar, which was His ordering. But He would be a sanctuary to them. I think it is perfectly lovely here, that Daniel goes to his house, and the companions are evidently there, as if it was their
{376}
normal place. My house is open to my companions, the brethren. It says, "Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions; that they would desire mercies of the God of the heavens concerning this secret; that Daniel and his companions should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision".
J.H.C. Would you say that this is an important principle -- leaving room for God to come in? Daniel asked for time -- that God might come in.
J.T. It is, and you wait until you get your answer.
W.S.S. I was going to ask in regard to these few verses of praise or thanksgiving, do they suggest a basis, without which service would be impossible; the understanding that God rules, that He is superior to all the empires of the earth?
J.T. Yes. Daniel would see what Nebuchadnezzar had seen in the night vision, but he would see it with intelligence. It says, "Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of the heavens". He did not go to tell Nebuchadnezzar at once; he remained to give thanks to God. He worshipped God. God had His part in all this. If God is not having His part in any service there is not much in it.
J.H. Daniel knew what the end would be, he had got that in the night vision.
Ques. Would you say that the poetic verses show that God was known by Daniel in this way, "he ... revealeth the deep and secret things"? Would not Daniel learn that in his own soul?
J.T. I think the tribute of praise is based on his own knowledge of God. If we analyse these poetic lines, we get the elements of the book.
E.G. Daniel not going to tell Nebuchadnezzar at once would show that we have to control ourselves in all circumstances?
{377}
J.T. Just so. It is a great thing to have yourself under control, and so to act at the opportune time. He began with that -- that the king would give him time. We need time if we are to act rightly in the things of God.
L.M. A *vision* is rather large, we might say. What about a word from the Lord?
J.T. In taking up service one is assured of something as before the Lord. What you get becomes enlarged in the presentation of it, but you are assured from the outset. And I believe that is what Matthew would teach us, that you have to take a journey to get it. See the anxiety these men went through, see the journey they had to take, morally, to get this message; but they got it. Daniel got it, he knew he had it, and I think that is how you approach service. You are in the mind of God, and you give Him thanks beforehand.
W.G. Would you say that was seen in the apostle Paul in regard to the glad tidings? He served God in his *spirit*.
J.T. Just so. He served God in it, in the glad tidings, and, as we were saying already, he worships in writing the letter -- Romans.
G.W.W. The exercise, without the turning to God, will not make the thing effective in my soul. God must have His portion out of it before one can be useful with one's brethren.
J.T. These men approach their service as worshippers. "*Therefore* Daniel went in unto Arioch"; that is an important word, it is a word of sequence. God was much greater in their minds now than Nebuchadnezzar could be.
F.W.W. The confidence that God is going to give the increase; is that a very encouraging point of service? God will give the increase if we have patience to wait.
J.T. Quite so. Then see the tone it gives to you in your service. You are a worshipper of God as you approach His service. There is a tone, a liberty, in your
{378}
spirit; as our brother has well said, you are serving God in your spirit.
A.S.L. But you have been with God, before you go to man about it. That is what you are seeking to emphasise.
Do you see the same thing in Abraham's servant, when he got the answer to his prayer? It says, "And the man stooped, and bowed down before Jehovah, and said, Blessed be Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, who has not withdrawn his loving kindness and his faithfulness from my master; I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren", (@Genesis 24:26).
J.T. It is very beautiful. He worshipped before he proceeded.
A.S.L. That is a great point. Do you not think it is a great thing to cultivate a spirit of worship?
J.T. That is what our lesson imparts -- you learn here that Daniel approached the king as a worshipper of God. God would be greater in his soul than the monarch. We have not to be afraid of standing before kings. The Lord said of Paul that he would testify before kings: but he would do that knowing that God was greater than the kings.
J.R. In that way Daniel is in keeping with what his name means, "God is Judge".
A.S.L. If a servant is called to stand before the king, and he stands there as a worshipper, he will recognise the king's place. He will conduct himself suitably.
J.T. He will not despise the king, but he knows that God is greater.
E.J.F. Daniel takes command here: he says to Arioch, "Destroy not the wise men of Babylon"
J.T. It is a command, as you say. It is moral power. "Destroy not the wise men of Babylon; bring me in before the king, and I will shew unto the king the interpretation". See the power there is in those words! Daniel is full of moral authority, and that is an immense thing at the present time.
{379}
W.C.G. "If God be for us, who against us?" (@Romans 8:31).
E.W. It says of Nehemiah too that he prayed to God, and *then* turned to the king.
J.T. Yes. You can see that Daniel is like an apostle in Matthew; he has influence; "make disciples".
Ques. Do you think it important that Peter suggests the thought of holy priesthood, before he brings forward the thought of kingly priesthood?
J.T. Quite so. The first is what I am *to God*; the second, what I am *before men*.
G.F.G. Would the consideration of the stone cut out without hands both produce worship and give stability in the heart?
J.T. Quite so.
A.S.L. How would Peter's exhortation come in: "sanctify the Lord the Christ in your hearts, and be always prepared to give an answer" (@1 Peter 3:15)?
J.T. That fits in here. "Sanctify the Lord the Christ in your hearts". Thus there is power in the heart.
Ques. "We have boldness towards God, and whatsoever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments, and practise the things which are pleasing in his sight" (@1 John 3:21,22) -- would that be the moral basis for all this?
J.T. Yes.
J.H.T. In @Acts 4:23 they go to their own company, and then they pray and praise God; then there is power for speaking, as they are filled with the Holy Spirit (verse 31).
J.T. That is the order; Peter and John had been prominent in service and suffering, but now the other apostles are in view as having power in bearing witness to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus (verse 33).
{380}
THE SERVANT, HIS SUPPORT AND CONTINUANCE (2)
@Daniel 3:24 - 30; @Daniel 4:19 - 37
J.T. In the consideration of this book this morning we were dwelling on the moral power that Daniel had acquired in his experience as recorded in chapter 1 and part of chapter 2, especially the priestly approach to God by him and his three companions; and how, as having the secret revealed, they *worship* God and approach their service -- at least it is said of Daniel -- "Then Daniel blessed the God of the heavens" (chapter 2:19). So that, as having been thus in the presence of God, he would not be overawed by the king, although respecting him. It was remarked that we are to "fear God, honour the king", (@1 Peter 2:17). So that it is said in verse 27, "Daniel answered in the presence of the king and said, The secret that the king hath demanded", etc. He answered *in the presence of the king*. Whilst in our service we may come before "great men", and we respect and honour those to whom honour is due, we should have a sense that God is supreme, and we must obey Him; His claims come first, and this in the sense of His greatness. All this is specially important in view of the image that Daniel has to account for in the presence of the king. For the gentile monarchies are represented in this terrible personality. It is said that the "image was mighty, and its brightness excellent; it stood before thee, and its appearance was terrible" (verse 31). That is to say, the might and glory of the gentile monarchies, extending over a period of thousands of years, and running on even today, are presented in one personality.
F.W.W. Why do you make that remark?
J.T. It is an element the servant has to encounter. Satan took the Lord to a high mountain, and showed Him the kingdoms of this world and their glory in a
{381}
moment of time; and they are all offered to Him: "All these things will I give thee", (@Matthew 4:9). Here it is seen in its condensed greatness; that is, in a person; but what a monster of a man!
J.C. Do you suggest that the devil is still working on that principle?
J.T. Yes, he is working to gather power under one head.
Ques. Would this be seen in its concentrated form in the antichrist?
J.T. Well, the idea of one personality will be. We have to consider here the component parts of this image. The head denotes what is of God, in itself. That is, we learn to distinguish between what is of God in external government, and what is purely of man, and so evil.
J.H.T. Does history, in that way, bring in the abuse of delegated authority in the hand of man? Would the servant of God learn in contrast, that his power lies in what is secret, and prayer?
J.T. I think the opposite of all this is in Daniel, where you do not get deterioration. Deterioration is a most sorrowful process. The image denotes deterioration, and that is something we must be on our guard against. The image does not denote something to be worked up to, to get to the best at the top; you begin with the gold.
G.F.G. Do you connect the head of gold with Nebuchadnezzar's testimony of God?
J.T. Yes, and the position he occupied; it was absolute monarchy. He was naturally no more equal to it than any other man, but God made him somewhat equal to it in chapter 4, so that there was some correspondence with the gold in him.
J.B. Is it your thought that he represents God governmentally?
J.T. I think so; it is the divine idea. However little he was equal to it, it was there.
A.S.L. Given to him of God directly. The God of heaven had given him this place.
{382}
J.T. Quite so. However poorly he sustained it, it was there.
A.S.L. That is the point, perhaps, of the gold directly from God -- to stand for God's glory; instead of that, he stood for his own.
J.T. So that he was king of kings, and lord of lords the imperial idea was there, which position Christ will occupy -- there will be no deterioration then. One element of instruction here is to learn how to avoid deterioration.
Ques. Do you think that the saints have always to recognise that this is the thought of God, no matter what time, or who governs?
J.T. Yes, the idea of the head. The whole image comes down at once, so that the abstract idea of the head of gold runs on even now; but the lower extremity being of such different material, we can see how far removed the idea of current government is from the divine thought.
Ques. As to the deterioration: did you say we have to guard against that?
J.T. I think so. Daniel would be greatly impressed with this figure of deterioration from the head down. There would be solemn instruction in it for him.
Ques. "The powers that be are ordained of God" (@Romans 13:1); would that be the thought in the gold?
J.T. Yes, that is the gold carried down to the Roman Empire. But an examination of the Roman system shows how far removed it was from the head of gold. We recognise the head of gold in it, however.
A.S.L. This direct transference by God Himself of the throne and dominion to the gentiles proves that the gentiles can do no better than Israel had done.
J.T. And these chapters show what an immense advantage God gave the early monarchies, so that there should be some correspondence with the head of gold; so that it should not be a mere empty, abstract thought; that it should be expressed in the monarchy -- and it was, according to chapter 4.
{383}
A.S.L. The deterioration is the gradual departure from God -- progressive departure.
J.T. Yes, from the thought of God, which, as we remarked, was expressed to some extent. So that Nebuchadnezzar *knew*. To Belshazzar Daniel says, "thou knewest". He is the apostate from this. The thing was presented to him.
F.W.W. Do we learn that every divine principle is to be held by the servant in accord with the thought of God, without any deterioration?
J.T. Yes, and that he may see how the principle of public government is interwoven in the instruction, so that he should be intelligent as to it.
Ques. Would the Lord's expression as to prayer, "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven" (@Matthew 6:10), be suggestive of the head of gold?
J.T. It would. He alluded to authority from heaven, when He said to Pilate, "Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above", (@John 19:11). He recognised the gold in Pilate, but, alas! he was very far from it characteristically; he did not even have the brass!
A.S.L. What a wonderful word from the Lord to Pilate, "given to thee from above". He recognised that even Pilate's position was from above.
J.T. Pilate had a great opportunity, as the head of the gentile power in Judaea, to have the mind of God, because his wife was sent to say to him "I have suffered today many things in a dream because of him", (@Matthew 27:19). It is very much like Daniel's position -- bearing witness to the head of the gentile system, in Judaea, but Pilate does not answer to it as Nebuchadnezzar does here.
Ques. Would you say that the principle of the gold should be better understood by the assembly at the end of the dispensation, in contrast to the deterioration in the world-government?
J.T. I think it should, and that is what God is working
{384}
out. We should be on our guard constantly against deterioration in what God has graciously given us.
Ques. Do you think that the servant, as being subject to the authorities, would look for holy operations of God in these conditions?
J.T. This book shows that God can carry on His operations under these conditions, that His truth, His principles and His people can be carried through without deterioration. Daniel represents all this; he increases in faithfulness and acceptance with God.
J.H.T. Would chapter 2:44 show His operations, as in Matthew's gospel?
J.T. "In the days of these kings shall the God of the heavens set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and the sovereignty thereof shall not be left to another people": that is what you mean. "In the days of these kings" God introduces His kingdom; He has done it now in a moral way. The kingdom of God as we have it now is the moral sway of God, not the actual outward form.
Ques. Is that in the Spirit?
J.T. The kingdom of God *is* in the Spirit; it is "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", (@Romans 14:17).
J.H.T. To those who are maintained in that there is no deterioration?
J.T. This new kingdom never comes to an end; "it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, but itself shall stand for ever. Forasmuch as thou sawest that a stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it broke in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold -- the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter". The 'stone' would mean permanency. The kingdom of God is permanent.
F.W. The head of gold was weaker because of the base?
J.T. Yes, there was no moral foundation. And Pilate
{385}
showed this; but he had an immense advantage in the testimony of his wife, "Have thou nothing to do with that righteous man". Judas had said that the pieces of silver were the price of *innocent* blood, but innocence alone will not do in government: you want *righteousness*. And that is what Pilate's wife observed; Christ was a righteous Person: "Have thou nothing to do with that *righteous* man", (@Matthew 27:19). So that the Roman system represented in Pilate had a great opportunity. The Lord is very gracious to Pilate; He exhibits the spirit that becomes us in service now in relation to the authorities.
J.B. In @Psalm 45 He goes forward in truth, meekness and righteousness.
J.T. These gentile monarchies have come down to us in the Roman system, and christianity has developed under that system. It behoves us that we should exhibit the spirit of Christ in relation to it at the end; if antichrist arises immediately from the closing testimony of the church, it will be in spite of that testimony.
J.H.T. If the Lord is accused personally before Pilate, He is silent; but if the authority or truth of God is called in question, He speaks. Is that the model?
J.T. Yes. It is a remarkable thing that the history of the testimony as coming into Europe is marked by the Spirit of Christ. "The Spirit of Jesus", Luke says, "did not allow them" (@Acts 16:7). It is the Spirit of Jesus that comes into the Western Empire, and I believe it is a point that the Lord would make, as to whether that Spirit is exhibited now. If He began with such a testimony to the gentile monarchies, He would finish with it. During the recent convulsions, the saints were brought peculiarly into touch with the authorities, and I believe the Lord helped them. As we remarked this morning, the Lord said to the leper, "for a testimony to them" (@Matthew 8:4), however much or little they took notice.
E.G. Do you mean the late war?
J.T. Yes.
{386}
C.M.J. What is meant by "the Spirit of Jesus" in the passage referred to?
J.T. The Man that stands over against the monster that we have here. Think of the image that was seen, in contrast to the lowly Jesus!
A.S.L. Is that the point of the expression in @Philippians 1:19, "The supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ"?
J.T. The Philippian assembly represents the crop of that seed, the sowing "in tears" of @Acts 16.
A.S.L. It is very beautiful. That is the spirit that should mark us.
J.T. Philippi was spiritually the gateway into Europe. And the sowing was indeed in tears, and the reaping with joy; all is in the Spirit of Christ.
A.S.L. The great object of the apostle personally was that the life of Jesus might be manifested in his mortal flesh.
J.T. Just so; at the end of the church's history, as in each of our histories, "bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus". As we grow older we realise more that we are mortal. It is forced upon us. The apostles say, "that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body", (@2 Corinthians 4:10,11). Where the dissolution is imminent, we the more desire to be clothed with the life of Jesus. I think that is what God would emphasise, that the powers that be should have such a testimony. That is what we get in these chapters, and what they began with in this sense they should finish with. So that you get in chapter 3, Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego. Their names are gone over by the Spirit of God about thirteen times in this chapter and these are the three men who have in their suffering the companionship of the Son of God. That is a very fine prospect for us -- to acquire in our service of testimony and the sufferings that go with it -- the companionship of the Son of God.
A.S.L. "Notwithstanding, the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me", (@2 Timothy 4:17).
{387}
J.B. You might develop that a little.
J.T. The position and testimony of these three men are magnificent. Daniel is not mentioned. It is what *they* came into. Nebuchadnezzar says, "Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said to the king, True, O king. He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the appearance of the fourth is like a son of God".
A.S.L. "Walking in the midst of the fire": the fire, we may suppose, had only burnt the bands that bound them, and set them in liberty.
J.C. Do not these men acquire this companionship through their refusal of idolatry?
J.T. Well, that is the way the passage stands: idolatry that arose, evidently, out of what God presented to Nebuchadnezzar. The image that he set up was evidently the outcome of what he had seen, and what Daniel had explained.
A.S.L. If Nebuchadnezzar had been humbled in the presence of the interpretation of his dream, and recognised that God had given it to him, and that he was the head of gold; he would never have had recourse to the image.
Ques. You mentioned that Daniel was not with these three men. Have you any thought about that?
J.T. I think he represents the mind of God here. His time of suffering came later.
J.T-l. Are these the sufferings of Christ -- normal sufferings in connection with the testimony?
J.T. That is chapter 3. Chapter 1 is the moral side; chapter 2 is the priestly side, and chapter 3 is the suffering side. What these men endured is simply and purely in connection with the testimony. They say to him, "O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer thee in this matter". In other matters they would certainly be obedient, but not in this matter. There can be no part
{388}
in idolatry; death must be accepted rather than that. The matter is settled.
W.S.S. The thought of the "Son of God" is very striking. I was thinking of the passage in @1 John 5:5, "Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?" Would that be in line with this?
J.T. Quite. It is *victory*; the "Son of God" is victory. "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?"
W.S.S. These three men had overcome the world.
J.T. They had, indeed.
J.C. Would you say that suffering is a great incentive to save us from deterioration?
J.T. Yes. Nebuchadnezzar had evidently no judgment as to deterioration. Daniel expounded the vision to him, but he did not take it in. If he had he would have understood that the system he was connected with was coming down. We have to wait for chapter 4 for that: God has recourse to other means.
Ques. Is not pride the secret of all deterioration? It says at the end of chapter 4 that "those that walk in pride he is able to abase".
J.T. That is the thing. "He is able to abase". What an opportunity Nebuchadnezzar had in the explanation itself! If he had taken it to heart that the whole system of gentile authority was coming to chaff, he would never have set up the image in the plain of Dura.
J.T-l. Would you say it is fidelity in testimony that would pull this down in the consciences of men today?
J.T. Quite so. I think these three men are mentioned, as I said, so many times over, expressly to call our attention to the third feature in our service in testimony seen here -- the feature of suffering for it. There is no question in their minds: "O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer thee in this matter", they say. It is a settled matter. It is very fine to come to a decision like that.
{389}
J.H.T. So that Paul writes to the saints before whom he had exemplified the Spirit of Jesus, the Philippians: "stand firm in one spirit, with one soul, labouring together in the same conflict with the faith of the glad tidings; and not frightened in anything by the opposers, which is to them a demonstration of destruction, but of your salvation, and that from God" (chapter 1:27,28). Is that the principle?
J.T. Exactly.
P.P. Do you think God always warns us if we are on a wrong course? If we do not heed it, it will perhaps come in some other way.
J.T. The power of the world is peculiarly brought to bear on these three men. We spoke of the attractiveness of the king's meat this morning, but you will notice the great prominence given to *music* in this third chapter, the repetition of the various musical instruments: "Now if ye be ready at the time that ye hear the sound of the comet, pipe, lute, sambuca, psaltery, and bagpipe, and all kinds of music, to fall down and worship the image that I have made". The influence of music is in view. The peculiar effect of music to support idolatry. I suppose there is nothing that appeals more to the refined ear than music, especially such a variety.
A.S.L. It appeals to the religious side of man's nature.
E.G. According to verse 6, it would appear that the king was suspicious that all would not fall down; there was a warning given to those who would not fall down.
G.F.G. Is your thought that the enemy would use music to drown spiritual instincts and desires?
J.T. It works on the flesh; as presented here, it belongs to Cain's world.
G.W.W. In a very touching letter of Mr. Darby's to a young christian he says that music appeals to the senses, but it does not touch the conscience at all.
J.T. One is struck with the mention of all musical instruments, "all kinds of music".
{390}
Rem. When we are awake to the fact that the enemy is aiming at us in something, then we are on our guard.
W.S.S. I was wondering if you had something to say in regard to verse 27, "upon whose bodies the fire had had no power"?
J.T. It is a question of the Son of God now. He can keep the believer alive even in fire -- quench its violence -- or He can raise him from the dead. What a scene this is! Daniel's place, in making four, is taken by the Son of God.
E.G. In all the special attractions of the world, Satan has the people of God in view.
J.T. "Woe to the world because of offences!" (@Matthew 18:7). It is aiming at the saints. It becomes a stumbling-block to the saints.
Rem. In @Romans 12 it says, "be not conformed to this world". It says of these men that they yielded their bodies.
J.T. They had presented their bodies a living sacrifice. The Son of God appearing changed the whole position. There is no power in the fire. Nebuchadnezzar says, "Lo, I see four men loose". That is, they were in the liberty wherewith Christ had set them free, a liberty acquired in suffering.
A.S.L. What wonderful places we can walk in when the Son of God is with us! We find another man walking on the sea when Jesus is with him.
A.E.D. What do you understand by the "son of God"? I have not quite got your thought.
J.T. Well, it is the Person of Christ viewed in that light. Nebuchadnezzar had some understanding of what he saw.
W.C.G. Does that suggest One able to bring the soul on the ground of counsel?
J.T. Yes, and One who will bring you through all circumstances. He can prevent death or raise one out of it; He also sets us free, bringing us into sonship.
{391}
W.C.G. I was thinking that Abraham was on the same ground in @Genesis 14, Melchizedek met him and blessed him, and he refused the offers of the king of Sodom.
J.T. Yes, that is the idea of it. The Son of God, in figure, came in thus early. Then, later, He comes in in Isaac. But Melchizedek is striking in that way, because he is said to be likened to the Son of God. Abraham was to go through his course with that light in his soul. Later on, he says, "I and the lad will go yonder and worship", (@Genesis 22:5). That is the Son of God in type. "I and the lad", and what a lad he was! He was submissive to his father, and allowed himself to be bound on the altar; and then Abraham received him from the dead in a figure. So that faith goes through, in the light of the Son of God. So Paul says, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son *in me*", (@Galatians 1:15,16).
A.S.L. And, "I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me", (@Galatians 2:20).
J.B. Do you think that the Son of God, being the object of veneration in contrast to the image, the servant can count on His support in what he is passing through.
J.T. That suggests a sort of key to the book: the suffering remnant are joined by the Son of God. Allusion was made a moment ago to the disciples rowing and the wind against them, but He appears to them. He joins them; it is the suffering remnant. We want to have the idea before us of being joined by the Son of God in our services and sufferings; He comes in.
Rem. So it says in @Galatians 3:1, "to whom, as before your very eyes, Jesus Christ has been portrayed, crucified among you".
J.T. That was in the apostle's manner among them. I think that this point is of very great importance, and the place the Son of God has with the man of faith strikes me peculiarly. Abraham is the father of us all; and the Son of God in figure appears and blesses him after his victory, as returning from the slaughter of the kings. It is a
{392}
tribute to Abraham's power. He had trained servants in his house, three hundred and eighteen, and he pursued the enemy to Damascus. But, in returning, Melchizedek met him. Paul, in Galatians, opens up the subject of faith in connection with the truth of the Son of God. The Lord would give His people to understand that He joins us in our service and sufferings.
J.H.T. "The just shall live by his faith" (@Habakkuk 2:4) would apply to these three men.
W.G. Would this be seen in @John 9? The blind man got the company of the Son of God.
J.T. That is it; he was suffering, he was cast out. These men are loose, suggesting the liberty wherewith Christ has set us free. "If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free" (@John 8:36) -- be it in the furnace or elsewhere.
G.W.W. Do you think the reason that our attention is directed to the Son of God is that the circumstances at the moment demand full acquaintance with His Person?
J.T. Well, I have been thinking that. The Lord is disclosing Himself to us, and we do not want to miss this great gain. We need to understand His greatness more fully. Here He gives complete victory over the power of the fire.
Now, chapter 4 is what you might call Nebuchadnezzar's psalm.
A.S.L. What he had learned by experience?
J.T. Yes. "Nebuchadnezzar the king unto all the peoples, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth: Peace be multiplied unto you. It hath seemed good unto me to declare the signs and wonders that the Most High God hath wrought toward me. How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation" (verses 1 - 3). What power would enter into these words as said for the first time! Something
{393}
extraordinary had happened. He had been through severe discipline under the hand of God, and it had its own effect. He begins with this wonderful note; then he proceeds to tell us how it happened, and the finish of the chapter reads, "And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto the heavens, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the Most High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation. And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he doeth according to his will in the army of the heavens, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou? At the same time mine understanding returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, my majesty and brightness returned unto me; and my counsellors and my nobles sought me; and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent greatness was added unto me. Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of the heavens, all whose works are truth, and his paths judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase". That is his psalm. How great a testimony to the gracious dealings of God!
A.S.L. He learned more of God in his afflictions than a good many christians have learned. What infinite grace! Nebuchadnezzar was definitely converted.
J.T. Hence what a wonderful start the "times of the Gentiles" had in this man!
J.H.T. There was recompense for the Spirit of Jesus shining in Daniel: "Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity". Would that represent the attitude and spirit of the saints amongst the monarchies that you spoke of?
J.T. That is what I thought. "Break off thy sins by
{394}
righteousness". It is not a mere negative thing; sins are broken off by *righteousness*.
A.S.L. Paul spoke like this before Agrippa, "O king" (@Acts 26); there is *feeling* in it.
J.T. It is the same kind of thing. God "left not himself without witness" (@Acts 14:17), as I was saying, "for a testimony to them". I think the powers that be will have to answer before God for the testimony presented to them recently.
G.C.S. What is the "dew of heaven"? He was "bathed with the dew of heaven" till seven times passed over him.
J.T. It would be one of the parts of the discipline. Of course, dew is also refreshing, if you look on it, for instance, as "the dew of Hermon"; but if you look upon it as falling on a man in the night, it is hardly that; it is a hardship, which I think is the sense in @Song of Songs 5:2. Nebuchadnezzar was like a cow or horse, suffering as they would.
Ques. When you speak of the testimony rendered to the powers that be, recently, what do you mean?
J.T. Those young men who stood before the tribunals and confessed Christ and suffered reproach for Him.
Ques. Do you think there is a certain analogy -- that after the testimony is rendered, God comes in and does what men cannot do?
J.T. Yes. Daniel's rebuke was not effective. Verse 27, as we had it, shows how faithfully Daniel dealt with him, but it was not effective. Then it says, "All this came upon king Nebuchadnezzar. At the end of twelve months he was walking upon the royal palace of Babylon: the king spoke and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power and for the glory of my majesty?" That was his thought, notwithstanding the faithful testimony of Daniel, and the Spirit of Christ in Daniel. In the king you see the spirit of pride: "Is not this great Babylon, that *I* have built?" There is a big *I*.
{395}
A.S.L. You do not find him talking like that till twelve months had elapsed. He had evidently forgotten about Daniel's admonition.
W.W. If there is one thing that God will not have, it is pride, whether in the greatest monarch or in the least creature.
J.T. Yes, that is what Nebuchadnezzar himself comes to. He says, "those that walk in pride he is able to abase".
A.S.L. There are seven things which are an abomination to the Lord, and at the head of the list is "A proud look". *We* should not have put that first, but God has (see @Proverbs 6:17).
J.T. All this ought to be encouraging to all of us, but especially to any one who needs restoration; this stump left in the ground is to bring before us the grace of God in dealing with one of His people. He says, You are going to come back to that. It is not punitive here, it is restorative. How well repaid God was in this wonderful psalm, and in this proclamation to the whole world!
A.S.L. What renders restoration impossible is pride! Pride cannot come down.
E.G. Is not Nebuchadnezzar's proclamation a reversal of chapter 3, where they were to bow down and worship the image? Does it show that you can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth?
J.T. It is what *God* can do, even where such a testimony as that of Daniel is ineffective. God can bring the man down. There are cases that the brethren are unequal to meet; God gives us to know our inability to meet certain cases. But He is able to meet them; and it is a solemn thing that seven times passed over Nebuchadnezzar.
Ques. Would you say that God's thought is always to exalt one? @1 Peter 5:6 says, "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you". Would that keep one from what is here?
J.T. Yes. I hardly know any chapter that is so educative as this for any one of us who needs restoration. How
{396}
solemn it is if we pay no heed to the voice of the brethren! Daniel's testimony was most conclusive. In opening up the vision to Nebuchadnezzar, explaining it to him, his heart is moved to speak to the king. He is no longer revealing secrets, but he speaks to him as a faithful servant, in saying, "Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee". It is a very touching appeal. It is a sorrowful thing if we disregard the solemn appeal of brethren; then God will come in. He loves us too well to allow us to go on. The stump is there -- looked after. The stump means what I am in the purpose of God. He will bring me back to that.
W.S.S. Would the tree suggest what I profess to be?
J.T. Well, I think it was what he was under the government of God. God had given him the place, but the stump remains. So that the last part of the chapter is to show that he is in his own place, but in different circumstances. I think the thought of the stump ought to be very reassuring to us. God brings Nebuchadnezzar back to that, but a different man.
Ques. Is this what Peter refers to, when he says "the mighty hand of God" (@1 Peter 5:6)?
J.T. Exactly.
Ques. Had you something in your mind in regard to "seven times shall pass over thee"?
J.T. Well, seven is a *complete* process.
R.McB. Naaman went down into Jordan seven times.
J.T. That corresponds.
J.B. It would speak of the perfect operations of God in relation to the stump.
J.T. It alludes to the completeness of God's dealings in restoring us.
Rem. And we have to be careful not to interfere with that.
J.T. Well, you feel you have to leave a brother in such a case with God. God would say to Daniel, You have done your part; you have borne a faithful witness, but I have to take him in hand. And Nebuchadnezzar does not hide the pride of his heart, the position he was placed in,
{397}
and what he experienced. He tells us all about it, which is an evidence of a truly restored man.
H.B. God expanded him after that.
J.T. God would convey to us that what He has effected He has effected for ever. The stump refers to this, and so it is cared for.
Ques. Does the way in which Nebuchadnezzar writes show that he had come under the healing hand of God -- the wound had been healed?
J.T. I think so. Thorough recovery is always evidenced in the way you speak of what occasioned it. You take God's side in regard to it. As we were saying, the Lord healed the dropsical man and *let him* go; it was a finished thing. The same appears here.
Rem. There are no bitter after effects.
J.T. No. If the dropsical man were to record what happened, he would not hide anything; but, as far as the Lord was concerned, it was a settled matter.
J.H.T. In another sense, there was no ill-effect from the furnace of chapter 3: "nor had the smell of fire passed on them".
G.W.W. Does not the discipline of God result in the scent or taste being changed? I was thinking of Moab; his taste is *not* changed. Nebuchadnezzar would come out of this with his natural scent left behind.
J.T. His restoration is especially seen in his last words here: "those that walk in pride he is able to abase". As already said, it is very important that the head of the gentile system should have a psalm through experience under the discipline of God, and that he should make it known universally. It is one of the great testimonies that God has presented to men.
A.S.L. So that the "head of gold" passes on the testimony.
J.T. Quite so; and it will come up against every one of the later rulers, as we see indicated in Daniel's rebuke to Belshazzar.
{398}
THE SERVANT, HIS SUPPORT AND CONTINUANCE (3)
@Daniel 5:17 - 28; @Daniel 6:10 - 16, 25 - 28
J.T. We do well to keep our eye on the last verse read. In the closing verse of chapter 1 it is said that "Daniel continued unto the first year of king Cyrus"; it is said of him here that he "prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian". It is a practical word for us in our service: to *continue* and *prosper*.
Our inquiry at this time lies in relation to the public departure from the truth (chapter 5), and God taking account of that, numbering, weighing, and dividing; and then the definite deterioration of the rule of the gentiles to the level -- not yet of democracy, but of limited monarchy, the king himself being bound by the law. The period of absolute monarchy continued through Belshazzar's reign, but he was wholly out of accord with the gold. In this well-known chapter, the prominence given to his use of wine is to be noted. It says, "Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his nobles, and drank wine before the thousand. Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels that Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king and his nobles, his wives and his concubines, might drink in them. Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem; and the king and his nobles, his wives and his concubines, drank in them. They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone", (chapter 5:1 - 4).
F.W.W. Do you suggest that these principles are at work today, and we have to serve as to them?
J.T. Well, we have the instruction here as to how we
{399}
are to serve in changed circumstances, because circumstances are constantly changing. But the principles on which we are moving do *not* change. There must therefore be continuance in the divine principles. There is a great difference between the attitude of the king in this chapter towards Daniel and the attitude of the king in chapter 4. Daniel is scarcely known; in fact, the king's inquiry is, "Art thou *that* Daniel, of the children of the captivity of Judah?" But, then, he had something to distinguish him besides the fact that he was of the captivity, and Belshazzar must have known this. The queen made no reference to the captivity.
Ques. What had you in mind in regard to wine in these circumstances?
J.T. It is to call attention to the contrast here to what becomes kings. According to @Proverbs 31:4, "it is not for kings to drink wine". You see a shameful drop from this when you see royalty dragged down to the level of debauchery. I think it is to call attention to that, that such prominence is given to the use of wine by Belshazzar.
Ques. Is the contrast in Daniel, a man filled, as we may say, with the Spirit of God?
J.T. We are not to be drunk with wine, but filled with the Spirit.
Rem. The queen said, "There is a man in thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods".
J.T. She was probably the queen-mother; I think she is the overcomer here. That is, God has someone in the time of a 'down-grade' to lift up a voice against it. There is always someone to lift up his voice for the Lord.
W.H.M. Someone like Pilate's wife, about whom you were speaking yesterday.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The queen-mother here is the overcomer, to a certain point. She was not in the debauchery: "The queen, by reason of the words of the king and his nobles, came into the banquet-house".
{400}
It seems she came in to meet the crisis. God never leaves Himself without witness, even though the witness be very feeble.
W.H.M. Daniel looked toward *Jerusalem* and prayed three times a day. Is your thought in reading the last verse that "they shall prosper that love thee", (@Psalm 122:6)?
J.T. Yes; he loved Jerusalem. The emphasis is on Daniel, beginning with chapter 1, his refusal of the king's meat, and now his prosperity; not only that he continued till Cyrus, but he prospered during his reign.
J.C. Do you mean that what is effective in the testimony is in a subjective line?
J.T. Yes. So that the queen here knew of Daniel, saying that there was a man in the kingdom who *had the Spirit*. Belshazzar had *wine*. The influence of wine marked that banquet-hall, and the man's hand appears; pointing to the Son of man. All judgment is in the hands of the Son of man, which is, I take it, to assure mankind that if judgment is executed, it is not for want of feeling, want of sympathy. God is obliged to do it from the exigencies of His own nature. Judgment is His strange work, but He is obliged to resort to it. And in using a *man's* hand, it shows He is not without feeling. "The queen spoke and said, O king, live for ever! let not thy thoughts trouble thee ... There is a man in thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods". She would not mean much, because of her limited knowledge, but the Holy Spirit records it here to show that she understood that Daniel had a spirit beyond what was merely human -- "the spirit of the holy gods". It was supernatural, it was outside of ordinary man.
J.H.T. What is the secret of this prosperity that you spoke of?
J.T. I suppose the kneeling down. Chapter 1 gives us the fundamental element of Daniel's constitution; he added to his faith, virtue. Peter gives the list of additions,
{401}
and I think chapter 1 is the first: having faith, have virtue in it, power to say 'No' to what is damaging, and 'Yes' to what is of God.
Chapter 1 is the first thing. Chapter 2 is the priestly side, which is emphasised in chapter 6, that at all cost he would maintain his active priestly relations with God, and have an eye to His chief interest on earth. You hear much in prayer oftentimes, and very little with regard to the chief interest of God on earth. No one can prosper without that. As has been remarked, "they shall prosper that love thee".
J.H.C. Would the assembly today answer to Jerusalem?
J.T. Oh, yes; it is the chief interest of God on earth. However desolate Jerusalem was, it was the divine selection. "Here will I dwell, for I have desired it" (@Psalm 132:14). That was in Daniel's heart, he loved Jerusalem.
H.B. Why does Daniel go into his house and kneel down at the open windows? Could he not have done it more secretly?
J.T. I think to show that he was not going to allow the enemy to hinder his service, to show that priestly service is to go on.
A.S.L. "As he did aforetime".
J.T. That is the idea. Why should God be robbed? In principle, Daniel is laying down his life.
J.B. "The righteous are bold as a lion", (@Proverbs 28:1).
J.T. Exactly.
W.S.S. It almost seems as if the pressure had brought to light the secret of his prosperity.
J.T. That is the point; when you are forced to the wall, the secret of your power is brought to light. Here is a man alone: notice that these men came in "a body" not in an assembly. It is not a question of intelligence, but of the number of persons. That is to say, we are now on the ground of politics. Chapter 6 is politics. So that it is a question of the number, the
{402}
number of votes, as is commonly said. These men came in a body to see Daniel pray.
But we are going too fast; we ought not to pass the queen-mother so quickly, because she is a very fine figure. She had no part in the banquet; it was a drunken scene.
J.T-l. Does she illustrate the Lord's words to Philadelphia, "thou ... hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name" (@Revelation 3:8)?
J.T. Well, she is an important character here; she came in to meet the crisis. She was not without sympathy for her son (or grandson), but she had in her mind that there was a spiritual man in his kingdom. He was not at a distance -- "a man in thy kingdom". God had a witness there, and that witness was in keeping with the hand that was seen on the wall. She was stressing the fact that this man had something different from the natural, and for us that is the Spirit of God. 1 Corinthians enlarges on this.
J.T-l. It stands out in the midst of apostasy. Does Daniel represent the Lord, in some way, just at this juncture?
J.T. I think he does. What one would seek to bring out is the importance of witness. As we have said many times, "for a testimony to them". What we are coming to now is not the disciplinary act of God, but a punitive act of God, and He *will* act in direct retribution. He did not do so to Nebuchadnezzar. And I think that in our dispensation, up to the present time, the government of God in the main has had the testimony in view; His actions have not been punitive, strictly. Terrible things have happened during the last two thousand years, but in the main they have resulted in a way being made for the testimony, that the gospel might have free course.
Ahab's history is a good illustration of God's present attitude towards christendom. Ahab is said to have been a worse king than all who preceded him, and *that* before
{403}
he married Jezebel. Jezebel made him worse. But God singles out that man to give him Elijah the prophet and several other prophets. So the Syrians attack, and God says, I will give them into your hand, and you are to lead the army, composed of the servants of the princes of the provinces (see @1 Kings 20:13,14). And on two occasions God gives that man remarkable victories. After the first great defeat of the Syrians, they say, "Jehovah is a god of the mountains, but he is not a god of the valleys" (verse 28). Well, God would show, through Ahab, that He was the God of the valleys as well, and the second defeat is irretrievable; there is a tremendous slaughter of the Syrians by Israel, who had before the battle looked like two flocks of goats in the presence of such a vast opposing multitude. But it was God, acting through Ahab (see @1 Kings 20). So that I think what we should see is that God is still going on in grace, not because of favourable conditions, but in spite of adverse conditions. It is to show His grace and patience. But that will come to an end. He had gone on with Nebuchadnezzar, and others, but the time had come now for judgment of that phase of the gentile system. It was numbered and found wanting. God is still acting in grace; while Christ is on the Father's throne, that will continue, but it will not continue for ever. The servant is to observe the fingers of a man's hand writing. It is the Son of man. All judgment is given to the Son of man; the Father judges no one (see @John 5:22).
W.C.G. Do you mean that the two deliverances you mentioned in connection with Ahab would set forth the deliverance of the Reformation?
J.T. Well, that sort of intervention, and what is more recent. God goes on to witness in the public body in spite of the terrible conditions.
A.S.L. God takes note of the smallest movements towards Himself. "Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me?" therefore, "I will not bring the evil
{404}
in his days". He was a wicked man, but he humbled himself, (@1 Kings 21:29).
J.T. Well, that is the light, I am sure, in which you would stand up to preach; any movement in anyone, be he a prince or a beggar, toward God, is owned of Him.
F.I. Where do you place the queen-mother in this present application?
J.T. Such persons may exist, who are christians. During the war voices were lifted up in favour of the people of God; otherwise, there would have been no provision made for them, but there was provision made for them. There is no justification for a christian to be anywhere but actually out on the side of Christ, but God knows how to adjust, with His own righteousness, His use of anyone who may be in worldly associations.
G.R.G. Does she represent love?
J.T. Yes. She was concerned for her son; but she knew Daniel and the kind of spirit he had.
J.H.C. Had you anything in your mind as to why she speaks of him as "a man"?
J.T. I think there is a link between that reference and the hand that wrote on the wall. The fingers of a man's hand would mean that God is not acting arbitrarily, that He has no pleasure in judgment, it is His strange work, and if He has to resort to it, it is because of the exigencies of His nature. It is really the exigencies of His love, if God brings in a scene for His pleasure, it is surely love to remove what this banquet represents. What is it but man in Satan's hands?
J.H.T. If the Lord hides His identity -- the fingers only seen -- would the *man* that the queen brings forward be the answer, as standing in public testimony?
J.T. There is certainly correspondence between the fingers and the man who had the Spirit. He is still here, but he is not going to act or speak out of accord with the writing on the wall. His testimony corresponds exactly.
{405}
What is written is written; it is only for Daniel to explain the words. They are terrible -- the very reverse of the gospel! There is no time given to Belshazzar: "that night was Belshazzar ... slain". The judgment was swift.
J.T-l. There was no word of counsel given to Belshazzar, as to Nebuchadnezzar.
J.T. Knowing that the time of judgment is near should affect us. "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men", (@2 Corinthians 5:11).
The vessels of the house of God are seen here. They had been placed by Nebuchadnezzar in the treasure-house of his god, but now they are prostituted to a man's lust. It is as Belshazzar *tasted the wine* that he commanded them to be brought in, and he, his nobles, his wives and his concubines drank in them. You could hardly conceive of anything more offensive to God.
A.S.L. And this by a man who was the son of Nebuchadnezzar who became converted, and gave such a testimony. So that the queen says, "the king thy father". It would recall to him that he was not following the steps of his father.
J.T. Daniel says, "Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet will I read the writing to the king, and make known to him the interpretation. O thou king, the Most High God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father the kingdom". I think we do well to take notice of this, because we should be concerned that there should be such a testimony today. "There is a man in thy kingdom" -- we need to be like that man, men who have the Spirit. I am thinking of the crises that have arisen in human affairs, how God overrules to bring to light men who have the Spirit.
J.H.T. You get a man who corresponds with this queen in Gamaliel (@Acts 5) standing up and saying, "if it be from God ...".
J.T. Yes, a man that God used at that juncture; he spoke as having some knowledge of God. There can be
{406}
no doubt that this queen was acquainted with Daniel; doubtless she often heard him speak.
W.H. So that the witness was *there*?
J.T. That is it, God had His witness in the queen, who called attention to Daniel.
O.M. Would the queen have been impressed by the bearing of Daniel, as a man who was like God?
J.T. I think she would; she must have been acquainted with him.
W.S.S. There are two thoughts here -- "a man ... in whom is the spirit of the holy gods", and, of an "excellent spirit". It says in @Proverbs 17:27 "a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit". That should characterise us.
J.T. It is a great thing for the brethren to have before them that God would develop spirituality. Paul says, "I think that *I* also have God's Spirit", (@1 Corinthians 7:40). He distinguishes between his own faculty of judgment and the Spirit of God. We have to distinguish between our own spirits and the Spirit of God. The Spirit forms a man -- including his spirit -- and then uses him. The vessel God uses is thus the whole man; the Holy Spirit in him is distinct.
W.S.S. I was thinking of the necessity of the two things. You get suggested in Joshua, "a man in whom is the Spirit"; and in Caleb, a man of "another spirit", (@Numbers 14:24).
J.T. That is what Jehovah had in mind: the man who was to lead His people had the Spirit (see @Numbers 27). The queen-mother had this thought; she also referred to the kind of spirit that Daniel himself had -- an "excellent spirit".
L.M. And she does not speak of him as a captive, but as "a man in thy kingdom"; she had discernment as to something there that was really to be appreciated.
J.T. She says, "There is a man in thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of
{407}
thy father, light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods was found in him; and the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, even the king thy father, made him master of the scribes, magicians, Chaldeans, and astrologers; forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and solving of problems, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar. Now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the interpretation" (verses 11,12). That is a very fine speech, showing what God may have in high places, that in a crisis calls attention to what He has in His own direct testimony here -- those in whom the Spirit is.
Ques. Do we get the same thing in the chief butler, with regard to Pharaoh's dreams? The butler draws attention to Joseph, (@Genesis 41).
J.T. Yes, only his testimony is not equal to that of the queen here; still, it was testimony.
R.A. Is it necessary for a person to be under the control of the Spirit in order to come out in witness?
J.T. That is the divine thought, for it is only by the Spirit that God can be rightly presented. How great a thing it has to be -- a vessel in whom the Spirit of God can bear testimony! We cannot, however, regard the queen in our chapter in this way, but rather as a person whom God uses providentially.
Rem. There are many believers that might not altogether come out in testimony whom God may use in this way.
J.T. Yes. The Spirit, however, is the power of testimony. Let us remember that! The testimony is in the power of the anointing.
Ques. Does not Peter's first epistle show that it was always that? "In which (Spirit) also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison" (chapter 3:19).
Rem. But, as you said, persons may be used of God who cannot be said to be characterised by the Spirit.
{408}
J.T. Yes; but the Lord stands up and says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach", (@Luke 4:18). His ministry was in the power of the Spirit. He did not enter on His ministry until He was anointed. That principle continues. So that the Holy Spirit, as coming down at Pentecost, is not viewed as coming *into* the saints, but *upon* them. That is, it is a question of testimony.
F.I. Do you think this chapter would warrant us to render testimony as to the destruction of the apostate system?
J.T. Surely. The handwriting is on the wall, and we do not want to be out of accord with it. Of course we have not the whole truth here, because no space for repentance is given; judgment descended that night. But with us it is not so: whilst we announce the judgment of God, we announce the gospel.
Rem. Paul says, "Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom", (@Colossians 1:28). There is warning in that way.
J.T. We see here that God deals with man on the principle of weighing and measuring, taking great pains, using the fingers. Fingers here point to God entering into details in His dealings with the public body, bringing out His fairness, that He omits nothing; He takes account of everything.
W.H.M. The queen had evidently been watching Daniel; her instincts were of God. She had seen how he was prospering toward God.
J.T. She knew him, and knew where he was; whereas the king did not. The king says, "Art thou *that* Daniel, of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Judah?" (verse 13). This is how he refers to him.
W.S.S. The queen-mother suggests something that we should be exercised about -- recognition of what is spiritual.
{409}
J.T. Yes; and to reckon that God *will* have witnesses, persons in high places, or, maybe, low places, who are conversant with what is really of Him in this world.
J.H.T. Proverbs speaks about a false balance being an abomination to the Lord, but a just weight is His delight (see chapter 11:1). Is that what we get in the weighing?
J.T. Yes; how God deals with the public system, even as He deals with all of us. He is a God of measure. So that the explanation is, "MENE, God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it; TEKEL, Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting; PERES, Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians".
F.W.W. The writing here reminds us of the writing on the ground by the Lord's finger, in @John 8.
J.T. Now, chapter 6 is a new feature of the gentile system. The deterioration has set in, but God has a man who has a certain regard for Him. The evil now is not in the king, but in what corresponds to the second part of the constitution of this country -- the lords and commons. The king corresponds somewhat with the queen of chapter 5. The evil now is in "the presidents and the satraps". Satan is working through them. Yet how remarkable that God should have a king who regards Daniel! So that there is something there to check the enemy's working.
Ques. Do you mean that the kingdom had degenerated into a republic?
J.T. Well, it was practically that. The king was bound by the laws; it was what you might call 'a limited monarchy'.
J.H.T. Is not the number one hundred and twenty (verse 1) interesting and instructive, in contrast to what you get in the Acts, where, quite apart from the world's system, you have one hundred and twenty on whom the Spirit came?
J.T. Yes, indeed. It is a number that is made by
{410}
12 times 10. It would represent administrative authority in responsibility. In the enemy's power it is a very terrible thing. At Pentecost it is the power of God controlling the persons mentioned.
F.S. Do you distinguish between the "powers that be" and the politicians?
J.T. I do. I should not pray for a politician, as such, but as he gets into power I should. But although these men were in power they were serving the enemy. "These presidents and satraps came in a body to the king" (verse 6). They were acting against Daniel, who was God's servant.
J.B. Do you think the degeneration of the kingdom is shown here, in that they compel the king to make a decree?
J.T. It brings out the weakness of the position, that they used the king for their own ends. The suggestion comes from them; he is just a tool in their hands. They wanted to attack Daniel. It is Satan's device to get rid of the testimony; the leading men, the statesmen of the realm, coming under the power of Satan. So that the idea of the voice of the people being the voice of God is blasphemous. Here it is the voice of Satan.
E.W. The whole effort is in relation to Daniel worshipping his God.
J.T. That is it; the enemy had his eye on the testimony. In chapter 5 the queen had called attention to Daniel, and he had spoken the mind of God to the king; and so in chapter 6 the whole machinery of the realm is moved to get rid of Daniel. Daniel is praying to God. How Satan hates praying people!
J.G. Do we find that at the end of 2 Timothy? Paul, the vessel of the testimony, is in similar circumstances; he speaks about being delivered out of the mouth of the lion, that "the proclamation might be fully made" (chapter 4:17). God would have the proclamation still made known.
{411}
J.T. Quite so; he says, "At my first answer". One would like to know what he said, but it is not recorded. It was, no doubt, a full statement of the truth. But then, the Lord stood by him, that by him the preaching might be fully known. God had selected that man that by him the preaching should be presented, and God would stand by him. Daniel represents that here.
W.S.S. Do we see another part of the secret of Daniel's prosperity in verse 4? They could not find occasion against him concerning the kingdom it, says, "inasmuch as he was faithful".
J.T. Quite so; they resolved that the only way to get at him was in regard to his relations with God. It is the priestly service here, a praying man. Chapter 5 calls attention to Daniel as having the Spirit, and chapter 6 shows how it is maintained. It is all very well if you get the victory one day, but what will you do the next day? You give an address, and you feel supported by the Lord, but the next night you may be flat, you may not have any power. How are you to continue in power in your service? By praying. Chapter 6 calls attention to that.
G.F.G. Do we see here what you were referring to last night, one taking root downward? In Nebuchadnezzar's reign, Daniel is ruler over the province of Babylon and chief of the governors over all the wise men; then in Belshazzar's reign he is clothed with purple and made third ruler in the kingdom; and in Darius¬ kingdom he is one of three presidents having jurisdiction over all, and his service so surpassing and his spirit so excellent, that the king thought to appoint him over the whole realm.
J.T. Yes. His prosperity is evidently founded in prayer. Luke's gospel opens up what that means. Daniel is the praying man, and Satan would destroy him.
Rem. It is instructive to see that as Aaron trimmed the lamps every morning, and when he lighted them every evening, incense was offered up on the altar (@Exodus 30:7,8)
{412}
indicating that if the light is to be maintained, it is in the power of priestly intercession with God.
H.C.L. What is the thought in the kingdom being silver?
J.T. Just gradual deterioration. You cannot make anything more out of it. It is a less valuable metal than gold.
G.W.W. There is deterioration, as you were saying, but Daniel is found in the same spirit under the silver kingdom as he was under the gold. *He* was not deteriorating.
J.T. That is the thing; he goes on and prospers.
G.W.W. The queen said that Daniel had an excellent spirit, and chapter 6 shows that he continues in this.
Rem. We get that same thought suggested in Joseph; whether it is in his father's house, or over the land of Egypt, the same spirit comes out.
W.H.M. The Lord made him prosper, whether in his father's house, in the prison, or ruling Egypt.
J.T. What God would do today is to bring out correspondence with what was at the beginning. He would show that there is no deterioration, and that involves prayer. Deterioration means that I am depending on myself. That was Nebuchadnezzar's breakdown: "Is not this great Babylon, that *I* have built?" If prayer is continued, we shall be in accord with the beginning. And I think that is what God would bring about, that the end should be as the beginning.
J.H.C. It is interesting to see that when the bride describes her beloved, she says not only that "his head is as the finest gold", but His legs are like "pillars of marble, set upon bases of fine gold", (@Song of Songs 5:11,15).
J.T. That is a striking contrast. One of the most important features of this book is the continuance of Daniel, and how he stands in his lot at the last; the moral application is that there is to be continuance, there is to be no deterioration in our testimony, but the maintenance of
{413}
the Spirit of Christ, and the intelligence that is spoken of here as in Daniel. So that God has such a testimony to call attention to, right to the end of the gentile monarchies.
A.S.L. And the word to the churches, seven times repeated, is really a word to the individual at the close of each church: "To him that overcometh". "Hold fast what thou hast" -- perseverance maintains what is of God.
J.T. Your thought is that deterioration is prevented by the overcomer?
A.S.L. That is right, and the great exercise with each of us should be to be an overcomer. You may say, I have been in fellowship for fifty years. But are you an *overcomer* in the fellowship! For this we need to go to Gilgal.
J.T. So that in this chapter we have direct testimony to the second phase of the gentile domination; and there is a word sent out similar to that of Nebuchadnezzar: "Then king Darius wrote unto all peoples, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth: Peace be multiplied unto you. I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel; for he is the living God, and steadfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the end. He saveth and delivereth, and he worketh signs and wonders in the heavens and on the earth: who hath saved Daniel from the power of the lions". So that this second phase, that of the Medes and Persians, is favoured by God also, and this remarkable testimony goes out.
W.C.G. Does it not show that if God is trusted and there is correspondence to His character, conspirators will fall into the pit that they dig?
J.T. So that the evil is dealt with, as Daniel's would-be murderers are cast relentlessly into the den of lions and destroyed.
Ques. Is that why it says, "*I* make a decree"?
J.T. Yes, he does not call others into it. He returns to
{414}
the 'gold'; there is thus recovery, but of course it was not maintained.
H.B-t. Would you say a little about the lions?
J.T. Well, I suppose they are chosen as instruments of cruelty. The passage shows what God can be to us in their very midst.
A.S.L. Our adversary, the devil, is likened to a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, but there is One who can stop his mouth.
J.T. The king spoke to Daniel in a mournful voice. Poor, helpless, man, bound by his ministers! As regards himself, he is with Daniel; he spoke with a mournful voice, which is touching, showing his feelings. "O Daniel, servant of the living God, hath thy God whom thou servest continually been able to save thee from the lions?" He notes that *he served Him continually*. And "Then Daniel spoke unto the king, O king, live for ever! My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions¬ mouths, that they have not hurt me; forasmuch as before him innocence was found in me" (verses 21,22), that is, before God, "and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt". Note that the "living God" is an addition here. He is now known as the living God, and so introduced as such in the proclamation.
W.S.S. Does that suggest that in spite of all the deterioration outwardly, where there is appreciation of what God is there is increase? Nebuchadnezzar speaks of Him as the God of heaven, but Darius speaks of Him as the living God.
A.S.L. Daniel speaks of Him as "*My* God". Remarkable testimony from these two kings, Nebuchadnezzar and Darius!
J.T. Very remarkable! I was thinking of it as spread abroad in their empires. And now it is our time -- the iron and the miry clay. We want to bring in the Spirit of Christ so that God can call attention to this as a testimony.
{415}
A.E.D. Have you in mind in all this the man of Macedonia whom Paul saw?
J.T. Yes; that vision to the apostle enters into what we were saying, because Macedonia represents the third gentile monarchy. "Come over ... and help us", he is saying to a despicable man, as the Greeks would regard Paul. He is not of Alexander's type -- Alexander would not appeal to a man like Paul. This is the kind of man that God would have in Europe, a man that would look to Paul. He is not the "O man" in @Romans 2. That "O man" that Paul addresses is the characteristic Greek. "Thou art inexcusable, O man, every one who judges", that is the Greek; he is inexcusable. But the man who says "Come over ... and help us" is needy and dependent.
J.H.T. The man who goes into Europe can call attention to himself as in keeping with that: "I myself, Paul, entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of the Christ", (@2 Corinthians 10:1).
J.T. That is the testimony, I am sure, the kind of testimony that God would present to the last phase of the gentile system.
W.H.M. And the first thing at Philippi is prayer. Paul found a river where prayer was wont to be made; and faith then comes in, in the jailer. Here, Daniel's prayer and faith are both emphasised.
{416}
THE SERVANT, HIS SUPPORT AND CONTINUANCE (4)
@Daniel 9:1 - 4, 20 - 25; @Daniel 10:11 - 21; @Daniel 12:1 - 13
J.T. What is seen in the second part of the book which is now before us, is the confidence that God placed in Daniel; he has the place of a friend. According to the word, God would do nothing save what He would make known to His servants the prophets (@Amos 3:7). That is a principle of great importance. God would draw us into His secrets. So that evidently Daniel rises in the appreciation of heaven: his value on the earth is depreciating, but he increases in value in heaven; he is regarded as 'beloved' several times in these chapters, suggestive of the advance that the servant makes. In devotedness to God's interests he becomes increasingly beloved.
In chapter 7 he has visions from God. "Daniel saw a dream and visions of his head upon his bed". That is, they are not from the standpoint of his exercises. Chapter 9 *is* from this standpoint, but here he gets the vision *on his bed*. God unfolds to him in these two chapters (7 and 8) the two great branches of the gentile domination, those towards the west in chapter 7, and those towards the east in chapter 8. And then, chapter 9 is the outcome of his exercises; it is not what he gets on his bed, but on his *knees*. He is exercised about his own people, his own city; taking an intercessory place with God with regard to them. He is seen praying, elsewhere, but we have his prayer *in extenso* in chapter 9; it runs on to the end of verse 19. I suppose the Holy Spirit would lay out before us the intercessory character of his service with regard to that which was dearest to the heart of God, and dearest to the heart of Daniel; that is, Jerusalem and God's people.
{417}
W.H.M. He speaks to God of His faithfulness, keeping His covenant and mercy.
J.T. Yes. That is, he prays to God as then known, the covenant God of Israel. It is a great matter to have a right basis for our prayer. So that he first says, "I Daniel understood by the books that the number of the years, whereof the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the prophet, for the accomplishment of the desolations of Jerusalem, was seventy years". That is the first thing, that he understood, not simply by Jeremiah's prophecy, but by *books*. He no doubt read what there was of value.
W.S.S. Is it your thought that in chapter 9 to the end we get what is given to the servant as a result of desire and exercise?
J.T. Yes. Chapters 7 and 8 are more God's concern -- what Daniel gets on his bed.
F.R.B. Would you give us the reason for his being called beloved?
J.T. Immediately, it is because of his great exercise in his prayer in regard to the city and the people, but the 'beloved' character of the man goes back farther than that. It is well to bear in mind that heaven has likes and dislikes. This book shows that in our walk and service we have to inquire whether we are liked up there. A beloved person is a lovable person.
J.H.T. I was wondering if the lovable feature of Paul would come out early; and then the Lord appearing to him by night in a vision, saying, "I have much people in this city", (@Acts 18:10) would correspond with Daniel 7 and 8. And then, bowing his knees to the God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ -- would that go with chapter 9?
J.T. I am sure there is correspondence. The knees bowed means exercise in prayer; (compare @Colossians 2:1 - 3).
F.R.B. Does not the Lord reveal Himself to such? "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him", (@John 14:23).
{418}
J.T. Quite so. I think John's writings would amplify this thought, that not only is one to be successful in his service, but he is to be lovable. John is not presented in Scripture as a leader or model in service; he was a companion of Peter in his early work, but aside from his writings there is not much prominence given to his individual service; but he makes much of lovability.
E.W. He was "the disciple whom Jesus loved".
J.T. He was.
H.B. You would take John, then, to have been a man who was liked in heaven?
J.T. Yes. I think he represents, in the New Testament, lovability. Normally heaven's tastes are reflected in the saints. So that, whilst one may be an effective servant in the way of preaching and teaching, he must not forget that he must be a lovable servant as well.
That Daniel should become the depositary of God's mind as regards the east and west is a very important matter. Chapters 7 and 8 are most interesting and instructive. As we are equal to it, God talks of His things to us. We are told that Abraham was His friend, and we are told that God spoke to Moses as a man speaks to his friend. We can understand therefore that God graciously makes things known to those who love Him. Of course I am not overlooking that Daniel was a prophet, and that he is employed here as such. In these chapters Christ is alluded to prophetically as Son of man, and Daniel is addressed by this title, so that the ground is wider than that of Israel.
W.H. Was he maintained in the spirit of Christ in this service?
J.T. He was. One point with Daniel is continuance, so that in the midst of these great events there is one to whom God can speak. God primarily speaks to him without any solicitation on his part, as far as Scripture shows; but in chapter 9 it *is* on account of his solicitation.
{419}
J.H.T. The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, (see @Revelation 19:10).
J.T. But in chapter 10 Daniel is not equal in strength to the great revelation, and here we get another thing -- priestly support. I mention this as indicating what is in the chapter for our souls. First, we have a man getting the divine mind without special solicitations, and then receiving it on account of solicitations, and then again the great exercise of fasting and prayer, and another great revelation or disclosure, and he is not equal to it; all this brings out what is available for the servant. In chapter 10 there is the priestly support that we get in relation to the *man* clothed with linen.
W.H. His strength was gone, and the priest comes in to help?
J.T. Yes, so that he might stand upon his feet, and take in what was presented to him.
G.F.G. Is it your thought that before it is said he understood by books he had a vision from God?
J.T. Yes, in chapters 7 and 8. But you will notice in these chapters that he is not without interest in the visions, but is very concerned to understand them, especially what relates to the fourth beast. This is the beast that had to do with Christ directly, and with christianity. It is to be remarked that while these six chapters are prophetic, each vision gives special encouragement for faith, for the final deliverance of the people of God is ever in view. This is for the cheer of those in the Lord's service also; we are to be assured that our labour is not in vain in the Lord.
W.H.M. Is your thought about the priestly service that it is connected with the evening oblation?
J.T. That is a touch; it would mean that Daniel was maintaining the full height of spirituality. The evening oblation is to correspond with the morning. As you will remember, in the types there were the morning and the evening lambs, accompanied by the oblations and drink
{420}
offerings (see @Exodus 29:38 - 41). It was about the time of the evening oblation, which would be dear to his heart. He would value the morning and the evening sacrifices. Many of us are more vigorous in the morning than in the evening. The evening sacrifice is that I should be equally vigorous in the evening as in the morning, that there should be no diminution in spiritual power by the wear and tear of the day. Daniel evidently maintained the height of spirituality under all circumstances. The morning and evening sacrifices were of equal value.
W.H.M. David says, "Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, the lifting up of my hands as the evening oblation", (@Psalm 141:2).
J.T. Normally we are vigorous in the morning, but the heat of the day causes decline. I believe that household readings and prayer are of great value in God's sight.
F.R.B. That is the true thought of continuance.
J.T. Yes. So that Daniel says, "Whilst I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before Jehovah my God for the holy mountain of my God; whilst I was yet speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, flying swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation". That would mean that Daniel was in full priestly vigour in his prayer -- *whilst* he was doing these things. He enumerates what he was doing.
F.S. All these experiences you would have us all to go in for -- the bed -- and having to get up to approach God?
J.T. Yes. The experience of lying in bed, in chapter 7, would be quite acceptable to God; you are restful, that is necessary. It is not easy to get much of that in these meetings; you do not get much time for rest. But it is very important to be restful, if you are to receive something from God. Being on your knees, as in chapter 9, is also most necessary; but in a time of restfulness God can pour in His thoughts to the soul. It is not laziness, it is
{421}
restfulness. But in chapter 9 it is the other side, it is energy. Daniel is engaged in all these things, and the touch is at the time of the evening oblation.
F.W.W. What is the force of Gabriel coming in here?
J.T. Well, he has a great place in Scripture. He is specially Luke's angel. He is not a military man -- Michael is the military angel. He comes to Daniel at the time of the evening oblation. In Luke, he has a remarkable place; it was he who stood beside the golden altar, it was he who had to do with the Lord's birth. I think he is the priestly angel.
F.W.W. Does he bring in the thought of grace and support?
J.T. I thought that -- priestly ministration. He would thoroughly understand Daniel, and his priestly exercise here, and so conveys the mind of God to him. God used him to convey His mind to the prophet. And so, in regard to the birth of John the baptist, he understood the position of the golden altar (@Luke 1). No doubt the heavenly dignitaries have their offices; I should say that Gabriel's is priestly.
J.C. This heavenly dignitary was detained three weeks, (chapter 10:13).
J.T. That would be spiritual opposition; "The prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me". It would be most comforting to Daniel to have a priestly dignitary in heaven, and one who could come to him in this way. Of course, that is all centred in Christ now -- all that Michael meant, all that Gabriel meant, is centred in Christ personally in heaven. The same remarks apply to angelic representation of children spoken of by the Lord in @Matthew 18.
Ques. Does not that make the "touch" here all the more important? He came and *touched* him.
J.T. Well, Daniel would understand the priestly touch. No doubt it would greatly accentuate his ability to take in the communication that was about to be made
{422}
to him. The book greatly stresses the value of prayer -- what heaven thinks of a praying person.
J.H.T. In @Luke 22:41 - 43 we read: "And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw, and having knelt down he prayed, saying, Father, if thou wilt remove this cup from me: -- but then, not my will, but thine be done. And an angel appeared to him from heaven strengthening him".
J.B. Do you think it is the Lord's way to sustain you in relation to the unfoldings He gives?
J.T. That is what comes out in chapters 10 and 11; the great sympathy of heaven with Daniel. The lesson for us is that as we advance in the Lord's service heaven becomes more interested: we begin to get weak as we grow old. God knows this and has sympathy for us, helping us accordingly. So that there is a great deal in these chapters to encourage the servants who are advanced in years to continue, not to give up, but to go on. As was remarked, Daniel was very old at this time.
L.M. It would be the same as, "though our outward man is consumed, yet the inward man is renewed day by day", (@2 Corinthians 4:16).
H.B-t. In this chapter Daniel was very old; probably more than ninety, this being the third year of Cyrus.
J.T. "The third year of Cyrus" directs us back to earlier statements as to Daniel's continuance and prosperity. Cyrus had by this time issued his proclamation for the building of the house of God at Jerusalem (@Ezra 1).
H.B-t. John was very old when he was at Patmos.
J.T. There is a great analogy between John and Daniel. You have the idea of continuance in John (@John 21:22) and in Daniel. For those who are getting on in years, it is a great matter if heaven, takes special notice of us. It would touch us, so that we should not give in, but go on in grace and patience. Chapter 12 shows us that a definite end is reached. There is resurrection, and Daniel's people will be delivered, and Daniel shall stand in his lot.
{423}
No matter how old we may be, we are to keep on; the Lord will specially sustain us.
A.S.L. "They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing; to shew that the Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him" (@Psalm 92:14,15). With regard to these servants getting on to ninety, it would convey to us that the Lord is upright, and there is no unrighteousness with Him. He indicated that it should be so, and it turns out to be so.
W.H.M. Another verse occurs to one, "The hoary head is a crown of glory", (@Proverbs 16:31).
R.W. "Who satisfieth thine old age with good things; thy youth is renewed like the eagle's" (@Psalm 103:5). That creature has great strength.
Rem. It says in @Acts 21:16 that Paul was to stay with an *old disciple*. Would he be one who would encourage Paul in the pathway?
J.T. He would, indeed! He was to stay with him at Jerusalem. I think it was rather a reflection on what was in Jerusalem; they had evidently waned in their hospitality; things had gone down in Jerusalem, so that the apostle brings his host with him. "An old disciple, with whom we were to lodge". Old persons need attention themselves; but this man must have had the character of a host.
R.M. He may have been one of the five hundred to whom the Lord appeared at once!
W.S.S. I was thinking of chapter 9:23; "At the beginning of thy supplications the word went forth", corresponding with the similar expression in chapter 10:12: "from the first day that thou didst set thy heart to understand". These are very encouraging on the lines you have been bringing before us.
J.T. It seems to me that the Lord, in these closing chapters, including what we had this morning, would speak to us of prayer, as the secret of continuance. As we
{424}
were saying, old age creeps on, and God would have us to be fresh: not only keeping up with present truth, but being lovable and fresh in it.
L.M. It is very good for the old to have those that are young before them, but I think often that we do need to consider the older ones.
J.T. Yes. In almost every prayer, or word of ministry the young are in view, which is of course right; but the old require attention, too.
J.H.T. What they did with Ruth's child is important; they put him in Naomi's bosom, and said, "He shall be ... a nourisher of thine old age", (@Ruth 4:15).
J.T. The communication here by Gabriel is important; it is connecting the people with Daniel. He says, "Therefore consider the word, and have understanding in the vision: Seventy weeks are apportioned out upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to close the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make expiation for iniquity, and to bring in the righteousness of the ages, and to seal the vision and prophet, and to anoint the holy of holies. Know therefore and understand: From the going forth of the word to restore and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah, the Prince, are seven weeks, and sixty-two weeks. The street and the moat shall be built again, even in troublous times. And after the sixty-two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, and shall have nothing". This is in answer to Daniel's prayer, to instruct him as to what was near his heart, Jerusalem and the people -- "thy people", "thy holy city".
J.B. And he would stand in his lot, as it says in chapter 12:13, "thou shalt stand in thy lot".
J.T. Daniel might query, Why *my* people and *my* holy city? I think it would lead him to think of how God *put things on him*. He had taken that ground.
Rem. In verse 19, Daniel says, "*Thy* city and *thy* people".
J.T. Yes, that was intelligent, but the angel says to
{425}
him, "*thy* people and ... *thy* holy city". It indicates how God places responsibility on the servant.
H.B-t. What is the thought of anointing the holy of holies?
J.T. I suppose to make it suitable for God. It had been desecrated; the prophecy would indicate that. I suppose it is to make it dignified, suitable for God, for His service. But, this thought of thy people and thy holy city raises the question as to how much I can take on. What is my attitude in regard to these things? God is putting something on me when He says, *thy* people and *thy* holy city.
F.W. Is it a recognition of Daniel's priestly state?
J.T. No doubt. He had rightly said they were God's people and God's city, but Gabriel says, "thy people ... thy holy city". Well, I have to consider what stands related to me in this way. I must see to the saints as thus obligated to them. Now it is a question of *his* people. He had been occupied with the gentiles.
W.C.G. Would you say he is a true pillar in the house of God, according to Revelation?
J.T. Exactly; the overcomer in Philadelphia is made that. He is honoured.
W.C.G. It is a great favour.
J.T. Does it not appeal to you as to what you can take on?
Ques. Is not that the true character of a priest?
J.T. Exactly. But it is a question of one's power; the breadth, the scope of what one accepts. I believe it is an important matter as to how much we take on. What have I taken on to do for the Lord? because service implies a transaction with the Lord. What obligation have you taken on?
W.C.G. The apostle Paul says, "*my* glad tidings".
J.T. Yes, and necessity is laid upon him. "It is woe to *me* if I should not announce the glad tidings" (@1 Corinthians 9:16).
{426}
W.C.G. The psalmist said, "I do bear in my bosom the reproach of all the mighty people", (@Psalm 89:50).
J.T. But the Lord took it on supremely at the cross; it is the spirit of Christ, to take on things.
H.B-t. @Ruth 1:16 says, "thy people shall be my people".
J.B. In John's third epistle he speaks of his children, "my children". He rejoiced greatly to see them walking in the truth.
J.T. You see how Joseph took on the obligation of his father's house in what he says to Pharaoh (@Genesis 47). He identified himself with them. *He* was lord of all Egypt, but they would tend to discredit him, especially because they were shepherds; he selected five and tutored them, because he was to be identified with them as bringing them in before Pharaoh. That is to say, he took on that obligation.
W.S.S. Daniel identified himself with the people: "We have sinned, and have committed iniquity".
J.T. Yes. And then, after a certain number of weeks, his desires would come to pass. So that, however much obligation I take on, the fulfilment of my responsibility, the result for God, must be by God Himself. But He loves to have us take on obligations.
Ques. Does Paul indicate that when he speaks of what came upon him? (see @2 Corinthians 11).
J.T. Just so: the care of *all* the assemblies.
J.B. He spoke of the sufferings of Christ, filling up "that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ" (@Colossians 1). That was a good deal to undertake.
J.T. Chapter 9 stands by itself. Chapter 10 begins, "In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the thing is true, but the appointed time of trial is long; and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision". Then he goes on to tell us, "In those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks: I ate
{427}
no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine into my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all, till three full weeks were fulfilled. And on the four-and-twentieth day of the first month, I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel: and I lifted up mine eyes and looked, and behold, a certain man clothed in linen, and his loins were girded with pure gold of Uphaz; and his body was like a chrysolite, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as torches of fire, and his arms and his feet as the look of burnished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude". The priestly service for the support of Daniel particularly enters into chapter 10; he is supported in the presence of this great vision. It is an exceptional appearance. It is a personage of extraordinary features, but he is priestly -- clothed in linen.
We reach a point here that enters into what we have been saying as to God increasing the light. He is presenting ever-increasing light to Daniel, and as to ourselves it is a question of whether we are equal to what God presents to *us*. There is no limit to the outlet of God's thoughts in Christ, the limitation is in our ability to take them in. The apostle says, "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man" (@Ephesians 3:14 - 16). That corresponds with our chapter. It is on a very high spiritual level. The greatest thoughts are presented in this personage, but Daniel is equal to them. So that what follows is the setting out of divine support, so that he might understand. He tells us in the first paragraph that he did understand, but the remaining part of the chapter shows how he came to it.
H.B. It is very touching how the thought of manhood is emphasised in this chapter: "one like the appearance
{428}
of a man", and "one after the likeness of the sons of men". The support is by such an one.
J.T. Yes. It says, "I was left alone and saw this great vision". It is for himself. "And there remained no strength in me; and my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength. And I heard the voice of his words; and when I heard the voice of his words, I fell into a deep stupor on my face, and my face to the ground. And behold, a hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and the palms of my hands. And he said unto me, O Daniel, man greatly beloved". Now you see the position, what he is to heaven, and how Daniel must not miss the full meaning of the vision. It is a very great affair, and he must be equal to it.
J.H.T. His comeliness was turned into corruption; then he was set upon his knees, and the palms of his hands, and then again he was told to stand upright. What is there in all that?
J.T. It is the progressive result of the support given. God would have us to stand upright, to be able to take in what He presents to us.
W.S.S. I suppose that this would teach us that we cannot take in these things in natural strength?
J.T. Yes; natural strength is turned to corruption.
W.S.S. He says in verse 19, "Let my Lord speak; for thou hast strengthened me". Strength had been given to hear what was about to be spoken.
J.T. The gradualness of it is remarkable. In the passage read, it says, "O Daniel, man greatly beloved, understand the words which I speak unto thee, and stand upright; for unto thee am I now sent". You are struck with the place that Daniel had in the mind of heaven: "And as he spoke this word unto me, I stood trembling. And he said unto me, Fear not, Daniel; for from the first day that thou didst set thy heart to understand, and to humble thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come because of thy words".
{429}
So that the answer to his prayer is greater than he expected; Daniel was not equal to it, but God would make him equal. He would make us equal to what He presents, and that is what is in view in the Spirit of the Father operating in the inner man of the believer; it is "according to the riches of his glory", that we might be "strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man" (@Ephesians 3:16). There is no limit to what He will unfold to you. But then, have I the power to take it in? That is this chapter. The apprehension of the immensity of what is presented in Christ requires more than spiritual mental ability, it requires the strength given in the inner man by the Spirit of the Father.
Ques. Would these be the exercises of a man who has accepted responsibilities?
J.T. I think it is all based on chapter 9 and the three weeks mourning and fasting in chapter 10. It is in relation to his own exercises, but God gives you far more than you might have desired or expected.
A.S.L. Is not a wholly new condition necessary for us to take in the deep things of God? In flesh and blood conditions the presence of the glory is too much for us; we cannot stand on our feet, but then the hand touches us. I was thinking of Colossians -- risen with Christ, and quickened together with Him.
J.T. God would open up great things to us. There is indeed a very wide field opened up now, the Person of Christ -- *who* He is, *what* He is, and His varied relations and offices. An infinite field is opened up to the saints; are we equal to it? Some oppose, others are troubled, and others fail to take the things up prayerfully with the Lord, leaving them for want of interest and energy. This chapter like @Ephesians 3, is, that there might be ability; as the apostle says, that we might apprehend with all the saints the breadth and length and depth and height, and know the love of Christ that passeth knowledge, and be filled with all the fulness of God. Here was something
{430}
extraordinary for Daniel; he had not seen anything like this before. Evidently it exceeded the vision that Nebuchadnezzar had: he had no power in the presence of it. But God made him equal to it, so that he "understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision", as he tells us.
J.G. In the book of Daniel emphasis is laid on the word 'understand'. Do you not think that if we do not understand we are in danger of the enemy? It says (@Matthew 13:19) that "every one who hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it, the wicked one comes and catches away what was sown in his heart". So that in regard to "the present truth", which refers to the sonship and offices of the Lord Jesus, if we do not understand them we shall be in danger.
J.T. That is a solemn consideration; and besides, we shall miss great gain. We cannot afford to lose anything that God is pleased to open up to us; we may not be able to take it in immediately, but if we wait on the Lord prayerfully He will give us understanding (@2 Timothy 2:7). There is great variety in this man's appearance. It says, "A certain man clothed in linen" -- that is simple enough being priestly purity. "And his loins were girded with pure gold of Uphaz" -- that is a deeper thought, pointing to service divinely excellent. "And his body was like a chrysolite" -- this is personal and substantial; condition or form. "And his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as torches of fire, and his arms and his feet as the look of burnished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude" -- these are attributes. Can I take all in? There is something wonderful here. One great point of the chapter is to show how God can strengthen us so that we might know Himself and the great things He unfolds to us.
P.P. Would this correspond with John in @Revelation 1:17? "When I saw him I fell at his feet as dead".
J.T. Very much. The Lord laid His right hand upon
{431}
him and said, "Fear not". His right hand laid on him would mean that strength was imparted to John.
F.W.W. This river Hiddekel was the third river flowing out of Eden. I was wondering if the figure here brought in a resurrection sphere, which is incomprehensible apart from divinely given strength. Then you have the *three* weeks¬ fasting, which would correspond with the thought of death and resurrection.
J.T. Quite so; and the man's position in relation to the river; he was *over* it, (see chapter 12).
W.C.G. It is remarkable that in these exercises Daniel did not cease to be a commoner, he continued in "the king's business" (chapter 8:27).
J.T. He was, as we see in types, one of the "common people"; he maintained his relations to the ordinary affairs, and that ministers to the levite and the priest. That is important. As we link this chapter with @Ephesians 3 we shall get the bearing of it.
W.C.G. Romans makes us good commoners.
J.T. You mean that if we want to be good Ephesians we must be good Romans. This chapter is really an Ephesian chapter, because it is a question of the greatness of what God unfolds to us, the vastness of it, and our being equal to it. And so the ministrations to Daniel throughout the chapter are to make him equal to what is presented. As was said, we cannot afford to miss anything God is unfolding today. We must not at the end have to say to the Lord that great things were presented and we did not understand. What will He say to us? 'Why did you not understand? why did you not come to Me'? "The Lord will give thee understanding" (@2 Timothy 2:7). And, moreover, there is support that He gives, as we have seen. There will be a constant unfolding and increase of light, if we are equal to it. @Luke 19:11, says, "*as they were listening* ... he added and spake a parable".
R.W. Would it be that there is not the condition of soul?
{432}
J.T. What we are seeing here is that the Lord furnishes the condition. A brother said to me, 'I have never read the book of Ezekiel'. How can you understand the book of Ezekiel if you do not read it? Many brethren do not read much. Look at the book of Ezekiel -- the vastness of the glory opened up to us; and so, we may say, as to every book of Scripture. What God resents is unconcernedness in His people -- that the greatest things may be unfolded but there is no concern.
E.W. Daniel set himself to understand.
J.T. Exactly.
F.I. Do you connect "O man greatly beloved" with knowing the love of Christ which passeth knowledge? because it says of Daniel immediately that he was strengthened, and then he says, "Let my lord speak". He is prepared now to take in the vision.
J.T. The chapter shows that he was not unconcerned. Those who were with him fled. It says in verse 7, "And I Daniel alone saw the vision; and the men that were with me saw not the vision, but a great quaking fell on them, and they fled to hide themselves. And I was left alone". *He* did not flee, and so he is supported and understands the vision.
E.G. Do you mean that we should not ignore these Old Testament books in our readings?
J.T. Yes. If we do, we miss a lot. I wonder how many brothers and sisters have read this book since we began it yesterday? If we do not follow things up we do not understand. "Have ye understood all these things?" the Lord said. They said, "Yea, Lord", and the Lord evidently accepted the answer, (@Matthew 13:51).
L.M. In @1 John 5:20 we read "we know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding". Would that correspond with this?
J.T. Yes. The Son of God gives us an understanding.
L.M. Is it only the apostles who can say, "We know", or is it more general?
{433}
J.T. It is characteristic, I think, of christians.
Now, what you get here is the thought of a *man* -- that is sympathy -- he 'touched me'. "Then there touched me again one like the appearance of a man, and he strengthened me; and he said, Fear not, man greatly beloved; peace be unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong". It is strength in the inner man that is needed to take in such things, strength of heart, strength of understanding. So that Daniel continues, "*as* he was speaking with me I was strengthened, and I said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast strengthened me". Now he can hear: "Let my lord speak": that in principle is within the reach of every one of us.
Ques. Would Mary sitting at the feet of Jesus hearing His word be something like this?
J.T. Quite: she could sit down and listen.
W.S.S. Verse 21 would confirm what you were just saying about reading: "I will declare unto thee that which is set down in the scripture of truth".
J.T. I was thinking of that. It shows the place the Scriptures have in relation to the divine unfoldings. All will be in accord with them, hence the importance of reading and knowing the Scriptures. "*The scripture of truth*": there you get *certainty*.
Rem. In @Revelation 1:3 the Spirit says, "Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein"; I do not think we can all understand the prophets, but we could keep them and know them.
J.T. I do not believe God has written anything that we cannot understand. He has written for our understanding.
G.W.W. Daniel gets three distinct touches. He does not reach the understanding until he has had these touches. One feels the importance of it. It brings one into personal contact with the Lord. It is not merely that I have seen something, or heard a voice from a distance,
{434}
but there is a personal touch, which results in a capacity to understand and enter into these things.
W.C.G. "They that seek the Lord understand all things", (@Proverbs 28:5).
F.I. Is the personal touch connected with the knowledge of being loved?
G.W.W. Yes, I thought so. You do not appreciate a personal touch unless you know it is the touch of love.
F.I. That is what it seems here with Daniel; the first and second touches are connected with a "man greatly beloved".
G.W.W. John had to get the touch of the right hand (@Revelation 1:17), before he could understand the things revealed to him.
E.W. It says in @Luke 24:45 "Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures"; is there any limit to that?
J.T. Not at all. We must not put limits as to the understanding of Scripture. We must not think for a moment that God has given us anything that we cannot understand.
Rem. "The Lord give thee understanding in *all* things", (@2 Timothy 2:7).
J.T. Quite so. "And he said, Knowest thou wherefore I am come unto thee? And now I return to fight with the prince of Persia; and when I go forth, behold, the prince of Greece shall come". All this is very interesting, because it shows the activity of God in relation to these powers -- that God is moving all the time, as it were. But the visitations are to *beloved* people. That is what we need to cherish and cultivate; that which is lovable to heaven, and lovable to one's brethren.
To proceed for a moment to chapter 12. (In chapter 11 we have a long prophetic account of the third great kingdom -- all converging on the last days.) "And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince who standeth for the children of thy people; and there shall be a time
{435}
of distress". So that the prospect is of Michael standing up. He is the prince of Israel, and would thus point to Christ. "And at that time *thy* people shall be delivered, every one that is found written in the book". So that now we come to counsels, and those whose names are written will be delivered. In all these happenings, the immutable counsel of God stands. Nothing will be lost. Everything of Him will appear at the end. And so it goes on, "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, to everlasting contempt. And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse; and they that turn the many to righteousness as the stars, for ever and ever".
W.H.M. That is a great incentive to winning souls.
J.T. Yes, those that are written in the book. Revelation speaks of the Lamb's book of life. The whole chapter is to encourage Daniel: "And thou, Daniel, close the words"; and then in verse 5, "And I Daniel looked, and behold, there stood other two, the one on this side, on the bank of the river, and the other on that side, on the bank of the river. And he said to the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, How long is it to the end of these wonders? And I heard the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river; and he held up his right hand and his left hand unto the heavens, and swore by him that liveth for ever that it is for a time, times, and a half". I think that what was already said is confirmed here, that the man "above the waters of the river" is victorious. He lifted up his hands and "swore by him that liveth for ever"; he gives certainty. It involves the victory of God in the eternal blessing of His people.
F.W.W. That is a very great extensive result.
J.T. Yes; and then it says in verse 8, "And I heard, but I understood not. And I said, My lord, what shall be the end of these things? And he said Go thy way,
{436}
Daniel; for these words are closed and sealed till the time of the end. Many shall be purified, and made white, and be refined; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise *shall* understand. And from the time that the continual sacrifice is taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand, two hundred, and ninety days. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand, three hundred and thirty-five days!" We are left with the idea of *patience*; you do not stop at the thousand, two hundred and ninety, but go on to the remaining forty-five days. "Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand, three hundred and thirty-five days!" The blessing lies in going on to the end.
{437}
ROOTS
@Revelation 22:16; @Daniel 4:26; @Isaiah 37:30 - 31
I venture, dear brethren, to take as a subject for this service *roots*. The idea has a great place in Scripture, and the book of Proverbs gives it a very practical turn in saying, "The root of the righteous shall not be moved"; and again, "The root of the righteous yieldeth fruit" (chapter 12:3,12). Thus we have an assurance to the righteous of immovableness; first of all, that he shall not be rooted up; the Lord says, "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up" (@Matthew 15:13); the earth being His garden or field He will test the roots found in it; there are, alas! a variety of roots which He has not planted. Whether these growths be in persons or systems God will deal with them, will root them up, as our Lord says. It will be a clearing day. Those of us who travel will have observed how great tracts of territory are sometimes stripped of growths in order that other growths should appear. God intends to plant in such a way that this world will be filled with vegetable adornment and fruit. The face of the world will thus be rendered fruitful and beautiful. The wilderness will blossom as the rose. So that a great clearing day is coming in which God will remove all that He has not planted. Only the roots of the righteous remain, they "shall not be moved".
The great Root for God is Christ. Genesis is the great seed and root book of the Scriptures, but the Lord alludes to Himself in a striking way in Revelation as the "Root". More than once the idea is connected with Himself, but here we have it most definitely. "*I* am the root ... of David" -- "I" is emphatic. David had a great place in the minds of God's people, and the Lord shows that He is his root. He uses this fact in baffling His enemies,
{438}
during the time of His ministry down here; they could not answer him: "David therefore calls him Lord, and how is he his son?" (@Luke 20:44). Christ is the true Solomon, and He propounded this question; unanswerable by His enemies, but intelligible to those who form the assembly. He is speaking here in this verse in Revelation to the assembly. The assembly is composed of the true "Maschilim", the understanding ones of God. No family of God has understanding equal to that of the assembly. The word 'church' (assembly) as used generally now has completely lost the greatness and glory attached to it in the New Testament.
When Paul said that he was a Roman, that seemed to be much to the military commander at Jerusalem, but it did not add to Paul spiritually. If he had said that he was one of the firstborn ones enregistered in heaven it would not have caused any anxiety; it would not have saved him one stripe. But there is no greater status for us than to belong to "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven", (@Hebrews 12:23) You get no other family composed of firstborn ones; ordinarily you get a firstborn in each, but not *all* firstborn.
The Lord is addressing the assembly when He says, "*I* Jesus ... *I* am the root and offspring of David". The members of the assembly understood from John's gospel how He is the root of David, and they understand from Matthew's gospel that He is also the offspring of David. In the latter we have His genealogy traced from Abraham and David. John specially presents our Lord's deity; Matthew His royalty, which is connected with David. Matthew also shows His deity, for he speaks of Him as David's Lord, and he alone records the revelation made to Peter, that He is the Son of the living God; but he specially presents Christ as the Son of David. There is nothing said in the early chapters of the Acts about the Son of God, but the thought was among the disciples. Before leaving this scene the Lord carefully inculcated
{439}
the truth of His Person. God brought it forward at the beginning; He announced the Person before He was born: "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God" (@Luke 1:35). That designation had been used prophetically of Him in @Psalm 2, and applied as He was born. At His baptism it was uttered from heaven: "This is my beloved Son", (@Matthew 3:17) and, "Thou art my beloved Son", (@Luke 3:22). Late in His ministry, before He ascended the mount, the Lord challenged His apostles as to who they *said* He was, not what they *thought* only. Many of us think much and say little; others say much and think little. We must be balanced, that is, what we say must be the outcome of what we think, our thoughts being governed by the Spirit of truth. But the Lord's question was not, 'Who do ye think that I am'? but "who do ye say that I am?" (@Matthew 16:15). It is a matter of confession. The confession of Jesus as the Son of God is a great matter. It is not a mere formal subscription to a catechism or a creed; it is the outcome of the Person known in the heart.
John does not record this incident at all, but his gospel is full of the deity of Christ: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". The eternal personality and deity of our Lord is stated here in the most explicit way, and these great and fundamentally blessed facts are seen throughout this gospel. And then we have the further great fact stated that "the Word became flesh"; also that He was thus contemplated "we ... contemplated his glory", John says. And what was that glory? "A glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". That glorious Person, having become Man, "dwelt among us" and was contemplated as with the Father, (see chapter 1). It is one thing to see Him in His great evangelical and curative services, and another to see Him with the Father. I can understand the disciple, when he saw the Lord pray, saying, "Lord, teach us to pray", (@Luke 11:1). In prayer He was with the
{440}
Father; He did not pray at a distance. In @John 17:1 it says, He "lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, Father"; and again, in @John 11:41, He "lifted up his eyes on high and said, Father"; and then in the touching scene in Gethsemane He says, "Abba, Father", (@Mark 14:36). In all these references it is a question of the Son and the Father. He was apprehended by His own in this peculiar glory.
Thus the truth in these two gospels, besides the testimony of the other scriptures, being known in the assembly, the Lord's words here are understood; and so the Spirit and the bride say, Come. This is not simply historical, it is the present answer of the assembly as well as that of the Spirit. Revelation is the voice of God at the present time. "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies", runs right down to our time; the whole history of the assembly is in view -- the witness goes on.
Now the true answer to the Lord's announcement at the present time lies in the knowledge by His own of the great truth of His Person as seen in John's gospel -- that He is the root of all that is for God. David represents, so to speak, the *best* there is for God. What the root means is His deity. John brings that before us, as I said; he records the Lord saying, "Before Abraham was, I am" (chapter 8:58). The root was there: "I am". There is the eternal, unchangeable Person, speaking as a Man here on earth: "without father, without mother, without genealogy; having neither beginning of days nor end of life", (@Hebrew 7:3).
Well, dear brethren, having said so much, one would challenge one's own heart as to @Colossians 2:7: "Rooted and built up in him". That passage fits peculiarly in Colossians, where the Person of Christ is in view. There you have the soil; the roots there are immutable; really the roots of the righteous. Rooted in Christ we are beyond the destructive power of the enemy. There is a peculiar fixedness in that. "Rooted and
{441}
founded in love" (@Ephesians 3:17) is a corresponding scripture. They are the amplification of the verses quoted from Proverbs, and give great stability.
In the passage I read in Daniel the idea of "root" is found three times. It is not there as accredited to Nebuchadnezzar; it is where God had set him. I have to regard myself in the light of God's thought for me. That is the way to arrive at one's position; after that, one can go back to divine counsel, that is, God's purpose in regard to me. Think of how far back the divine thought of every one of us extends! It is not a question of credit to me; it is a question of *God*, and of where He sets me, where He sets you, where He set Nebuchadnezzar. God had great thoughts of that man. He was "this head of gold". Gold represents what is of God. Nebuchadnezzar could hardly have said that he understood that; but it was the mind of God as to him, and so the root stands. The tree was not in keeping with the roots, and so was cut down, but "the stump of its roots" was left in the earth and protected. In the same sense the root of Israel remains, as we learn in @Romans 11. We gentiles have been grafted in and become partakers of the root and fatness of the olive-tree, but the continuance of the gentiles there is a question of continuance in faith, and in the goodness of God. Leaving faith and the goodness of God, we are out of keeping with the root, and we shall be cut off; but the root remains. That is to say, the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. The root of Israel, in the counsel of God, is fixed. Whatever has happened in these nineteen hundred years, the root will come into evidence again. Are we sympathetic with God in this great thought that Israel's root will come into evidence again, and that all His thoughts as to His earthly people will flourish upon it?
And so with Nebuchadnezzar; the root was of God, and God would take care of it with a band of iron and brass in the tender grass of the field where there is
{442}
vitality. All this is of the greatest importance as a principle, especially to those, who as having failed, are under discipline. It affords assurance as to the unchangeableness of God's purpose, and so becomes a basis for recovery. It is a question here, therefore, of Nebuchadnezzar coming back to that as he is restored; the root remains.
And so Daniel explains to the king that the kingdom shall be secure. He says, "Thy kingdom shall remain unto thee, after that thou shalt know that the heavens do rule". That is to say, the believer's setting is in relation to heaven. The gospel of Matthew is of great importance in that respect for young believers; it is there we are told that plants the heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up. But *He* plants also; He plants here in relation to what is there; and if the growth is not in relation to what is in heaven, *it* must go. But the root remains, and recovery is to that root. "The gifts and calling of God are without repentance", (@Romans 11:29). My place in the counsels of God is surer than the sun in the heavens. They are without repentance. Nebuchadnezzar, under the gracious discipline of God, comes back to his root. His understanding returned, and the glory of his kingdom, majesty and brightness returned to him. "And I was established in my kingdom, and excellent greatness was added unto me" (verse 36). Then he praises and extols and honours the King of the heavens. The difficulty was that he did not respect the heavens, nor the fact that God ruled there. As he lifted up his eyes to the heavens his understanding returned to him and he came back to the stump of his roots. The church, particularly as seen in Matthew, stands in relation to heaven, and so to have part in it one must own that heaven rules, that God's will must be done on earth as it is in heaven. In @Revelation 11:13 they glorify the God of the heaven; but the point there is not that only, but that God is the God of the earth as well; the heavens and the earth stand
{443}
together; and Nebuchadnezzar emphasises this: "He doeth according to his will in the army of the heavens, and among the inhabitants of the earth" (@Daniel 4:35). God graciously brought him to own this.
I now go on to Isaiah; I want to come to the idea of a remnant, which has a great place in Scripture, and we can thank God for this. But I wish to show you how real and practical a remnant is, and how that in recovery it is not simply that I come back to the primary too (that is to say, the purpose of God regarding me), but I *take root downwards*. That is a moral idea; it is a question of myself. *I* do that.
And so, in this great attack of Sennacherib, Hezekiah is addressed by God in the most encouraging terms, through the prophet, as to what would happen to the Assyrian. That is a comparatively small matter -- what God can do with *one* angel. It is a military transaction, but it is not nearly so interesting to heaven as this matter of taking root downwards. So that Hezekiah is to understand by the sign what God is intending in the recovery. Sennacherib is important, but he could be easily disposed of, as I said; he represents what God may allow; and God is constantly allowing the enemy to do such things as he attempted. It is well for us to remember this; it keeps us dependent. Israel was surrounded by enemies that God could let loose at any time, and this ever reminds us of our entire dependence on God, who is round about His people. He let the Assyrian attack at this time, but through this he intended to teach Hezekiah something about life, taking root. The remnant had been spoken about earlier (chapter 7); it is a great feature of Isaiah's prophecy. Shear-jashub means "A remnant shall return". But Hezekiah needed instruction in regard to it; and it was a question of life illustrated in vegetable growth. The prophets speak much about growth. Here the sign includes three years¬ growth. The first year there was to be what grew of itself. Now, there are many of our
{444}
brethren eating this growth; they are in Lo-debar, so to say, in those systems in which man rules. I mean, there is no cultivation, no sowing and reaping according to God. But even in such circumstances there is *some* growth. What would become of these people, brethren, if something did not grow? God never leaves His people without sustenance, but all credit is due to Himself. So that the first year is that you begin to eat of what grows of itself. It is not very delicate food, it is not a growth that you have brought about by sowing; it is just *what you can get*.
Then, the second year, they were to eat "that which springeth of the same"; alluding evidently to a growth from the previous one -- what grew of itself in the first year, but still without cultivation. This has to be noted. With none of the so-called religious denominations of christendom is there any culture according to God. They know nothing about God's agricultural year, one of the most interesting things in Scripture. It involves the idea of the 'field' (@Ecclesiastes 5:9), upon which the king himself is dependent. But if the king lives of the field he sees that it is properly tilled. He sows to obtain a certain crop and gets it. We all know how Solomon had superintendents who provided for him and his household throughout the whole year (@1 Kings 4), so that there was abundance of food. Solomon's table was not furnished with fruits that grew of themselves. They were from gardens, and fields, properly cultivated and cared for.
But the second year's growth, in our chapter, had no cultivation, and as it has a spiritual significance, the meaning undoubtedly is that it is a product devoid of the general care needed in divine things. This product is not to be despised, for it is a divine provision, but not as I have remarked, such as those of God's people have who maintain His principles and order, who by love serve one another. Under these circumstances God makes abundant our sowing and increases the fruits of our righteousness. The sowing and reaping are on the principle of
{445}
death and resurrection, as we learn in @1 Corinthians 15. In the divisions of time which God has ordained (@Genesis 8) the first is agricultural -- seed-time and harvest; this includes the agricultural year spoken of later in scripture, which ended in the seventh month. If anyone here is feeding on this second-year growth you have poor fare as compared with some of God's people. You are not sitting at Solomon's table, you are not sitting at David's table; you are like Mephibosheth at Lo-debar, a place of no pasture. I do not say there is *no* pasture, because, as I said, God provides something for the christian; but then, there was David's table, Solomon's table, Nehemiah's table. On such tables things are provided that are produced by cultivation. When a christian sees that there is an agricultural year spiritually, that there is a "seed-time and harvest", he thinks of sowing so as to have a desired crop, and to this end he must sow certain seeds, and not divers seeds (see @Leviticus 19:19). Christendom is full of this sort of sowing. But God knows what He wants, and sows accordingly, and so also does the believer who is taught of Him and subject to Him.
In this third year there is sowing and reaping, planting and eating the fruit, and then we have the application of the figure to the remnant: "Judah shall again take root downward". That is the secret of the whole matter; we do not like the going down; but in order to "bear fruit upward", there must be the taking root downward. As I said, it is not now that I come back to my place in the counsel of God; I do recognise that of course, but I do not become inactive there; I must take root downward. God has fixed the root where it is immovable; that belongs to His counsel, and every christian should understand what we mean when we say 'the security of the believer', but it should not make people content without taking root downward; if it does there is little or no practical growth; taking root downward implies self-judgment. How do I learn to go down? From Christ. He
{446}
came down from heaven; that is the first movement; it was a movement of love, involving humiliation. He served on the earth as from heaven. But He took a further move, and that corresponds with our taking root downward. The Lord went down to the lowest parts of the earth.
"But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth?" (@Ephesians 4:9). He went down. So that if we are to be planted in the likeness of His death -- 'planted' there implies growth together -- we shall be in the likeness of Christ's resurrection (@Romans 6:5). Thus it is obvious that this great thought of taking root downward and bearing fruit upward involves the truth of Romans.
What is presented here will be seen in the remnant of Israel in the future. They will take root downward and bear fruit upward. That is what will happen by and by. They will go down. They will see that their Messiah had gone down. They will read @Isaiah 53. I believe that and similar passages will be well read by them, and they will become identified with Him in His death. And then @Isaiah 35, 60, and may other passages show the glorious result in fruitfulness into which they shall come as identified with their risen and glorified King in Zion.
Well, dear brethren, I think you will see I have endeavoured to keep to my point, the question of roots. One could say a great deal more about it. There are roots of bitterness: "Lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you", says the writer of Hebrews (chapter 12:15). These have to be dealt with. But I am speaking of what is positive, the great need of the saints understanding how to take root downward; as planted in the likeness of Christ's death, to bear fruit according to His resurrection. That is bearing fruit upwards. It is in the apprehension of Christ gone up that the fruit is borne upwards. May God bless the word!
{447}
SPIRITUAL FEELINGS
@John 11:17 - 35
I have read these verses, dear brethren, to apply them to a local company of believers, for, while this chapter is vast in its scope as regards the Person of Christ, His power and His glory, the bearing of it is on the local assembly.
While John does not use the word "assembly" in his gospel, he has it in view, however, and would promote in it not only order but a *living* state of things; for order, in itself, is cold; it is most important, of course, but it must be associated with *life*. This is seen generally in Colossians. In @John 11 and 12 this is also contemplated, so that chapter 12 is the result of the ministry of Christ in chapter 11. The Lord comes to Bethany six days before the passover; and being there, and in what ensues -- supper is prepared -- He says nothing, save to rebuke Judas; nor does anyone else say anything. Judas breaks the silence, producing a foreign element, criticising the worshipper. It is a scene (aside from Judas and aside from the Lord's rebuke) of spiritual power in silence. This must underlie all assembly meetings, if conditions are to exist such as are suitable for divine operations, for the service of Christ as Head, as the minister of the sanctuary.
Now, chapter 11 is preparatory to all this. It has in view not simply to establish order in the place, but a living state of things. What occurred at Bethany was a shining forth of glory: "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it". What was seen, therefore, when the Lord came to Bethany later, was the outcome of this presentation of glory. Chapter 11 is of infinite scope, and yet what is presented converges on a small town; it is "the village"
{448}
of Bethany, and a few saints are in it. That brings out the magnitude of the position we occupy in our respective localities. However small outwardly, there is ability to take in the glory of God, the glory of the Son of God.
I want to point out very briefly that feature of the ministry which establishes balance in a local company, spiritual balance; and that is to be observed in Martha as seen here. It is said, "Martha then, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went to meet him: but Mary sat in the house". Now, John has a peculiar way, by the Spirit, of bringing forward every item of the work of God. Martha has acquired in our minds a certain character drawn from Luke's presentation of her (chapter 10:38 - 42). Luke introduces Martha to us as a busy sort of woman, owning a house, and possessed of a complaining spirit; and her criticism was not limited to her sister, but extended even to the Lord Himself. "Dost *thou* not care", she says to the Lord, "that my sister hath left me to serve alone?" That is Luke's record, the first we have of Martha, and it appears to me that generally the saints have formed their judgment of her from that record, not having given due weight to John's account of her. I am not speaking, nor did the Holy Spirit record these things, merely to call attention to this one person. He is dealing with a quality, a certain character that shows itself in us, and how an objectionable feature is displaced by what is desirable and essential to a local assembly.
And so John says, "Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him". I may remark here that John alone mentions Nicodemus. And he brings forward certain commendable things about Thomas, as in this chapter, for instance: "Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellow disciples, Let *us* also go, that we may die with him" (verse 16). We call Thomas the doubter, but we must not
{449}
omit this record of him because, it is a question, as I said, of bringing in the work of God, every bit of it; that not one item, however small, or however allied with other things, even with extraneous matter, must fail to be taken into account and made room for in the assembly, if we are to profit by it. One great point in John is, that the works of God should be manifest. And so the record here is that Martha, having heard "that Jesus was coming, went out and met him". Not simply that He came, but He *was coming*. That is another point that John emphasises, that Jesus *comes*; He moves towards us, and He honours those who meet Him.
Martha went immediately to meet Him, and, when Mary comes into evidence, it is said that the Lord was still *in the place* where Martha met Him; as if we are not to forget that the Lord took notice of that. He is still in the same place when Mary comes. Much transpired there. Every believer ought to take note of the conversation that passed in that place. "Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day. Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this? She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world". That was the conversation between the Son of God and a believer, for such Martha was. She was active and energetic, but this conversation shows that she was a genuinely interested person, who loved the Lord Jesus, and would know the truth; and the Lord took account of her and instructed her, and made her what she had never been before, a believer in Him as "the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world". That was the result of this remarkable meeting.
I think, dear brethren, we should ponder these things
{450}
about Martha, bearing in mind that the Holy Spirit has not recorded them merely to interest us as to a believer of centuries ago, but to instruct us as to that in the assembly now which she represents; persons who have a disagreeable beginning, but in whom, nevertheless, there is a work of God. The gold was there, and the Lord knew it; and He opened up to her at this meeting at Bethany what would bring it into evidence. We have no more complaint from Martha, no more criticism of anyone, but rather, as the passage goes on to say, she went away secretly to her sister Mary and says, "The Master is come, and calleth for thee". There is no jealousy in her heart; she loved her sister, and would convey to her that she had a place in the heart of Jesus. "The Master is come, and calleth for thee".
Mary "arose quickly and came to him", we are told. No doubt the Lord would have her particularly in His heart, because the chapter at the outset specially mentions that she was the Mary who had anointed Him. She is in the mind of the Spirit, because she is the worshipper. John is emphasising the worshipper; and whatever activity there may be, whatever intelligence, as in Martha, if there be not the spirit of worship, our testimony must be on a low level, and wanting of the heavenly touch. So that Mary is specially in the mind of the Spirit here. She represents the spirituality of the place. She "sat still in the house". I do not criticise that; she was restful; but still I cannot ignore the fact that the Lord did not go to her: He remained in the place where Martha met Him. It is as if He would free us in our minds from undue occupation with this one or that one who is reputed, and rightly so, to be spiritual; as if He would establish a balance amongst us, in each local assembly, that whilst full value is to be accorded to those who deserve it (those who are spiritual, those who are worshippers) we must not ignore the work of God, however small, in others. It must be taken account of. It is pure
{451}
gold. However small it may be, the gold is to be taken account of by itself; and God brings it into evidence.
So that, as I noted, the Lord does not go to Mary; she comes to Him. And the Holy Spirit tells us that Jesus was still in the same place where Martha met Him. I rather think that is the principle of the gathering at Bethany; it is the place where Martha met Him, where the light of the conversation with her shone. Evidently, there were no others present, but you have the principle of conversation carried on -- the Lord of glory conversing with a sister who, as I have said, did not have a good beginning. But the Lord is now taking account of her, and she is constituted a believer in Him as "the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world". She is, as I may say, a board in the tabernacle. She is of that which is to be filled with the glory. And you get what corresponds with this in the next chapter: the odour of the ointment *filled* the house. The Lord remained in the place where Martha met Him until Mary came. She went to Him; and I believe that involves a principle. We come together on ground wide enough to include all in whom God had wrought in any given locality. The worship of God in the true sense *may* be found there, but all in whom God has wrought have normally recognition there.
The Holy Spirit loves to enlarge on what is "more excellent"; the epistle to the Philippians makes provision for that, not only what is excellent, but "more excellent" (chapter 1:10). Martha has made headway, but Mary still represents what is more excellent. And so as soon as she heard that the Lord called for her, "she arose quickly, and came unto him". And: "The Jews then which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went out, followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there".
What I want very briefly to point out is that when
{452}
Martha moves, nobody moved with her. That is to say, she does not represent *influence*. When Mary moved, others moved with her, so that she represents that in the believer which influences others towards Christ. As she went, they went. You may say that they were only Jews actuated by natural feelings; but then verse 33 says, "When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came *with her*". They were also weeping, and He took account of them. It is a tribute to Mary's spirituality; she had influenced others, and as influenced by her, the Lord takes account of them, and goes so far as to weep Himself. Marvellous thing! Mary is weeping, and the Jews are weeping, and when He saw them, *He* wept. There is a great deal in that, spiritually. The Lord joins in the feelings centring in Mary. Martha received intelligence from Him, but there is nothing about her tears, whereas Mary's weeping and the weeping of those she influenced, affect Him.
The assembly should be a place of influence. I do not mean weeping, but it is certainly a place of feeling, a place where the Holy Spirit is free to act on our holy sentiments and feelings. And the wonderful thing is that the Lord joins in this, as we see in this touching scene at Bethany. It is affecting that He should take notice of Mary in this way, and the influence she had with others -- that what they did, He did. His tender heart of sympathy was moved: "Jesus therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews who came with her weeping, was deeply moved in spirit, and was troubled, and said, Where have ye put him? They say to him, Lord, come and see. Jesus wept". Except Gethsemane and the cross, Scripture presents no scene more touching than this. But what I call special attention to is, that seeing Mary weep, and seeing the Jews who came with her weep, the Lord wept. You get the principle there of the Lord coming in and having part with us in the expression of our holy spiritual feelings. Mary thus represents what is spiritual, what the
{453}
Lord can take part in, what is, in a word, "more excellent". Many of us, like Martha, get light from the Lord, but what this section in John's gospel emphasises is the spirituality seen in Mary's affectionate feelings and influence, and in the pound of ointment with which she anointed the Lord, the odour of which filled the house.
