{1}
DIVINE DWELLING (1)
@Exodus 20:22 - 26; @Exodus 24:9 - 11; @Exodus 25:1 - 9
J.T. The idea of dwelling, divine dwelling on earth, is one of the leading subjects of the Scriptures and it seems to me that we might consider, for the three readings ahead of us, if the Lord permit, the conditions of divine dwelling such as God can accept. We get the thought of dwelling first in @Genesis 28, in connection with Jacob. It was named by one who was in it, that is, Jacob. He realised the presence of God and called the place "the house of God", and David later alludes to Jacob in that connection. He represents our side of the subject, that is, the side which attaches to every Christian, everyone who loves God, and who desires to have, as far as he may, conditions for God to be near him, and abide with him. So David asked Jehovah to remember his afflictions, how he was afflicted in regard to the matter. He suffered the loss of his sleep, as he says, so that he might find a place for the Lord -- a habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, Exodus is the proper book to get help from in looking into the subject. We have, indeed, in the exit from Egypt an allusion to it. As the people came out of Egypt, they spoke of it; they said "This is my God, and I will glorify him",(@Exodus 15:2) and it appears that the word denotes that they would make Him a dwelling. I suppose in no way do we glorify Him more than in making Him a dwelling, a place where He can be at home here on earth where Christ has been rejected. They said that He was their God, and that they would glorify Him. We have it on good authority that the word signified that they would make Him a dwelling and the Lord takes the thought up. The song of Moses, as it is called, goes on to say at the end of it that Jehovah would bring His people unto the mountain of His inheritance, the place which He had made for Himself
{2}
to dwell in, the Sanctuary which His hands had established. So that the idea laid hold of the people immediately on coming out of Egypt -- whether it would be what they would do for Him, or what He would do for Himself. It is a question of what we do for Him, and what He does for Himself, or both.
And so in this first passage, we have the initial idea in the mind of God as to it. He prescribes that we are not to have gods of silver or gold beside Him. We know how, later on, they did this very thing, they made a golden calf beside Jehovah, formally retaining Him, but at the same time bringing in another god, a rival god, which is very common; not the refusal of God, but bringing in a rival. The next thing is as to the altar. What will help us in regard to this matter is an altar -- the kind of altar that we make to Him; an altar of earth first, and then an altar of stone. The brethren can link on with it.
H.M. God could not dwell in a place unsuitable to Him.
J.T. That is the thought. He commences this chapter by calling attention to the fact that there are thousands of those who love Him. God will have us near to Him, but why do not we seek to have God near to us, to afford Him conditions to be near us? How could we better express love than in this? If we have Him near to us, there must be conditions for Him. One thing I think we can readily understand is that God abominates a rival -- another god beside Him.
H.W. Do you connect the thought of the altar with the thought of what we provide for God in the way of conditions?
J.T. That is what I thought. The first is positive. They were not to make gods of gold or silver, but "an altar of earth shalt thou make unto me". Unto me -- the allusion is to Christ as Man. An altar of earth alludes to Christ as Man, that is, according to what He was here; an altar of stone would allude to Him as in resurrection.
{3}
W.J.Y. Is the thought of an idol a false conception of God?
J.T. Yes. Why should a believer have any conception of God other than the one he began with? The gospel is the gospel of God concerning His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. It presents God to us, the Saviour God, and the acceptance of the gospel involves reception. Why should that ever be altered?
H.W. Is that connected with the altar of earth?
J.T. That is the thought. Jesus, as here as a Man, held to that infinitely -- what God was; what God was, not only as presented in His attributes, but what God was to Him.
H.W. So the apostle John, before bringing in the warning about idols, says, "This is the true God, and eternal life",(@1 John 5:20).
J.T. The Lord Himself said, "That they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent", (@John 17:3). It is not only what is presented to us as profitable to us, but the conception of God that Jesus had -- that is a perfect idea of God, and ultimately that is what all are to be brought to.
E.E. In regard to the altar of earth, would this be one of the first movements of a soul in a positive way? Would there be certain instincts in a soul at the beginning that would appreciate Christ as Man?
J.T. That is the thought. God has brought in Christ. He was here for thirty years under His eye and then God announces His delight in Him. He was praying as the Spirit came upon Him and the voice came from heaven. He had an infinitely accurate conception of God.
W.J.Y. Is the making of an altar appreciation of Christ, just as the making of an idol would be lack of appreciation of Christ?
J.T. That is the thought, I think. The making of an idol would be want of appreciation of God, the divine thought of God. The making of an altar would
{4}
be the appreciation of Man -- *God's* idea of Man. There is man's idea of God, and God's idea of man, these are both centred in Christ. We see how the Lord speaks to God. We have not only to listen to what the Lord has to say to us but to see how He speaks to God, so that when the Lord was praying in a certain place, one of the disciples said, "Lord, teach us to pray",(@Luke 11:1) as if to say. We should like to get to know your way of speaking to God.
J.S. Why is it that we have the altar brought in before the building, before the dwelling place?
J.T. There can be no thought of providing for God aside from sacrifice. There must be sacrifice. God intimates at once that that is the line. It is a question of sacrifice.
-.P. They *must* make an altar of earth.
J.T. That is imperative. "If thou wilt make me an altar of stone", that would be a question of your spiritual ability, but the altar of earth gives us a status. The altar of stone is progress. But verse 24 says, "An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me"; that is imperative. We must have that, or we are not Christians at all. There is no Christianity without sacrifice, either on God's part or ours. We must begin with sacrifice -- that is the first thing mentioned, the first positive thing.
E.F. Unless we know something of sacrifice, there can be no thought of God dwelling with us.
J.T. That is one of the initial thoughts. An altar of earth is the idea of Christ as Man, that is, as a Man here, as He is seen in the gospels. That is, God is intimating here that these are the lines He is on. Christ was coming in, and it is for us to get on to that line. It would be a question of a building or house or dwelling for Him. That is what is on the Lord's heart -- to find a place for God, so He reaches it first in @Psalm 22. In @Psalm 16, He abominates the idea of idolatry -- He speaks of what those who sought out another god should suffer. In @Psalm 22 He says, "In the midst of
{5}
the congregation will I praise thee". He would afford conditions delightful to God. These conditions were found in Himself, as the voice from heaven declared, but they were to be extended. "In whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3:17); it is not *all* My delight; there is room for extension, and @Psalm 22 is extension. The sphere of delight would be extended, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2:12. That is how the Lord stood as entering into death. "But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel" (@Psalm 22:3). The praises of Israel were His habitation. The Lord had that in mind, and immediately He comes forth in resurrection. He speaks of how He would sing in the midst of the assembly. The idea was extended.
E.F. Were you distinguishing between the altar and the burnt offerings and the peace offerings?
J.T. What we have already said refers mainly to the altar. We have to get the idea of the altar, it is what Christ is. That is, it is a question of suffering, of bearing suffering, but suffering towards God. The Lord was the altar and the sacrifice as well, and the priest also. He was all. He was the altar and the offering and the priest at one time -- a great combination of great moral elements. That is what is meant here, that we should get on to that line.
E.E. So that as God approaches men He finds all He wants in Christ, and as we approach God we find all in Christ too.
J.T. As we get on to that line God announces to the universe that "this is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", @Matthew 3:17. And we are to get on to that line, the line that God is on.
W.M. It would appear that God must answer that, for He says it is the way to blessing.
J.T. That is what we are coming to. It goes on to say, thou "shalt sacrifice on it thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen: in all places where I shall make my name to be
{6}
remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee" -- a word that ought to appeal to us. "I will come unto thee, and bless thee". Not yet dwelling but "I will come unto thee". In the coming He would find happy conditions, for His name is revered there.
E.G. Why is it "thou shalt make"? Just now it was "ye". Why is it in the singular?
J.T. The singular is used in addressing a collective number, the whole number. They are all included in the "thou". All Israel was included in it. It is a common way throughout the types.
E.G. One heart and one mind?
J.T. Quite so.
C.D. The words 'ye have seen' are used at the beginning of the previous chapter, "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians" (@Exodus 19:4), and in this chapter (verse 22), "Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens".
J.T. That is the idea. What a privilege to be spoken to out of the heavens! We have the thought amplified in chapter 24, because the idea of dwelling must necessarily be linked up with the heavens. Heaven is God's dwelling place. Chapter 24 shows that they went up and saw the God of Israel, and what was under His feet. They saw His living conditions. Jacob alluded to this; the first mention of the house is that it is the gate of heaven.
C.D. I was thinking of the words 'I have spoken' in connection with the hymn we sang just now. It is the response to that voice.
J.T. It is not only what the voice says, but where it comes from. The heavens were opened to Christ, as much as to say 'You have a place up here', and He knew the conditions in heaven. Indeed, He says He is the Son of Man which is in heaven. The dwelling on earth must be a transcript of what is in heaven. The idea is, what is in heaven.
{7}
A.J.D. Then we should have to understand what is spoken.
J.T. The thought here is, "Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens" -- a holy conversation with them from the heavens. Hebrews opens up that He speaks from heaven now.
E.E. Is that not an important consideration, that if God is going to dwell as He dwells now in the heavens and in Christ, the dwelling must be heavenly in its character? Is that not lost sight of today?
J.T. Entirely. They have no idea of what is called the house of God, no idea of its being a transcript of what is in heaven. If conditions are not equal to what they are in heaven, then God is sacrificing to be with us, but there must be some relation to what is in heaven. We are told that the tabernacle is a figurative representation of what is in the heavens.
A.J.D. In seeing Christ we would understand what is in the heavens, apprehending Him.
J.T. Christ brought down here what was up there.
W.J.Y. Would you open up why the altar of stone is not obligatory?
J.T. Because the Lord makes allowance for spirituality. He does not unchristianise us because we are not spiritual. The Corinthians were not spiritual, but they were not unchristianised because of that. They are still regarded as the assembly of God in Corinth. So long as the Spirit has a place amongst the saints, they are owned of God as in some sense having conditions for Him, but then allowance is made for spirituality. If you can go that far, God appreciates it all the more. What is your own idea?
W.J.Y. I just wanted it opened up a little. You connect the thought of the house of God on earth a good deal with the knowledge of a risen Christ.
J.T. We do, but to apprehend the stone altar as it typifies Him here is another matter. Romans, of course, gives us a status in that we believe in Christ
{8}
raised from the dead for our justification. It does not go so far as to say that we are risen with Him, nor does it say in Corinthians that we are risen with Him; but Corinthians intimates that the assembly is the assembly of God, nevertheless. Colossians contemplates that we are risen with Christ by the faith of the operation of God who raised Him. I believe that fits in here with the altar of stone. It is a question of what Christ is in resurrection before God. If we can go on that far, good and well. God delights that we should go that far; but still, there is an if here.
E.E. Would their standing so closely to the giving of the law be an outcome of regulating their conduct morally before God?
J.T. It is a question of spirituality, I think. The idea of His coming to us is not made to depend on it. It says in verse 24, "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee". And then it says, "And if thou make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone". The blessing is secured on the ground of the altar of earth and the coming in of God. The remembrance is owned to be there. If we can go further than that, so much the better, but we are not unchristianised because we do not. It denotes poverty but we are still on ground that God can own.
J.S. I would like a little help on the thought that there should be no steps to the altar.
J.T. That is that their nakedness should not be discovered. It would mean that you would be exalting yourself like the Colossians were, adding to what they knew. That would be steps. They were adding philosophy and vain deceit to that, that is adding steps, that would be a higher altar than others. If you take on philosophy, that is going up by steps and so is ceremonialism -- these are the two things in @Colossians 2 that are condemned. It is bringing the human element into the service of God. That is all it is -- mounting
{9}
up in my own strength and exposing myself as just a man in the flesh.
W.J.Y. Contrary to the liberty of the Spirit.
W.M. "To whom coming"; there would be no steps there?
J.T. "To whom coming, as unto a living stone ... ye also, as lively stones, are built up" (@1 Peter 2:4,5). Built up is one thing, and climbing up by steps is another thing.
E.F. You were connecting what you were saying with that word in Colossians, "Ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God" (@Colossians 2:12). Could you say a little as to what that means?
J.T. It is a question of faith. It is "through faith of the working of God". We are not risen literally, while in flesh and blood, though there were those who said it; they shot far beyond the mark. It is the most extravagant statement one can make, that the resurrection is past. People are dying every day, yet it was said the resurrection was past already. Colossians is not that, it is 'raised by faith'. Our resurrection is a question of time, but we may take it on spiritually as if it were already so.
E.F. Is taking that ground the altar of stone?
J.T. No. The altar of stone is Christ. It is the apprehension of Christ in that light and it brings us into accord with Him.
-.P. Is that why it is not to be of hewn stone? No human element comes in.
J.T. Quite so. It is like the stone cut out without hands, man has nothing to do with it; it is Christ in resurrection. The idea, I think, is permanency. The altar of earth would be Christ as He was, in His humanity, His incarnation. But the altar of stone is Christ as He is. He remains Man but the allusion is to what belongs to that condition of things here.
-.P. Would it be that we cannot approach God or know Him in any way except by this altar of earth?
{10}
J.T. There is no other way of drawing near to God save by sacrifice. There are no specifications for altars in Genesis, it is in Exodus you get the first specification of an altar. It is an altar of earth; the allusion is to Christ. In Genesis the worshippers are allowed to make their own altars, but in the ministerial books we get specifications; that is in view of Christ becoming Man. When we come to the later chapters we find an altar of brass, and then we have the measurements as well as the material.
R.S.T. Would it be right to say that if we are to have some apprehension of the value of Christ as the altar and as the sacrifice and as the priest, we must have some soul experience of the greatness of what is set out in verse 18? This great thought of dwelling is consequent upon some soul experience of the majesty of God.
J.T. Quite so. This thought of the stone is very compact, very concise. Permanency is suggested in the stone. It is not quarried or cut, it is in its original state. The allusion is to Christ as He is in resurrection, that is a permanent state. We might go further and say that it is as He is in heaven. The forty days on earth after He rose would be what He is now, brought within the range of the saints, that they might grasp the new state and conditions, and then we see Him as He is -- a further thought.
J.S. It is important for us to get the altar as being alone in this chapter. What I mean by being alone is Christ being the altar who stands alone.
J.T. He is to be apprehended in this way. God is leading up to the thought of dwelling and impressing upon us what the initial ideas are. He makes a covenant with the people. He loves the people who make a covenant with Him by sacrifice. The altar of earth is the initial idea. We are grasping the thought of humanity in Christ and then what He is in resurrection. We are on the high road to the dwelling place.
{11}
H.W. Is the thought that every saint of God has an altar individually, or have you the collective idea in view at the moment?
J.T. It is the collective thought, I think, right through. We do get individual altars: Moses made an altar in chapter 17 and he gave it a name there. But this altar is prescribed. God is prescribing material here. It is on the way to the dwelling, what He requires. If there is to be a dwelling, it must be according to what He requires. He is proposing His terms.
W.J.Y. We could not walk with anyone who refused the thought of sacrifice, but we might walk with one who was not up to Colossian truth.
J.T. That is the thought. The Corinthians were certainly not equal to the Colossians, and yet they are owned as the assembly of God. They are owned in both epistles as the assembly of God.
H.J.M. Why does it not speak of sin-offerings in verse 24?
J.T. Burnt-offerings and peace-offerings are mentioned, that is, offerings that are pleasing to God; burnt-offerings are wholly for God. The peace-offering is for the saints, but makes room for God. In our meetings we make room for God, another initial thought. That is just what it means.
H.W. Is the service of God the end in view?
J.T. Yes. A meeting like this is for the saints, but God would like to have a part in it. There is not a meeting the saints have that He would not like to have a part in in some sense. The peace-offering means that. It is very lovely to think that the Lord would have part with us in all these meetings in some sense. The assembly is the supreme thought.
A.J.D. That would greatly enhance the value of these meetings to us.
J.T. We never should omit the place for God in our meetings. The peace-offering means that.
{12}
A.J.D. It is incumbent upon us to recognise God's requirements.
J.T. You feel that the more you know Him the more you see that. His requirements are in our favour too, as well as in His own. Now in chapter 24, Jehovah proposes in the first verse that Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders should go up. Then the next thing that comes in in this chapter is in connection with this proposal of Jehovah's that the saints should go up, and you get the richness of the circumstances. That is, God really means that we are to come up to see how things are in view of chapter 25, and the remaining part of the book which has in mind the subject of God's dwelling. God said, as it were, 'Let a goodly number of you come up and see just how things are where I am. The mediator, the priests and elders will be with you, persons capable of witnessing, so that a right testimony should be presented of what is up here'. Then the next question is. What about the state of the people themselves? This is a great proposal that God is going to make, taking up what was intimated when they came out of Egypt, that He would let them build Him a dwelling, glorify Him, but. He says, I will give you every advantage. I will let you come up, not under poor circumstances, but under rich circumstances. So Moses proposes to the people what Jehovah says and they say, 'We will do everything He says'. They answered with one voice (verse 3). "All the words that Jehovah has said will we do(@Exodus 24:3)!" and then again at the end of verse 7, "All that Jehovah has said will we do, and obey(@Exodus 24:7)!" They add the word 'obey' as if they are getting on. This is fine progress in a believer's soul. They commit themselves definitely.
J.J. Why are the youths of the children of Israel brought in in verse 5?
J.T. That means that service is to be in freshness. God is the living God; He looks for living things and Moses sees that. The surroundings here are full of
{13}
rich thoughts. All Israel is represented in the pillars and there is plenty of testimony to the death of Christ in the blood, the abundance of blood, and the obedience proffered by the people. It is a rich state of things; that is to say, the word for us is spiritual wealth. If God is to have a dwelling place this is the thought. Before you come up. He would say. You will have every advantage in the circumstances you leave. It is a rich state of things in verses 9 to 11: "And Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up; and they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness. And on the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand; they saw God, and ate and drank". A wonderful scene! And they are to come down again, qualified to bear witness of what was there.
W.J.Y. Is that a heavenly experience?
J.T. I think so.
W.J.Y. A good many have difficulty about the expression, "They saw God", in view of the scripture that says, "No man hath seen God at any time" (@John 1:18).
J.T. It is good to bring that up. Whilst God in the absolute sense cannot be seen by the creature, yet He will never have it that He cannot be seen in some sense, for the Lord said, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (@John 14:9). We see Him in His moral features. There was something there that these men could take in, for they were creatures, as representative of God. There are those who see God and are blessed according to the Lord's own words in @Matthew 5. Also Moses saw the form of Jehovah.
W.J.Y. Would Paul's visit to paradise be a counterpart of this?
J.T. It would, to some extent. He speaks of what he heard.
W.J.Y. That he might help those down below.
{14}
J.T. What an effect it would have on his ministry and on his demeanour afterwards! God would be stamped on his mind, the heavenly scene would be stamped on his mind, though things were not to be uttered; he heard unspeakable things not allowed to man to utter.
C.S.S. Do you think this would suggest something more than days of heaven upon earth; they went up amid the richness of the scene and they ate and drank.
J.T. It does. It is what is up there; the assembly as the habitation of God by the Spirit comes down, really like the vessel Peter saw which came down and went up.
C.S.S. It would speak of purity. Those that are pure in heart shall see God.
J.T. That is it.
P.D. Would God show them the conditions that He was accustomed to up there that there might be conditions down here suitable for Him to dwell?
J.T. That is the thought. No one would assume that God is not visible in some sense. We have to read Scripture contextually. In the word "No one hath seen God", God's infinite essence is alluded to in an abstract way, for God is revealed and is to be seen in some sense, He is to be seen in Man, to be seen in Jesus.
C.M. Would this indicate our experience as following the Supper?
J.T. This is a suggestion of our place above, only that what is in mind is in the next chapter, which describes what God requires for His habitation, and which presents an accredited testimony as to what is required, what He seeks, what He needs, and what is due to Him. Now they are called nobles, "on the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: they saw God, and ate and drank". God was there. Abraham saw God too, but not in the absolute form; he saw Him in one of the three men, for certainly one of the three men that came to Abraham was God. Abraham discerned
{15}
that and stood before Him. Abraham could say that he saw God, but not in the sense of @John 1:18. Everyone who sees Jesus, sees God in some sense. That is what I apprehend eternity will be -- God seen in Christ. The dwelling or tabernacle of God is with men; God is there.
H.W. This scene depicts the present position of the saints and what is available to us at present.
J.T. The point here, I think, is competent testimony. Not only Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, but seventy of the elders, that is seventy-four persons, are going up there and seeing God, seeing what is under His feet. How affected they would be, what a testimony they would carry down to the camp as to what was up there!
W.J.Y. Why does it emphasise that they ate and drank?
J.T. To show that they were normal, I think. It was not that their condition was merely visionary, it was real. As it says of the Lord, He ate before them. He took part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb and ate before them; the condition was real. Their condition up there was real; they were balanced, they were sober, so that they could witness to it; it was a real thing. How important that is, that we are brought into spiritual realities in the assembly.
C.S.S. Would it suggest that the thing is to be continued? So that the Lord says, 'Give her meat' when He raised the little maid from the dead.
J.T. We might say, 'What are we to be up there?' Paul says, 'I do not know whether I was in the body or out of it. I was caught up to the third heaven; I went as far as that'. That is not exactly this; that was a very exceptional thing. Paul did not eat or drink up there. He was a man in Christ, in his senses, whether in the body or not he could not say. He repeats that.
W.J.Y. This would emphasise that the humanity of the nobles was in no way changed.
{16}
J.T. It was real humanity. They could say, 'We were perfectly in our senses when we saw God'. The idea is to bring down a balanced testimony as to what was up there.
E.F. Are you suggesting that we must know something of this to provide these conditions you are speaking of?
J.T. Yes, to get a competent testimony as to what is suitable to God.
A.J.D. They went up. The exercise is on their part.
J.T. Yes. It was not 'caught up'. It was no rapture, it was a normal, balanced state of things. There is nothing more balanced than Christianity.
C.D. Does it not suggest, too, that under right conditions the presence of God is restful, not alarming?
J.T. That is the idea. I am sure these men would say to you, 'We were perfectly at home'. They were called nobles.
E.F. Does the covenant provide these restful conditions that you are speaking of?
J.T. It has a great place. These are the conditions from which they went up. The covenant is down here. If you apply it to an assembly meeting, this properly follows the covenant. It produces liberation so that we may ascend, as it were.
E.F. Sometimes we are not able to ascend. Is that because we know so little of the covenant in its reality?
J.T. Quite so. There is no power. We are not released.
E.E. One feels if we are honest with ourselves we would say that this is where we are weak. I was wondering if you could think of some incident relating to the Lord that would help us to apprehend what you are bringing before us. Would the Lord going up the mount of transfiguration be akin to it?
{17}
J.T. Yes, very much akin. They were, you might say, the personnel of the assembly. How great the persons are! A heavenly scene comes into view. Two men, we are told by Luke, spoke with Jesus -- two *men*, before the names are given, as if to call attention to man. The men are perfectly free up there, so free that instead of the Lord speaking to them, they are speaking to Him. In our eternal relations I believe we shall be free to go and speak to the Lord at any time. Peter and John were not equal to the scene, but Peter refers to it afterwards as if he were then equal to it. "When we were with him in the holy mount" (@2 Peter 1:18) there came "such a voice to him from the excellent glory" (@2 Peter 1:17). He makes no allusion to his own failure there. He is now speaking as a competent witness, "eyewitnesses of his majesty". What he is speaking of he had actually witnessed, and that is the idea.
W.M. Would we learn from this that it is the mind of God that we should be restful before Him?
J.T. Because the thought originated from Him. He said 'Come up'. The Lord took three up. This was a divine proposal.
P.D. Would the scripture "See that thou make them according to their pattern, which hath been shewn to thee in the mountain" (@Exodus 25:40), fit in with this reading?
J.T. Yes. The point for this reading is to grasp the initial ideas of dwelling, and the competency of the witnesses that went up there. How balanced they were! How real the scene was! So at any time you could speak to any of those persons and they would give you a testimony as to what divine conditions were up there.
{18}
DIVINE DWELLING (2)
@2 Corinthians 3:6 - 18; @Exodus 35:1 - 3, 20 - 29; @Exodus 40:33 - 35
J.T. It will be borne in mind that our subject is tabernacle or wilderness conditions for the divine dwelling. We left off yesterday at chapters 24 and 25: It was intimated that we should proceed with the consideration of the new covenant as bearing on this subject. Chapter 3 of 2 Corinthians alludes not to chapter 24 of Exodus but to chapter 34, to the second giving of the law. Moses was called up again to the mount and a most interesting conversation proceeded between Jehovah and him; he had acquired great moral power in the interval between chapters 24 and 34. The golden calf had been made, and Moses shines not only as the mediator but as offering himself, offering to sacrifice himself for Israel, and through his intercession Jehovah went on with the people, but on the ground of separation. The tabernacle was taken outside the camp and pitched afar off, and Moses ascends to the mount, as having thus acquired great power and acceptability to Jehovah. So he stands out in chapter 34 as more definitely a figure of Christ, typical of Christ.
Then a peculiar glory is attached to the second giving of the law, so that his face shone, and that is what is alluded to in @2 Corinthians 3. There was glory attached to this giving of the law, but the Spirit of God proceeds in verses 7 - 16 of this chapter to enlarge on the new covenant and the glory that attaches to it, shines in it, and to compare it with the glory that shone in the giving of the law. The ministry of the Spirit subsists in glory. In fact the Spirit goes on to say, in effect, 'You could hardly speak of the glory of the first covenant at all because the glory of the second is so transcendent, and so exceeds it'. Attention is called to the richness
{19}
of glory that enters into the new covenant -- that is, what God is as seen in Christ, surrendering Him, giving Him up in love. It is called "the ministry of the Spirit", which implies that the Spirit has part in it, and the end of the chapter brings out that "the Lord is that Spirit"; that is, the two divine Persons, who have taken a mediatorial place, are merged in order to make this wonderful thing effective in our hearts.
That is what is before us to begin with, so that we might understand the richness there is when we are together in assembly, that is, not yet viewed as in the land. We are not speaking of divine dwelling as seen in the land -- that is not our subject. Our subject is the conditions of divine dwelling in a scene of contrariety as seen in Exodus and, indeed, in the Pentateuch as a whole. So that as we link all that up with the verses read in @Exodus 35 we can see in the type what richness existed amongst the people. In Exodus it is not the leading ones particularly, the kings and the princes as in the days of David and Solomon, but every man and woman in Israel. Exodus brings out the mutual, yet rich, conditions amongst us; but the riches are disbursed, fully disbursed and equally divided, not all centred in the kings and princes as in Chronicles. And what is particularly worth noticing in a practical way is the allusion to the sabbath in the opening verses. It is said, "And Moses collected all the assembly of the children of Israel, and said to them. These are the things which Jehovah has commanded, to do them. Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of rest to Jehovah: whoever does work on it shall be put to death. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your dwellings upon the sabbath day". That reminds us of the need of apprehending Christ as the sabbath, and shows how we are to be restful in the enjoyment of the riches that the covenant suggests, so that we are balanced in our part in the assembly.
{20}
W.J.Y. Is the thought of glory the expression of God?
J.T. That is the idea of the covenant. It is what God is in this particular setting, the shining out of God in the gift of Jesus.
W.J.Y. Why, in chapter 24 and in Hebrews, is so much made of the blood in connection with the covenant?
J.T. What is to be observed in chapter 24 is the volume of blood. I believe it is to bring out the immensity of the love that enters into it. It is sprinkled on the book and on the people and on the altar. That is, we are all, as it were, enveloped in the volume of blood to bring out the richness of the position from the divine side, so that the ascent is made in that richness. There is no reflection or shining suggested in chapter 24, but we have the amount of blood that was put in basins and employed for different purposes, so that the whole scene is, as it were, enveloped by the testimony of the fulness of love in Christ, so that we should understand the richness of the position in which the people go up to the mount. In the second giving of the law, however, we get the shining because the second is more the spirit of the thing. In the second giving, Jehovah says, "After the tenor of these words have I made a covenant with thee", which may be taken to correspond with the spirit of the thing (@Exodus 34:27).
E.F. Would you help as to what is said in Corinthians, "The Lord is the Spirit" and "even as by the Lord the Spirit". The two Persons seem to be intimately together there.
J.T. I think there is a combining, speaking reverently, of the two divine Persons that have become mediatorial. The Lord Jesus has taken a humble place in manhood, but the Spirit has also taken a humble place, not in manhood, but yet in men. He is here in the lowliest conceivable attitude, and They merge in this peculiar service of making this great thing, the love of God, effective in the saints. They
{21}
combine (it seems by the word used) to make this great thought effective in us; so that it should not be merely a theory or doctrine, but a known thing. There should be great wealth amongst us in the effectuation of this great thought, the new covenant; there is the idea of authority -- "the Lord is the Spirit", but there is the Spirit too; and in fact, in the parenthesis, we are told that the ministry of the Spirit subsists in glory. The Spirit is there alluded to by Himself without the idea of authority, but in verse 17 we have the two thoughts merged. In verse 6 we have, "Not of letter, but of spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit quickens", and in verse 17 it says "the Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". I think we should get the thought of wealth. We have it in 2 Chronicles in regard to the temple and in Exodus in regard to the tabernacle. The thought is that in the service of God we are to be consciously possessed of wealth and to use it, as in Exodus, under the direction of Moses and with the greatest skill. So that the conditions of the divine dwelling are not incongruous in any way; each is in his place in the assembly and the part he takes is under orders, under control.
W.J.Y. Would the expression, "The Lord is that Spirit" refer to Him where He is now?
J.T. Yes. He is made Lord and Christ up there. He gave the Spirit so that He is identified with the operations of the Spirit down here. The operations of the Spirit are carried on in authority.
W.J.Y. What was before me was that the value of the new covenant is not only to be found in His death but in His present position. Is that so?
J.T. Well, it could not be made effective without the Spirit and you could not have the Spirit until Christ is glorified. The effectuation of it awaited the full establishment of the divine system. What is needed in our service, among many other things, is the thought of the sabbath.
{22}
H.W. Why does that come in first in connection with the manna?
J.T. It is to call attention to the presence of Christ here -- that God found His rest there. The manna stands related to the sabbath, it is the first mention we have of it formally. The relation between the sabbath and the manna is significant because it is Christ, as we read in the hymn, "once humbled here", it is the Lord Jesus here as man in ordinary circumstances. That is to say, @Philippians 2:7 says He "emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in the likeness of men", outwardly an ordinary man, sin apart, as you would see in Palestine at that time in everyday circumstances. Whatever men may have thought of Him, God says 'I have found my delight in Him'. God rests in that.
H.W. Is the thought that the One who has provided a rest for God becomes food for man?
J.T. They synchronise, but the sabbath is carried forward. After the first forty days on the mount Jehovah refers to the sabbath again. In the closing verses of chapter 31 you find a great deal said about the sabbath and something said about it that is not said anywhere else, that God rested on it and was refreshed, meaning that He had been unfolding the glories of Christ to Moses during the forty days. God had a great time of it, speaking reverently, a much better time than Moses had. He was unfolding Christ to him and at the end of the giving of instructions about the tabernacle He refers to the sabbath and enjoins it in the strongest terms, saying that He rested on that day and was refreshed. That is what He had on the sabbath, and I think this chapter begins with this thought in the same sense, that God would bring us into the spirit of restfulness, for we are apt to be very active, even in the assembly.
H.W. Are you connecting that with the thought of the wealth that is found amongst the people of God?
{23}
J.T. Yes, there may be a show of wealth in a flow of language and hymns, but there is not much in that. It is the skilful use of wealth, and for that there must be calm contemplation and restfulness as to what God sets out in Christ.
H.W. Are you connecting the thought of the sabbath with the wealth that is found amongst the people?
J.T. The sabbath enables us rightly to distribute it and regulate it wherever it is found. It is not simply the leaders as in Chronicles; it is in every man and woman; it is the mutual state of things amongst the saints.
W.H. Is that anticipating the world to come?
J.T. Of course there will be great display of official power in the world to come, especially centred in the heavenly city, but the state of things in the wilderness as described in the Pentateuch is to establish mutual feeling amongst the saints, but mutuality in wealth, not a democratic spirit, but in spiritual wealth, in ability to be quiet and to calmly weigh what is presented in the enjoyment of the wealth, and to know how to use it.
W.M. You would say that the more we enter into the spirit of the new covenant the more we enjoy sabbath rest?
J.T. They run together. We sit down in assembly. The idea is that we sit down; it is not a time of activity necessarily but a time of quietude because it is a question of what is presented to us for contemplation.
W.H. It would preserve us from gathering a few sticks or doing that which we could do during the week.
J.T. I think that is good. The man who gathers sticks is put to death, and it is prohibited here in the strongest terms. It says, "Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of rest to Jehovah: whoever does work on it shall be put to death. Ye shall kindle no
{24}
fire throughout your dwellings upon the sabbath day". That is to say, there is to be no promotion of heat in any way. It is calm restfulness that is required if we are to be in assembly according to God, the entire absence of the natural.
C.S.S. Would that be suggested in God resting in His love? (@Zephaniah 3:17).
J.T. That shows how it is in God. He rested in Christ here, according to @Exodus 16. He rested in Him in His ordinary circumstances here on earth, in which He was doing what other men did. He would do anything that other men might do legitimately, sin apart, and at the end of thirty years the Father's voice is heard, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 17:5). He is resting there. The beginning of everything really in the new order of things is that we are to be brought into that rest.
H.J.M. Why does it say in Chapter 34, "After the tenor of these words have I made a covenant with thee and with Israel" (@Exodus 34:27)?
J.T. Moses is, I think, brought into more prominence because of what had transpired. He became more and more a type of Christ.
G.McK. Connected with what we were saying as to the sabbath, what do you understand by "None shall appear before me empty"? @Exodus 34:20. Is that connected with the service of God as here?
J.T. Quite so; it calls attention to the wealth that He looks for in us. I should like it very much if people would pay attention to the idea of wealth, and how it is seen in Exodus, compared with the way it is seen in 1 Chronicles. The immensity of the wealth in 1 Chronicles is largely from the king and from the princes, but in Exodus it is every man and woman in Israel, bringing all the saints into it, brothers and sisters. Indeed they are all in it, in the tabernacle, in the silver supplied for each one, half a shekel for each one. Each saint is set up and has a status in the system.
{25}
R.S.T. Is it instructive for us that there is no lack of wealth amongst the saints? Of every article needed there was abundant supply.
J.T. That is what comes out under these circumstances. There is abundance of wealth, and what the book culminates in is not singing as in Chronicles, not music, but the completion of the work by Moses. That is, that all the saints, viewed as in assembly, are under the hand of the Lord in His authority. Each will is subdued; there is no room for the exercise of any will, because each has his niche to fill and is in that position. Moses has put him there. It is a question of the authority of the Lord.
W.J.Y. Does wealth suggest the work of God in each soul?
J.T. Quite so. It involves the Spirit in us.
C.S.S. This wealth was not found in the wilderness. God had taken care that His people would be provided with it. Is the thought that it might lie dormant?
J.T. I think it began in Egypt, which would refer to the exercises that the saints have in getting out of the world; if one does not come out of the world with wealth, he is not really out of it. The idea is that I come out of the world through exercise; I have had to suffer, and it is in that that I acquire spiritual wealth. They "spoiled the Egyptians", it says; they demanded of the Egyptians. It is a matter of right, we are not leaving anything that is of God behind. The principle in coming out of the world is that we are carrying with us all that belongs to God and spoiling the world; the world is ready to adopt things that belong to God, but the Christian in effect says 'They are not yours at all, and we are taking them all with us'.
H.W. Is that why confessing the name of the Lord helps us?
J.T. That is where it begins, I think. That brings out opposition.
{26}
-.P. It is not so much the thought of individual wealth as accumulative wealth?
J.T. It is individual wealth first -- every man and woman, but it becomes accumulative through each contributing, meaning, in a practical way, that brothers and sisters alike are supposed to contribute to the assembly. The actual use made has to be left. All is in the hands of Moses.
P.D. Does the principle come out in the beginning of the Acts where each one brought their contribution to the apostles¬ feet?
J.T. That is the thought. No one who had possessions called anything his own. It was a community, but stress is laid here on every man and woman whose heart prompted them. God is looking at the state of our hearts.
H.W. It is spoken of as a heave-offering. What is going to promote that feeling with us that the wealth shall be made available?
J.T. I think the stirring up of the affections. There are two ideas in the offering, one the heaving, the other the waving. A heave-offering is something raised up, the outgoings of the heart towards God; the wave-offering refers more to Christ. He is kept constantly and strikingly before the eyes of God. It is the heave-offering here because it is a question of the saints.
W.M. The wealth had been previously used in the service of the devil, but now it is brought into the service of God.
J.T. That is right. That shows the terrible breakdown. The exercise in connection with it had increased the wealth of the saints.
E.E. How can I distinguish wealth in my soul? What would wealth be in the way you are speaking of it?
J.T. It is the movement covered in the word "heave". @Romans 8 brings out that the Spirit searches the hearts, or rather God does. "He who searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit",(@Romans 8:27).
{27}
God searches the hearts, and it is in the consciousness of the movement of the heart Godward; and another great test is whether I love the brethren, whether in relation with the brethren my heart is moved.
A.J.D. Would the call to the fellowship of God's Son have this movement in view?
J.T. I think so. We are called into it, and we ought to be able to discern the movements of our hearts. There are in a man or in a beast automatic self-acting organs, these are what are alluded to in this movement called "heave". The Lord alludes to it too in saying, "The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life" (@John 4:14). Surely one is conscious of that movement. It is not the action of one's will; it is a movement by itself; it is the effect of God being brought before the affections.
C.D. What would cover each would be the fact that this contribution was toward God's dwelling place, would it not?
J.T. What a great thought it is! God seeks to dwell amongst us. Everyone who loves God would be alive and ready to contribute to that.
H.W. I think we need help really to discover and discern the value of this wealth that is found amongst the saints and to use it rightly and hold it available.
J.T. You get initial thoughts in Exodus. There it is all a question of what Moses did. Aaron is there, but Moses and the anointing are the two great thoughts; every item in the tabernacle, meaning every brother and every sister, is in place, but not the place which he has taken, but the place which he is given. He is given his place. Moses set up the tabernacle and set every item in its place, and as there it is functioning, acting, doing what it should do. That is the idea, so it is a question of the authority of Christ exercised, but in the anointing. The Spirit is there too.
{28}
C.D. So that it is the hand of Moses that unifies the whole thing.
J.T. Moses finished the work and the next thing is that God says in effect, 'That is all suitable to Me'. It is not yet the varied woods of the temple and the other metals and the like in the temple, but just the tabernacle here -- just the saints in their wilderness setting, where contrariety is. God can say, 'That pleases Me'. There is nothing more satisfying than the sense spiritually that you are just where God would have you and that He is pleased with you there. There is not an incongruous thing in it; there is no more need for Moses to say, 'Do this or do that'. We are all perfectly restful in our position.
P.D. Is it not interesting to see that it is God that proposes the materials suitable for His dwelling?
J.T. It must be. All is on divine terms, but then everything that He requires is provided. There is plenty of it too.
C.S.S. The words 'found' and 'brought' seem to be repeated in the chapter. Does it suggest this volume of movement? Where are they brought from?
J.T. Are you speaking of chapter 35? It says in the opening verses that Moses collected or gathered all the assembly. That is, they are all there and under the hand of Moses. He is gathering, and after speaking of the sabbath, he gives a list of the things that are needed -- and then we are told in verse 20 that "all the assembly of the children of Israel departed from before Moses". That is, they are not under his influence. They departed from the presence of Moses and that raises the whole question as to fellowship, that is, what we do when we are not formally in the presence of the Lord, or in the presence of each other. We have gone back to the places of our individual settings. Shall we forget what is needed? Will our hearts be occupied with other things? Very often at a meeting we are full of a thing that is presented to us in power, but as we go back to
{29}
our individual settings it loses its force. But what comes out here is that it did not lose its force with them (see @Exodus 35:20 - 29). All that takes place as the people departed from Moses; they are no longer under his influence, but act as honest men and women. Whatever these utensils had been used for before, that is now abandoned and they are brought to make a dwelling place for God. God is before the assembly. It is a wonderful picture of the normal result of the Spirit of God working in the saints as of the assembly.
W.J.Y. Carrying assembly exercises back to our homes?
J.T. That is the idea. You may go back from the meeting and forget what you heard, and you turn to your own things. When you get back other things affect you, but the point here is that they were not forgetful or affected adversely; they carried out the desire of Moses.
C.S.S. I was thinking that they brought these things out of their homes, would that be right?
J.T. Yes, it was sacrifice. People had nose-rings and earrings, and bracelets; it was sacrifice to give these up. And the women had looking-glasses, and they have them today; this book contemplates that these are given up too. All that sort of thing is given up for the sake of a dwelling-place for God.
T.P. In `4:2, which was written by a sister, we have, "Now with this treasure our spirits are freighted". Is that the acquisition of wealth in that sense?
J.T. Very good illustration of it. The word 'freighted' was well debated before it was put into that hymn, it is a good word.
T.P. I was thinking of the first part of the verse. It indicates that we have come from conditions where we have been, as it were, away from Moses.
J.T. That is the thought. We go back to our houses after a meeting like this. We may get a touch, but shall
{30}
I carry it back to my house? shall I forget it? It may require sacrifice, and I say, 'Well, that is not needed'. It may be I stay home from the next meeting. Or on the other hand I may resolve 'I will not miss one meeting, I will be like Anna'. Will you carry that through? God looks to you to carry it through.
J.P. What would help us as to willing-heartedness?
J.T. I think that is the covenant. The covenant is the heart of God. That is, God's heart is towards you, and now what is your heart towards God? That is what these verses mean. The covenant is in chapter 34. That is the second giving of the law; this chapter is the response to it.
-.H. Is that where the glory is seen, in the expression of all these things in the assembly?
J.T. That is the idea, I think.
{31}
DIVINE DWELLING (3)
@2 Corinthians 6:11 - 18; @2 Corinthians 7:1; @John 14:21 - 26
J.T. Our subject began with @Exodus 20 and we went on to the covenant and the material for the dwelling. What is in mind tonight is just a continuation of that, the covenant being before us. The link with chapter 3 is maintained in these chapters, but the minister, as representative of Christ, is strongly prominent throughout as one (that is the apostle Paul) fitted of God to make divine thoughts intelligible and effective. So that we have here in chapter 6 a list of some thirty-seven items characterising Paul and leading up to the verses read, in which he indicates that his heart is expanded towards the saints, towards the Corinthians; this is all borne out in detail in the type, that is, in Moses. God directs that he, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders should go up, and says no more. Moses immediately, in true mediatorship, brings the words of the Lord, Jehovah, to the people and tells them all that He said, as if he had in mind that in going up they must go up suitably in reconciliation, and to that end in the fulness of the covenant and in the fulness and understanding of what is implied in the whole position, that is, the unity of the tribes. And so he rehearses the words of Jehovah and the people say, "All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!" (@Exodus 24:3) Then Moses builds the twelve pillars and the altar, and the youths are employed as priests, the blood is put into the basons and he sprinkles the blood on the altar and the people and the book, and says, using the word covenant, "Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you",(@Exodus 24:8) for all the people said, "All that Jehovah has said will we do, and obey!" (@Exodus 24:7). So that on the ground of this Moses and Aaron and Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders go up and they see
{32}
the God of Israel and eat and drink and are called nobles, and then Jehovah says that Moses is to come up higher, and be there, meaning that the mediator is now a heavenly thought as we are fit to go up. The heavenly thought is established and the mediator is to be there, that is, Christ on high; as the writer to the Hebrews, commenting on it, says, "For the Christ is not entered into holy places made with hand, figures of the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear before the face of God for us", @Hebrews 9:24. So Moses was there forty days and forty nights, the idea is Christ on high, and the tables are given there, although the commandments are already spoken, and the pattern all comes out of heaven; that is the principle of divine dwelling.
W.J.Y. Would the going up suggest our heavenly calling?
J.T. Well, I think that is the thought that the dispensation is heavenly. It is not exactly the millennium, it is a heavenly thing, the habitation of God is from heaven. The material is, as it were, from heaven; the pattern is received up there. Moses is there forty days and forty nights in a state of abstraction from natural conditions, because he did not eat or drink.
W.J.Y. Does the thought of a heavenly calling go beyond the letter of the covenant?
J.T. It does. The covenant enables you to take up that thought in liberty. That is why Moses, without any commandments as far as this record shows, brings in the thought of the covenant, brings in the volume of the blood and applies it to the altar and the book and the people, so that all are enveloped in the idea of love, the love of God in Christ. As Romans brings it out, no one can separate us from that, the love of God in Christ; we are sustained in it. That in itself, however, is not the heavenly position; but in the power of it we go up and are owned up there. The material all comes out consequent upon that, and I think we have the same order here in 2 Corinthians. The covenant is in
{33}
chapter 3 and then we have much about eternal things and our house which is from heaven and new creation; that is, our souls are bathed, as it were, in these great eternal thoughts of God. But then, all is worked out in the servant, in the minister, and so in the end of chapter 5 he brings himself out in that way as an ambassador. Then this chapter shows how he commended himself in these items. These items, thirty-seven in all, a remarkable list, are mentioned to bring out what the minister was, and that he is thus because of what he had been engaged in. His mouth is opened; knowing, too, that they were affected by his first letter, he goes on here to call them his children. He establishes confidence in them and points out what is necessary, in view of all that he has been saying, to the dwelling-place of God. God is to dwell amongst us and walk amongst us.
W.J.Y. In measure we learn the importance of the message as we look at the messenger.
J.T. I think that is the idea. The mind of God comes out in qualified vessels; that is to say, not only is the truth spoken, but it is exemplified. The power is seen in a concrete way in the vessel.
E.E. Would his mouth being opened and his heart expanded show that on his side there is going to be no restriction in communication of these divine things nor lack of affection in the vessel?
J.T. That is the idea. The first letter, of course, had done a certain amount of work, but there was much more required, and he points out now that he is set free himself. He had gone through much and his heart was engaged with much, with these great things, the covenant and eternal things. He calls them things unseen, our bodies which are from heaven, new creation and reconciliation. All these things necessarily affected him inwardly. Now it is your turn, he says, "Be ye also enlarged", *also*. What we are aiming at, of course, is conditions for the divine dwelling.
{34}
E.E. We see the same things in type in Moses. All he received in the way of light on the mount, he communicated to the people in love.
J.T. Yes. The writer to the Hebrews tells us he communicated everything, he made known every word of the covenant and he spoke about the blood, too, in volume.
H.W. In connection with the divine dwelling, you spoke about tabernacle conditions. In this chapter we have the thought of the temple. Would you distinguish and help us as to the difference?
J.T. The word 'temple' has to be understood, like other words, in the context in which you find it. The context in these two epistles is a wilderness setting, because the tabernacle had the idea of the temple as much as what is called the temple. What Solomon built, of course, was the house.
H.W. Is that more in line with Ephesians -- "Increases to a holy temple in the Lord"? @Ephesians 2:21.
J.T. You have to connect that with Solomon's temple. In these two references in chapter 3 of the first epistle and chapter 6 of the second epistle, the allusion is to the wilderness because *walking* among them (verse 16) is in the wilderness. The building of Solomon's temple is a fixed thing in view of the millennium and eternity. This is a movable idea. So that the Corinthians were temple of God locally. "Ye are [the] temple of God (@1 Corinthians 3:16)". The word of course is the real word for temple. "Ye are [the] living God's temple". The omission of the article in the Greek is somewhat characteristic of these epistles. It is to bring out the character of the thing without assuming that it is the whole idea.
H.W. At the same time, is it not so that the two thoughts are to be reached in the apprehension and enjoyment of the saints?
J.T. Quite so. On the one hand it is the wilderness position and on the other our position in the land.
{35}
The wilderness position is movable and provisional; the other is fixed, looking on to eternity. Not that the movable condition ceases, I mean the thing itself, because what we have is the same as what is fixed. So that in Chronicles the tabernacle is merged in the temple; the whole thing is brought in to the temple.
H.W. Would you connect the tabernacle idea with the position of the saints in the early part of the Supper and the temple with the end?
J.T. That is exactly the thought. We begin with the local setting and then pass on to the universal and eternal setting.
W.J.Y. Would it bear the thought that the tabernacle is more God approaching us and the temple what is dedicated to Him?
J.T. I think so. The tabernacle is that God is with us, that is "that I may dwell among them" (@Exodus 25:8), but earlier it says, "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared", @Exodus 15:17. That is the other side, which God Himself builds. In the Psalms it says, "And he built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever", @Psalm 78:69. It is fixed in the Psalms.
H.W. The apostle John in his ministry dwells much on the tabernacle side of things -- "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us", @John 1:14, He carries it on to the final thought that God will tabernacle with men.
J.T. The idea is that God will be near us in lowly circumstances. We begin with that in Adelaide; we come together in assembly, that is the local setting, the position that comes under man's eye, and God comes there. "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee", @Exodus 20:24, That is not the end. The end is to draw us over to His own side, that is Ephesians.
{36}
H.W. Do you think that, in effect, when the saints come together in that way there is the setting up of the tabernacle, and then there is the carrying through the week?
J.T. That is the thought. It is a public thing and therefore there is the anointing. In the first epistle, the assembly is called the Christ, "So also is the Christ", @1 Corinthians 12:12. That is, it is the anointed position here. It is the testimony here where things are contrary. It is the dignity that comes under man's eye, so that the anointing is to begin in our houses; I mean the dignity that attaches to us as having the Spirit. As we move out to the assembly, everything is in dignity and holiness, even our deportment, the way we sit, the announcements: everything is in the power of the anointing. They are not common things. If you announce anything that is to be done amongst the saints, it is not common; it is anointed and God respects that. The Lord comes there to lead us over to His own side. Hence you have the idea of the love of Christ, and of calling Him Lord Jesus, by the Spirit; everything is by the Spirit. And then you go on to the other side. The covenant comes in to set us free, and what marks the covenant is glory. It is not only the anointing but glory.
W.J.Y. So the covenant produces the conditions in which God can come to us.
J.T. Well, yes. The anointing, I think, suffices. "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee" (@Exodus 20:24). That is in chapter 20; but the glory is a further thought, that is, it is the Spirit making the idea to shine, to permeate all. The glory is there.
H.W. The effect of the covenant here in @Exodus 24 would seem to be to liberate Moses and the nobles who went up.
J.T. Yes. And it is above that you get the glory, in that chapter. The glory of the Lord abode on
{37}
Mount Sinai for seven days. That was where it belonged for the moment, but in the end of the book it comes into the tabernacle and fills the tabernacle because of the conditions. The glory is distinct from the anointing. The tabernacle is anointed and every part of it set up, but the glory is distinct from that; it is an advance on that. I think the glory involves the covenant. It is a further thought but it is not the final thought; the final thought is the family. You have to go to David and Solomon for the final thought.
H.W. That is what I thought in connection with the effect of the covenant. It is liberating with this other side in view.
J.T. With the other side in view, that we might go on to the eternal thought, and for that you must have David and Solomon. Joshua does not help on that at all. The book of Joshua is not the service of God in the way you get it in David and Solomon; so that if we cut out time, we have to add on David and Solomon to the end of Exodus. After all, time is only connected with the ways of God. When He reaches His end in our souls, everything merges and we are able to pass on to Ephesians. That is the divine thought. God has raised us up together and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies.
W.J.Y. Would not Joshua be a link between Exodus and Chronicles?
J.T. Not with regard to service. There is a link as regards passing out of death into life; there is a link there which is probably Colossians.
A.J.D. It is necessary for us to understand the glory of the covenant before we can move to the other sphere.
J.T. That is the thought. The covenant comes in properly in the force of it after we drink the cup; after they all drank out of it, the Lord told them what it was. Then they sang a hymn, that is, they were liberated. That is the order.
{38}
H.W. Was teaching connected with it?
J.T. Certainly there was teaching connected with it. It is the Mediator that makes it effective.
A.J.D. Is it to put glory upon us that we may be free to move?
J.T. We go up gloriously. Two men appeared in glory, that is, their dress.
R.S.T. Would you say a word as to glory?
J.T. I think it is the thing that shines out. It is what God is, not in His eternal thoughts, but in His covenant thoughts. It is what He is in love, that is, in the sacrifice He made. He "has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all", @Romans 8:32. The sacrifice is made. How He would let His heart flow out to us!
E.G. Is the way Stephen presents things in @Acts 7 what you were saying, the testimony of Joshua, David and Solomon?
J.T. Quite so. He goes through the course in a beautiful way, he even tells us about Moses in the assembly in the wilderness. That is a good thought: Moses in the assembly in the wilderness, what he did there.
H.W. Think of the glory filling the house! In the end of Exodus it says that Moses could not enter the tent of meeting because of the glory, but in Chronicles the priests could not stand. Would you help us as to the difference?
J.T. The first alludes to what we are at now -- the necessity for obedience. That is really what it means, that I am fitting in my place in glory. I am anointed. Chapter 40 is just the saints in type, that is ourselves at any given time, as having learned to be subject. They said, "All that Jehovah has said will we do, and obey!" (@Exodus 24:7) We are sanctified unto the obedience of Christ. Sanctified unto -- it is that kind of obedience, and nothing less than that will fit in the tabernacle.
{39}
H,W. Do you suggest in speaking of chapter 40 as the saints that they provide the furniture in that way?
J.T. Surely that is the thought. Every item fits; there is no suggestion of any incongruity whatever. It is all perfect, and that must involve the obedience of the Christ. We are sanctified unto that and the Holy Spirit in us would imply the anointing. It would enable us to be in that, not only in a passive way but in a living way, so that each knows how to function; as any item is set up it is functioning. It is not passive, it is active; it is active in its own place. Each of us is in the sense of the power of the Spirit, ready to function, each in his own place. That is what God has in mind. He says, I want all that, Moses does not need to say anything more, it is all met.
A.J.D. "He came unto his own" (@John 1:11).
J.T. That is exactly my thought. He would say, I want all that. His glory fills it.
W.J.Y. If you sought to touch the eternal side of things without travelling the way you bring before us, it would be disastrous.
J.T. That is just what happens, it would be mental without the glory. We go via the anointing, via the covenant, the anointing and the covenant and the glory; the glory is the outcome of the covenant -- so that we go up glorious.
J.S. What you have been bringing before us has a wilderness setting?
J.T. That is the idea exactly. It is in a scene of contrariety that this comes about. Think of a number of saints sitting down together in perfect subjection to the Lord, each in his place as anointed, as having the Spirit! If a person is anointed he says. Lord Jesus. He says it in the power of the anointing and that affects everybody present; it has a powerful effect. That is the note to keep on until you get another note.
P.D. To go back again to the covenant after having addressed the Father would be out of order.
{40}
J.T. I think so. It is better just to go on. Sometimes we take up the thought of the Father too soon, we have not the glory. You need the glory. If you look through Exodus you will be impressed with the idea of the glory.
H.W. I was impressed with the great dignity that marks the saints as coming together in that way, but as together we require to be controlled.
J.T. That is what the Lord is seeking to bring about, to bring us into the dignity of the position, that things are not common. We should not sit together in any common way. We should learn how to sit bodywise, involving the Spirit.
J.S. So that there is great dignity connected with us even in the wilderness setting?
J.T. Certainly that is the thought. There is this before men.
H.W. Would you amplify that -- sitting bodywise?
J.T. Well, it implies the light in which we sit down together. "Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf", @1 Corinthians 10:17. So that as the emblems go round, we are not restless, we are not waiting for something in a common way; we are in dignity and affection together. We look at each other as one, as one body. There is enjoyment and increased power in sitting together even in silence.
A.J.D. Is that merging by the Spirit?
J.T. That is the thought. That is where you realise that in the power of the Spirit we have all been baptised *into* one body.
H.W. So that there will be no independent action.
J.T. That is the thought exactly. That is what @Exodus 40 means. God says as it were, 'That is all suitable to Me; that is delightful. It is all Mine; I will take it all over'.
H.W. That makes @Exodus 40 very wonderful.
J.T. @Ephesians 2:6 touches on what we were and what we are. "And has raised us up together" -- it is
{41}
not together with Christ, but together with one another. Really, sat down together in the heavenlies, that thought comes into it. That is what is meant. You do not wish to go to heaven without the brethren. You want the brethren. If you want them up there you want them down here in the body.
W.J.Y. He has made us drink into *one* Spirit. Is that a present thought here preparatory to passing over to the other side?
J.T. That is right. I think drinking is for satisfaction, that you are not irritable or finding the position irksome, you are satisfied in the position. A great many are not. A great many are very irritable and find things irksome, if they would only say so, but the idea is to be satisfied. "The trees of Jehovah are satisfied", @Psalm 104:16.
E.B. Is that what the Lord has in mind when He says, "Drink ye all of it" (@Matthew 26:27)?
J.T. That is right. It does not mean to drink all the wine, but that all the saints should drink what is there.
A.R.G. What do you mean by 'finding things irksome'? What have you in mind?
J.T. Any discontent with the brethren. Naturally, of course, we may be in a position that we are not equal to. The anointing makes me equal to the position and the drinking makes me enjoy it. I am satisfied in it. And the merging, the baptism, is God putting me there as fit for the place. "For also in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body", @1 Corinthians 12:13. It all bears on unity, that we are satisfied together in any setting in which God places us, and God comes in. So here we have in our chapter the idea of the danger of all this being spoilt by evil associations, by unequal alliances, which are most baneful. The enemy is working in a most concerted way to cause young people to make alliances ignoring the fellowship, ignoring the Lord. The apostle stresses it here, the contrast between
{42}
righteousness and lawlessness, light and darkness, Christ and Belial, the believer and an unbeliever, and the temple of God and idols. These are all very strong statements, the Spirit of God presenting the natural disposition with us to form unholy alliances.
H.W. You are speaking of marriage now?
J.T. That is the principal one. But there are also partnerships or even companionships.
R.S.T. It would help us to see that these are definite statements -- light and darkness. There is no middle course.
J.T. Quite so. He brings in the precious thought that you are God's temple. "*Ye* are the living God's temple". The living God's temple, what a thing that is! The word here is the inner shrine, but it is not here a question of getting light out of it, as in chapter 3 of the first epistle, but of God dwelling in that and walking in that.
R.S.T. I was thinking of that. If we take these things up in exercise in the light of God's dwelling, it becomes a much more important thing than our own blessing.
J.T. Yes. God dwelling and walking. Well, if He walks He will come round to see what is going on. He will take note of what is going on. In the types He was very particular, not only as to what was in the tabernacle but as to what was in the camp. There was to be nothing at all contrary to His mind, that would offend Him.
-.P. There is no room for a difference of opinion and such a thing as agreeing to differ.
J.T. No. There is no room for agreement to differ at all.
W.J.Y. Separation has a very great reward here.
J.T. Quite so. It is put in that way as worth while.
C.S.S. It says that Jehoshaphat allied himself in marriage and in business and the Lord broke his works.
{43}
J.T. Quite so. The word to him was that he loved those that hated the Lord, and many of us do that. We love ungodly companions, ungodly people.
C.S.S. You were speaking of the Christ. It follows on to say that "God has set certain in the assembly" (@1 Corinthians 12:28). It is the recognition of that which we need as being together. God has set *in the assembly*.
J.T. Yes, it is a place where He can put things. You might say that, as with a diamond, the surroundings enhance the thing He sets there.
C.S.S. That is where the glory is.
J.T. Exactly. What a great idea! It is the vessel of divine residence, the residence of divine glory in a world of contrariety. But the enemy is constantly aiming at reducing the standard amongst us, to destroy the Lord's authority. He would say, 'If I can get those two young people to unite, if I can get them into fellowship, they will lower the standard and weaken the position. The more I can do that, the more I can destroy the divine thought'. What Satan had in mind in Ananias and Sapphira was to destroy the divine thought, and make it appear that God was not there.
P.D. Your thought as to 'in the Lord' would be borne out by the daughters of Zelophehad. "Let them marry whom they please; only they shall marry one of the tribe of their father". @Numbers 36:6.
J.T. That is the thought. The preposition 'in' is a strong word. It implies God's power. It is not a mere question of a person being a nominal Christian, but a question here of a real believer. The authority of the Lord is involved in it, active authority. 'In' is a preposition of power.
H.W. Would you say there might be a marriage with a believer and yet it not be in the Lord?
J.T. Certainly. "In the Lord" involves His authority; it involves the fellowship.
A.J.D. It is important for us to get the divine standard.
{44}
J.T. Quite so. I thought we might see in @John 14 how all this fits in with remnant times. What we are speaking of here is normal conditions at the beginning, but John after verse 20 in this chapter records what the Lord says, speaking of one person, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". Then it goes on in verse 23, "Jesus answered and said to him. If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him". I think that is the idea of tabernacle conditions. That brings the thing down to one person and, of course, to any number of such persons, alluding to remnant times, that we may have tabernacle conditions.
W.J.Y. This applies when everything official has broken down.
J.T. I think that is the way; it merges somewhat with @Matthew 18. There is a division at the end of verse 20. Up till then there is normality. The beginning of verse 21, I think, alludes to a time when many who professed to be the Lord's did not love Him. "He that has my commandments and keeps them", he is the one; he is qualifying as a lover of Christ, and hence the Lord says, "He that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". I think we can see how tabernacle conditions and privileges are coming in. Then in answer to Judas, He says, "If any one love me, he will keep my word", meaning the whole disclosure of the divine thoughts. I apprehend that is what the word means. The keeping of that implies conditions that God can own. The Father and Son abide with such an one as that.
H.W. Do you think that John's gospel is intended especially for the overcomer, to enable the saints to be overcomers here?
{45}
J.T. I think so. You can see how this would fit in with the addresses to the assemblies.
H.W. It has often been said it was written after he got the light of the Revelation.
J.T. I think that is true. You can see how it furnishes a lover of Christ with everything they had at the beginning.
P.D. The Lord says to Philadelphia, "Thou ... hast kept my word" @Revelation 3:8.
J.T. Well, that fits in here, and the Spirit in verse 26, I think, is in that connection. It contemplates forgetfulness, that things have been forgotten and brings in the idea of remembrance linking on with the Lord's supper. There is the idea of remembrance; the Spirit causes remembrance of what has been forgotten, and how much has been forgotten of all that He said! Certainly the whole history of the church is built up on ignoring what He said, but now things are brought back to us; they are brought to light.
C.S.S. What would be the difference between the abode in this verse and in the second verse? Does one lead on to the other?
J.T. The many abodes, you mean? Well, that is the heavenly side; of course, it is the same word; the heavenly side which is here is future in this second verse, but Ephesians makes it a present thing: "Has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies", @Ephesians 2:6.
C.S.S. You are drawing our attention to conditions necessary for this verse. Would that help us in regard to the second?
J.T. Well, the second is what has been prepared by the Lord for us up there -- a wonderful thing!
C.S.S. Sometimes we sing, 'There no stranger -- God shall meet thee!' (`76:10)
J.T. Well, quite so. It is what He has done up there. "I go to prepare you a place (@John 14:2)". What we have below is a place for Him here.
{46}
E.E. I would like a little more help on this. This is as they were seated at the Supper table, is it not? Would the beginning of @John 14 set out what the Lord has in His mind as a kind of climax? Would what you have been speaking of in the individual set out how we should be concerned to respond to such love, what the Lord is seeking to lead us to in regard of the Spirit?
J.T. It is a future thought. So when He comes, He takes us up there. What we are engaged with here is what lies in the Spirit. In this section of the chapter it is what lies in the Spirit.
G.McK. It says, "If any one love me". Do we profess each one of us to be lovers of Christ as we take the Supper?
J.T. Yes. Tell us more of what is in your mind.
G.McK. You were speaking of the dignity of our position; this would not only strengthen us in regard to the dignity of the position, but it brings out the link of affection that is proved by keeping the Lord's word. The Lord distinctly connects the thought of professing to love Him with keeping His word.
J.T. Yes, keeping His commandments and then His word. Verse 23 is an enlargement, an advance on verse 21. What we remember helps. The time had come when many were professing to love the Lord but did not. Of course, that is our own time. Well, He gives us a test here: "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me". He makes the keeping of the commandments a qualification for a lover. No one else has a place. Every other person is questionable. If a person professes to love Christ and does not keep His commandments, he is questionable. He may love Him, but it is questionable, and of course it is a very humbling thing for this to be questioned amongst us. If a person is questionable there is a sort of cloud over him. That is what that passage would indicate. John is very abstract, that is to say, he makes things acute in contrast. He does not want
{47}
any middle way at all. That is how he quotes the Lord here. The time would come when many would be professing to love Him and yet ignoring His commandments.
H.V. Is that in order that there would be suitable conditions among the people generally?
J.T. Exactly. How can you expect divine Persons to come in if the commandments are ignored?
W.J.Y. Any one who professed to love the Lord and refused to break bread would be very questionable.
J.T. Very. And even if they were breaking bread and disregarding the authority of the Lord they would be very questionable.
J.S. So that keeping the commandments is so important that the Spirit would bring the word to remembrance.
J.T. That is the idea. The commandments are a sort of clearing; the keeping of the commandments takes you out of any sect, any relations that are contrary or unwarranted. This is seen in @2 Timothy 2. But then there is the positive thing, that is, the word, the disclosure of the mind of God, what He wants, what He requires. It is a further thought involving more intelligence.
C.S.S. Keeping that word would lead up to the thought of dwelling that you have in your mind, and would not that be a sample of what we have at the commencement? "Days of heaven upon the earth" (@Deuteronomy 11:21) -- as we sing, 'Eternity's begun'.
J.T. You come on to that. Here it is divine Persons coming to us and making Their abode with us, which of course is not final. It can only be provisional.
A.J.D. It depends on our observance of the covenant.
J.T. And conditions here amongst us, one, two or three or however many, where divine Persons come in. First the Lord says, I "will manifest myself", and then "my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him". The next thing is the
{48}
place the Spirit has. The three Persons are brought in. The three Persons are seen here.
G.McK. Why does it say 'We'?
J.T. The Lord associates Himself with the Father. It is a wonderful thought. Their coming unto you. Verse 26 is to make scope for the Spirit in these new conditions. In the earlier verses, in the beginning of verse 16, we have the Spirit here in relation to normal conditions; but verse 21 begins abnormal conditions, and verse 26 brings the Spirit in in relation to abnormal conditions, and abnormal conditions require that He is here in the Lord's name, because that is then the test. He is sent here in the Lord's name, and as here in the Lord's name He will teach us everything. It is important at the beginning to see how everything is to be learnt in any circumstances, by the Spirit as sent in the Lord's name, and the first thing He will do is to establish the Lord's authority. I do not believe that anything at all is rightly understood save by a person who has the Spirit of God, even making due allowance for the scientific men. I do not believe anything is understood unless we begin with God. The Spirit teaches all things; we get the divine view of them. Then He brings things back to us, because Christendom is really marked by disregard of what the Lord says, whether it be forgetfulness or wilful disregard. "The Holy Spirit ... will bring to your remembrance".
A.J.D. Is that the whole light of the truth brought to us in that setting?
J.T. That is the idea. The Holy Spirit is sent here by the Father in the Lord's name, Christ's name. In the next chapter, the Son sends Him from the Father. He comes as having been with the Father, as having first-hand knowledge, as it were, of what is in heaven.
W.M. The character He takes as Comforter is very striking.
J.T. It is. The word of course means that He is here to take charge of everything. It is a wonderful
{49}
thought that we can trust in the Lord in a meeting like this. The Holy Spirit takes charge of things in a meeting like this. He keeps Himself out of sight, but He is here in power.
W.M. So every holy emotion that passes through our hearts and minds is the result of the work of the Comforter.
J.T. Quite so. You are conscious of that. Room is made here for the Lord, and you are conscious that there is some power keeping things right. Things are kept right in what we say.
R.S.T. Would you run over those three things again in regard to the Spirit? The name of the Lord, and the Son, and coming from the Father. You referred to Him here in this verse, bringing to remembrance in connection with the Lord; and then you said in the next chapter that the Son sends Him.
J.T. In the end of chapter 15 we have "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes forth from with the Father, he shall bear witness concerning me" (@John 15:26). Now the Lord is sending Him Himself, but sending Him as having been with the Father. In other words, speaking reverently, there is a new experience in heaven, which is a thing to be borne in mind, that it is, so to speak, the history of heaven coming into creation. In coming into the heavenly regions He is coming into creation. He has His own realm. There is a history there; a Man is now in heaven. That is history and God enjoys that, and the Holy Spirit being there with the Father brings down here all that which is felt up there about the Son.
R.S.T. Does that involve the ten days?
J.T. Exactly.
H.J.M. Is that why He speaks of the Father's word in verse 24?
J.T. Yes. He says, "He that loves me not does not keep my words; and the word which ye hear is not
{50}
mine, but that of the Father who has sent me". That is what He was saying down here Himself. That is the Father's word. As down here the Lord was the expression of the Father, but now He has gone up there. The coming of the Spirit contemplates Him up there, and His presence up there means history and new conditions up there. The Holy Spirit is presented here as having been with the Father, meaning that He is fully cognisant of all that. He brings all that down to our understanding. The Lord says to the twelve in addition to that, "ye too ... because ye are with me from the beginning", @John 15:27. They can bring in order on earth. 'I will be up there with the Father'. Of course, it can be called the ministry to bring out the place that Man has up there.
E.E. I think that is very wonderful. It says in the end of chapter 15, "*He* shall bear witness concerning me" (Verse 26). Would that be to the disciples first?
J.T. Well, it is "*He* shall bear witness" and "Ye too". That is, the Spirit is viewed as bearing witness as distinct from them. It means an additional testimony to the twelve.
H.W. Does that continue throughout the dispensation?
J.T. Certainly.
E.E. That must give a power of dignity to the twelve.
J.T. It does. It gives them a great place. "Because ye are with me from the beginning";(@John 15:27) they beheld all occurrences on earth. The Holy Spirit alone can tell us of the occurrences up there.
J.S. Would it be too much to say that the Holy Spirit is so jealous of the word of God that it is His work today to bring the words of the Lord to remembrance that nothing may be lost?
J.T. That is right. This is a wonderful time. Things are coming out. For us it means that the Spirit may use this or that one, but things are constantly coming to
{51}
you. But they have been there all the time. They have been forgotten, but they are there, and the Spirit is operating to bring them all out.
H.W. Were you going to say anything further about "whom I will send to you from the Father" (@John 15:26)?
J.T. It brings out the great place He has there, and He is here. "Whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes forth from with the Father" (@John 15:26). I suppose the preposition implies that the Spirit is in that relation with the Father, and can bring out here the conditions, the enjoyment of things here. It is the Father's house.
C.S.S. Is it the expression of divine joy that is wanted to be made known down here?
J.T. I think so. I think the Spirit brings all that down here. @Luke 15 shows the Father's joy.
{52}
STRAYING SHEEP
@Isaiah 53:6; @Psalm 119:176; @Song of Songs 6:6
I have in mind tonight to speak to souls who haven gone astray. There are many abroad who were born into light, as indeed everyone in Christendom is, but there are those who were born into light in a more immediate sense -- in the sense that their parents were Christians. Those born in heathendom are different, of whom there are, alas, vast millions, for there are perhaps four times more of them, including Mohammedans, than there are of nominal Christians. That is a very solemn consideration, and one that baffles many, especially in view of the fact that Scripture says that the world, including the heathen part of it, is in reconciliation. But we have also to bear in mind that God is in charge of all these matters and is not obliged to give an account of them to us. Did He do so, we could, perhaps, scarcely understand. Nor are other things any clearer; there are many other things that we have to leave. We are creatures and generally very limited in our knowledge, although these modern days, days of research and investigation, may seem to have brought much to light as to things that had been obscure. Yet many things remain obscure; we look into the heavens, for instance, and the thought arises, 'What is beyond that, and what is beyond that, and what is beyond that?' and we are lost, in danger indeed of losing our minds if we keep too long on that line. So we have to admit that we are exceedingly limited, and that our very efforts to understand may endanger our health. It is well to humble ourselves, dear friends, as to these matters, and each to come back to his own little self, and even there he is baffled, at least I am, as regards his physical constitution. I mean to say that as we come back to ourselves, each is just as limited as to knowledge of what he is, and of what is current every instant in his
{53}
body and in his mind. God has intended the environment in which He has set us to affect us in this way, and it is only a fool that disregards this.
Thus such foolish questions are asked, and, indeed, were asked the Lord Jesus. "Are there few that be saved?" (@Luke 13:23) one says to the Lord. The Lord could tell him every one of the saved; He could tell him every person that is in the counsels of God, and yet the book of Revelation speaks of a number of persons who wash their robes in the blood of the Lamb, and it says that no man could number them, even that particular set. The Lord could tell that particular man the exact number of those required for the counsels of God. God has His own number and the Lord knows that number, and He could have told that man that number, but what good would it have done him? The Lord did nothing of the kind. It was a question for that man to find out whether *he* was amongst the saved. That would be the burning question for any honest person; I mean honest in the sense that God has begun to work in his soul; there is no honest man otherwise. I am not accusing any person of being dishonest in the ordinary sense. The Lord Jesus says to Nicodemus, a very great teacher in his day, a leading teacher in Israel, You must be born anew. That word anew means that you must be born throughout, that the old birth does not count at all; and it is the effect of that operation called 'new birth', for it is really born from above, born throughout; it is the effect of that that makes an honest man, and every such man will question before God as to himself; he will smite upon his breast like a certain man the Lord speaks of who went up to the temple to pray. He smote upon his breast. Another man went up too, but he did not smite upon his breast. There are very few going to the temple, even what is called the temple of God today. There are very few going to the churches today, alas! One would very much prefer to see the churches filled than to see the picture shows filled,
{54}
not that I am commending you to go, but I am saying that we are in terrible times when men on every hand are giving up even a semblance of Christianity. But here is one man who goes up to the temple to pray and he smites upon his breast and says, "God be merciful to me a sinner" (@Luke 18:13) -- *to me*. That is an honest man. They are very rare. Someone says that an honest man is the noblest work of God. I do not believe he meant what I am saying, I do not believe he understood what I am saying, but what I am saying and what he said is true, that an honest man is, you may say, the noblest work of God, morally so. Every such man will stand up before God and challenge himself in His presence as to whether he is fit to meet God; and not only so, he will avail himself of what God provides to make him fit for God. He will accept the gospel. He will see that it is the only remedy for man, and if he is advanced in years he will say, 'I have been a fool all these years'; moreover he will say, 'I have been morally unrighteous all these years'. And so it is, beloved friends, an honest man will face things; he will admit his limitations and he will acknowledge and answer to his responsibility before God, and he will be unhappy until matters are settled between his soul and God.
Well now, I said all that in relation to the puzzles that people are talking about. What is going to become of the heathen, of the little children and so on? To anyone who is questioning about little children I would say to you that the Lord Jesus says, "Their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven", (@Matthew 18:10). A most assuring word! The truth is that we do not accept God in His infinite greatness or recognise that that greatness is also seen in His ability to take account of the minutest things, of the very smallest particles, of the very seeds put into the ground. A seed of corn, or any seed you like, which falls into the ground, God gives a body (think of that!) as it pleases Him. It shews His ability to take up details and to follow
{55}
them up; so that we can well leave everything with God. We often quote and rightly, the great believer, the father of us all, even Abraham, saying "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" (@Genesis 18:25). What a fine question! It was no question really. It answered itself, and how settling that is to those who believe. We leave everything with God, but then we do not claim irresponsibility as to our salvation. We are responsible to God about that, and if we are honest with God and with ourselves we question before Him as to it. And what I believe some here will have to arrive at and own in honesty is that they began in light, that they came into this world into a wonderful heritage of light -- the light of the gospel. Suppose we were born into this world with no sun, moon or stars in the heavens. Well, you say, 'It would be impossible to live'. Surely, but is that not applicable to the moral system of things? Morally it is impossible to live unless there is such light as Christ in heaven and the Holy Spirit here; but think of being born into that light! That light is known here in Christendom but in no immediate or positive way; that is to say, you are born into a believer's household where God is owned, where there is an altar, so to speak, where the Bible is owned, believed in, and read and practised. Think of being born into that! Think of the heritage that is yours! Yet there are those here and myriads throughout Christendom who have gone astray. The force of the word would mean that. "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way", (@Isaiah 53:6). These are not the words of a heathen, beloved friends, these are the words of persons who were born into light, for every Jew was born into light. Even the apostle Paul says, in regard to the Jew, "What advantage then hath the Jew? ... Much every way". And what particularly? "Unto them were committed the oracles of God", (@Romans 3:1,2). Every Jew is born into that, no heathen is born into that. So the apostle Paul says
{56}
again, "Of whom, as according to flesh, is the Christ" (@Romans 9:5). Think of the heritage a Jew was born into! And these speakers in this well-known chapter in Isaiah belong to these. "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way". One goes about the world a little, and many others here also go about, and we know that particularly in the British Dominions there are many young men and women grown up now into middle age, and perhaps old age, who were born into light and took their own way, they would go abroad and they got into the world. They abandoned their heritage. They have gone astray, you see. Many of them have been known as remittance men. Many of them would start out to see the world and say, 'The world owes me a living'. The world owes you nothing, you will find that out. It has nothing to give in the sense in which I am speaking; if you are on that line you have chosen a false way. "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way". Let each question himself here tonight as to what way he has chosen. You have gone astray, you came into light and you have left it. You have taken on a by-path instead of the highway of God, and now you are stranded. You are stranded, maybe, financially and morally, and the Lord is here tonight to meet you in the gospel; and so the Spirit of God through the mouths of these speakers says, "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all". For it is not only that I have gone astray, but the straying means iniquity. What sins entered into those straying ways, who can tell? We can be sure that it is will from the beginning to the end; you have taken your own way. It is a way of your own choosing; not that you have inaugurated the thing, for it is usual that young people follow examples. There are very few originals. The world really is built up on leadership; you hear what others have done and you say, 'I will try too', and you do, and it is a steadily crooked way. The world, you know, is built up for such as you.
{57}
Satan has designed it and has been working at it for thousands of years and has in mind such as you.
We read in Proverbs, which is spoken to young people, to persons in the relation of sons, that the wicked woman has a flattering tongue, she flatters with her mouth. The man is froward; he says froward things. The wicked man in the book of Proverbs represents the intelligent leadership of the world; the leaders on this line are marked by speaking froward things; they always like to bring out something that catches, that has not been heard of before. It is not a question of being right or wrong, but a question of being froward, and drawing attention to the person who says it. That is modernism and all that goes with modernism. But then there is the other side -- the flattering side, that is to say, the theatre and cinema. What marks these institutions is flattery, and young people are very keen on flattery; and so it is that the foolish woman is found in the highway, and she entices, she calls out to the wayfaring and to the passers-by, "Turn in hither: ... Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant" (@Proverbs 9:16,17). But he turns, as the writer says, "as an ox goeth to the slaughter" (@Proverbs 7:22). "But he knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests are in the depths of hell", (@Proverbs. 9:18). This is the situation in going astray. How many have been ruined in this way, and one would speak to young men and women here tonight, If you have veered at all from the light into which you were born, the word is for you. The speakers here are acknowledging that they have gone astray. They are enlightened and now it is for you to come in, as you get in the last verse of @Psalm 119.
It is a wonderful psalm, the longest of them all, 176 verses. It is an alphabetical psalm, a psalm written by a man who had gone through the deepest exercises in regard of God, and yet he finishes up his remarks with a remarkable statement. He says, "I have gone astray like a lost sheep". How honest he is! You can
{58}
understand the force of his words if you read the psalm. He says, "I have not forgotten thy commandments". Indeed he had not. If anyone read the psalm he would be impressed with the wonderful grasp the psalmist had of the commandments of God, and the more he judges himself in the light of them, the more he will acknowledge that he has gone astray like a lost sheep.
The fact of the matter is that he is a repentant person. Repentance is not a mere historic thing at all. It has a beginning, of course, but it is never regarded as finished until we die. There may be repentance afterwards, you know, as in the unsaved, but I am speaking now of truly repentant persons. The word is a *repenting*  sinner. "There is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner", (@Luke 15:10). It is that kind of person. It is not the kind of person who says, 'I attended a gospel meeting 15 years ago. So-and-so was preaching and I was converted'. But where have you been ever since? 'I have been in the world'. Then you do not belong to the class that heaven rejoices in. Heaven rejoices in persons who go on repenting. The more you know of God and yourself the more you will see the need of repenting. And so this wonderful writer is one of the greatest authors I know. I do not know who it is, the name is not given. It is a question of whether I can go through with things; whether I can write down my exercises alphabetically before God, one after another, and then say, "I have gone astray like a lost sheep". You could not write anything truer. If the apostle Paul himself were to speak to us in the light of these things he would say, 'I am like that'. Do you think he ceased repenting? I do not think so. I am certain he did not. Luke tells us that what interests heaven in regard to repentance is just that they are *repenting* sinners, not simply persons who have repented, but who are doing it. That is this man; and he says to Jehovah, "I have not forgotten thy commandments". I say Amen to that. There is every evidence he had not.
{59}
But he says, "I have gone astray like a lost sheep". What an interesting man this is to heaven! Think of what heaven thought of him, after writing this wonderful psalm of 176 verses, and saying this at the close of it, instead of sitting down and saying, 'Look at that psalm, did anybody ever write a psalm like that?' He would be inflated if he said that. But perhaps someone is here who is accustomed to look back on his history since he was converted who says, 'I have been preaching and people have been saved by me. I have written books too'. That is not of any interest to heaven at all. Not a bit. It is the man who is able to say just where he has been spiritually after all his ministry, after all his writings; reviewing them all, he says, "I have gone astray like a lost sheep". But then he says, "I have not forgotten thy commandments". That is to say, there is a great moral element in the man, and how much God will do for this man. I believe that was a great time in heaven, if you understand me; I am not speaking lightly. I believe it was a great time in heaven when this man said that, after writing such a psalm. Would he not write another? I think he would. As we are told of the prophet John in the book of Revelation, an angel says to him, "Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel" (@Revelation 10:8), and then he is instructed to eat it up. And he did, he ate it up. It was in his mouth sweet, but in his belly it was bitter; that is to say, he felt things. He felt what would be the consequences of that little book, of what that little book says, and then it was said to him, "Thou must prophesy again" (@Revelation 10:11). It is the taking of the low place. "I have gone astray like a lost sheep". I do not know who the psalmist was who wrote this psalm, but you may be sure the mind of heaven is, 'You can write another'. What I want to point out is that he calls upon Jehovah. He says, "Seek thy servant". The Lord is here tonight to seek every one of us. I never think of preaching the gospel except to preach
{60}
to the saints who are present, and then to the others, the more saints the better so far as I am concerned. They receive things more freely and intelligently than others and they need to. There is something wrong very often with us. You know most of us need a second conversion, and more than two, more than three. Now this wonderful writer, this spiritual man, this writer of these 176 verses of the most remarkable matter, all treating of the ordinances of God, the precepts of God, says, "I have gone astray like a lost sheep: seek thy servant". The Lord is here tonight, as I said, to seek every one of us. If there be anything wrong with the best of us, the most spiritual of us, that should be the language of his heart -- "Seek thy servant; for I have not forgotten thy commandments". There may be something with you that you have not detected, something that is hindering you, marring your testimony, and if the light comes into your soul at this moment, this will be the language of your heart, "Seek thy servant; for I have not forgotten thy commandments".
What a history Peter had after he had denied the Lord Jesus! He did not take long to confess, that sin did not remain long on his conscience. It was not like the case in @Luke 13 where we are told a woman had been bound by the devil eighteen years before. Something had happened in her life eighteen years before that had not been settled. It was not so with Peter, it took only a few hours, as far as I can see. Luke puts it very beautifully. He says, "Immediately ... the cock crew",(@Luke 22:60) as it were a clock on the wall striking the hour; the Lord looked then at Peter. The Lord had put something on the calendar, so to say -- that Peter was going to do, before the cock crew twice. He said, 'You will deny Me three times before that'. The Lord had said that and the Lord kept it in His mind. Think of the wonderful Saviour we have to do with! He is here tonight on that very principle. He was before the high priest; He knew the cross was ahead of Him; He knew that
{61}
the terrible agony of the cross and the forsaking of God were ahead of Him, yet He kept that in His mind, that He had said that to Peter, that the time would come when the cock would crow the third time and that He would look at Peter, and He did. He turned around and looked at Peter, as much as to say, 'Peter -- *you*  know'. Think of the Lord carrying in His mind what had happened to that woman eighteen years before! We would have to regard the Lord as about twelve years of age when it happened, but He knew it happened and He says, 'It is going to be rectified'. He called her, and that is the principle here tonight. "Seek thy servant". If there is any such question in any soul here tonight, how ready He is to draw near and help you.
I want to say a word about this other statement in @Isaiah 53:6. These speakers, or whoever is speaking for them, say, "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all". ALL! Think of that! Jehovah, in spite of those crooked wills which took their own way, was thinking of them and of their iniquities and He laid them all upon Jesus. 'How could it be?' you say, 'Retribution should be in His mind'. But no! Retribution, of course, was in His mind for the sins must come in for judgment, but it was the retribution that was to fall on Jesus. Think of the agony of God, if I may speak so of God, of what it was to Him, as He looked down from heaven, to contemplate those wanderers, those strayers who took their own ways, and to decide that in spite of their crooked wills He was going to send His Son and He was going to lay all those iniquities on His beloved Son. Think of that! Let us rest in it. Think of the grace of it. Think of what it was to God to contemplate the laying on Him of these iniquities of those stubborn, self-willed people going astray. I refer to Saul as an example; see how he strayed. He took his own way; he held the clothes of those who stoned Stephen, and he sought letters from
{62}
the priesthood at Jerusalem to go to Damascus to hail men and women there, as in Judea, to the tribunals, to be imprisoned and to be put to death. He was an insolent overbearing man. That is what he was, but the Lord Jesus met him on the way. God had foreseen that man in his crookedness and He laid his sins upon Jesus. Is not that like balm to your soul as you look back upon your history of sin, that God had seen it beforehand and had made provision for it and laid all those sins upon Jesus? If there is one here tonight repentant, that word is for you. "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all". We do not feel it much. One has to own it. What was it to God to think it out beforehand? He looked down from heaven, we are told in the book of Psalms, to see if there was any good, and instead of good, this is what He saw, these crooked ways, and He had them all on His mind. He knew the end from the beginning of everyone, and laid their iniquities on Jesus. He did it. Does it not touch our hearts? It ought to. What thoughts and feelings were in the divine mind, in view of the incarnation, taking account of all those ways, those crooked ways, in view of men coming to repentance one day. "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all", and if there is one who comes to repentance tonight, this word applies to you. You will take up these words, you will look into the gospel, you will believe it. Mark says you are to *believe in* it. He quotes the Lord Jesus in that way: "Believe in the glad tidings" (@Mark 1:15), meaning that you are to believe in the gospel in a general way, and look into it and see the depths and wonders and riches of it.
Now, having said so much, I want to go on to the Song of Songs, to show how the work of God proceeds in persons like the writer of @Psalm 119, how such persons are brought together; and what a group of psalm writers are brought together in the five books of Psalms! They bring together a wonderful group of believers, but they
{63}
do not bring together all the believers. One loves to think of the myriads of the redeemed, and how the Lord, speaking poetically and feelingly to His bride in the Song of Songs (the saints are His bride), addresses them as seen together; for there are those here tonight who are really the Lord's, as much as the most spiritual of us, but they are not delivered from the world, they have not committed themselves to the brethren, nor come to see the heritage they have come into in the saints. The Lord, referring to the saints, says of them that they are the excellent of the earth, "In them is all my delight ... Yea, I have a goodly heritage", (@Psalm 16:3,6). The Lord is pleased with the brethren. He would love to see some one, or more, here tonight, come to this, that the brethren are a heritage, they are God's heritage, they are the heritage of the saints, too. They have love in their hearts; think of a people in this world with love, divine love, in their hearts. They are thinking of you. They know that you are not faring as well as you ought to be faring; they know that you are out in the cold world, that you are seeking something there, that you are not getting on at all. They would love to see you take your place amongst the sheep, amongst those who have spoken so contritely, so uprightly, whose names are not only in the book of life, but in the book of Jasher, meaning the book of the upright people. Those two books go together. Those in the book of life are necessarily in the book of Jasher, the book of the upright people. That is what the people are. Think of an upright people, people who are practically righteous, but who have love in their hearts. What a heritage that there is such a society as that available in this city, as in hundreds of towns and villages and cities in this world; and yet you are outside of it all. We know you are not faring well; we know just where you are; we know that you are not in the house of feasting, the house of music and dancing that @Luke 15 speaks of, and your place is vacant. It is
{64}
indeed. You are needed there; no one can take your place there. If you have a place in the counsels of God no one can take it; it belongs to you. The whole bent of heaven and of the Spirit of God upon earth is to get you there. The Lord looks at such; He calls them sheep here. He looks at them together; He looks at the saints, and pictures them in a remarkable way. He says your teeth -- the teeth of the saints -- are as a flock of sheep that go up from the washing. They are real teeth that He is looking at. They enter greatly into the symmetry and beauty of the human countenance, and no one knows better how to value a human countenance than the Lord Jesus. He says, "Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice" (@Song of Songs 2:14). Did the Lord ever address you like that? He is doing so tonight. He would love to have you look into His countenance. The psalmist refers to the salvations of His countenance, the countenance of God and the face of Jesus; but He wants to look *into your* countenance and see the effect of salvation in your countenance. And what are the teeth? They are important; they have an important function. There must be mastication, but I am not speaking of that, nor is the Lord here, exactly; He is speaking of the beautiful symmetry and the beauty of the ornamentation of the teeth. What is the figure? It is the saints. Young people turned away from the world; such are like a flock of sheep shorn (He uses the word 'shorn' in chapter 4), coming up from the washing. You say 'washing'? Yes, I say 'washing'. The Scriptures are full of the thought of washing. There is a great deal made of watering-places in these modern times. One often thinks of them. This month of August in Europe is a great time for holiday making. The idea of watering and bathing is very, very prominent, but not in the moral sense; in fact it is very often the other way, And so the Lord is looking at young people turning their backs on the world. What does that mean? That
{65}
means washing. "Blessed are they", says the Spirit of God, "that wash their robes" (@Revelation 22:14), not who *have* done it. No, it is not a past thing; it is a present thing. "That wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city" (@Revelation 22:14). It is a present thing.
So He looks at the saints coming up. You have been in the world, but now you have turned your back on it and want to be with the brethren, and oh, how lovely you are alongside of them! How different you look from what you looked when you were going along the street with that ungodly acquaintance, that worldly companion! Your looks are different. And so the Lord says, 'Now I want you to understand what I think of you'. He says, "Thy teeth are like a flock of shorn sheep, which go up from the washing" (@Song of Songs 4:2), meaning that a Christian is now ready to give up. Shearing is taking something away from you, it means that you are yielding wealth to someone else. Is it not worth while to sacrifice, to yield your back so that you may be shorn of whatever there is in you that others can use for their benefit? The Lord says, 'You are just like that -- like a flock of shorn sheep coming up from the washing'. They have lost their wool. In the losing of it, others have gained; that is the happy thing. In truth, in the hot weather it is an advantage for the sheep to be shorn. Coming up from the washing is the important thing. How many of us are accustomed to wash? You say, 'I am washed in the blood of the Lamb'. Thank God. But that may be a historic thing, for faith in the shed blood of Jesus is good for eternity, but it may be only historic, I am not saying it is not valid, but the Lord is not speaking of that here. He is speaking of washing of a different kind, because, you know, the blood flowed from the side of Jesus for our conscience, to deal with our sins; but the water also flowed from the side of Jesus, and that is another matter; that is to do with you morally, it
{66}
means that all that wretched *state* that has produced all these wicked things is to be dealt with. So He says, 'Your teeth are like a flock of shorn sheep coming up from the washing; that is what you remind Me of'. It refers to ornamentation. The Lord is depicting the beauty of His people as they turn their backs on the world and join with the saints, those who not only have washed their robes, but who are washing their robes; those who *do* it. And all these people have a right to the tree of life. Do you ever think of that? Do you ever think that you have a right to the tree of life? It is a great time, you know, for the assertion of human rights, but it is not being handled very well in some countries. It is not very long ago that the slogan was that the world is to be fit for democracy to live; but it is not making headway. So we will not get on very well on the line of asserting our rights in this world, but we do get on well when we assert our rights to God's world. God loves it. These rights belong to people who wash. It is a moral question, that one is accustomed to apply the word of God to himself to rectify his conduct, regulating his conduct by the word of God, He allows the word to come to him in its power. "For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword ... and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", (@Hebrews 4:12). That is what it is, and the true honest man I have been speaking of allows that, allows the word of God to have full sway in his soul. If you read @Psalm 119, you will be impressed with the way the writer allowed the word of God to probe his very inmost being. That man has rights. @Psalm 120 to Psalm 134 are all psalms of right, that is to say, they admit of persons going up to heaven. They are psalms of ascension; you have a right to go up. Think of God according that to you! It is on moral grounds. You see, you wash. "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the
{67}
city" (@Revelation 22:14). That belongs to people who wash, and each of us can tell if it applies to him; that is, am I allowing the word of God, the water that flowed from the side of Jesus, from the side of a dead Christ? The Lord Jesus died in order that I might have water to wash in, and hence acquire a right to the tree of life and enter by the gates into the city.
That is all I had to present, dear friends, and I would commend it to you, especially to the young ones, that you might join in with the brethren as those who wash their robes and whom the Lord delights to look at and whose praise He loves to hear. He seeks to look into your countenance and see you with the brethren whom He loves.
{68}
GOD'S SPEAKING
@Proverbs 20:27; @1 Chronicles 21:9 - 13, 18, 26, 27; @Romans 10:6 - 11
Some of you may be enquiring in your minds as to the connection between these scriptures, and I would say at the outset that the connection lies in means, either in or near every one, whereby God can speak to him, or affect him spiritually. The first thing is that every one has a spirit, which is the subject of the first scripture read, and the second is that every one has got a conscience. Gad is said here in Chronicles to be David's seer. He is not said to be God's seer, but God used him. Although David had sinned he had not dismissed Gad. He still retained him, and so had in him a means whereby God could speak to him. This is true of all of us, perhaps Christians here, who may in their pride have sinned: we do not give up our consciences and therein lies our salvation. Then thirdly, @Romans 10 speaks of the word of the righteousness of faith, that that also is near, not by our choice, it may be, but God has seen to it that it is near. "The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart". These are the three thoughts, dear friends, that are linked in these scriptures, and every honest person here will say, as he compares, as he considers them, that they afford great possibilities. First I would say to any unconverted person here, or any person in whom God has not as yet begun definitely to work, that God is waiting to work in your soul, but you have prevented His entrance so as to operate, so far. Just as the Spirit of the Lord hovered over the deep, God, by the Spirit, is hovering over your soul; He has been for years, but He has not yet had an entrance. But He is still hovering, and *particularly* here tonight! The next time He is mentioned in the Bible we are told that He will not always do that. He will cease striving. I do not say that the first chapter of
{69}
Genesis says that He was striving. He was hovering or brooding over the face of the deep, as if He knew something needed to be done, and would do it, but He was waiting His opportunity. The time came when God added to that, and commanded that light should shine. When God commands, you are having to do seriously with God, or God with you. If there be resistance to His command, it is more serious, and, as I said, when the Spirit is next mentioned, it says, "My Spirit shall not always strive" (@Genesis 6:3). And so, as I said, there may be someone here who has resisted so far, or it may be you have never felt the strivings of the Spirit, the efforts He makes to get an inlet, and the first scripture read is for *you* particularly. It tells you that you have a spirit, and that that spirit is something in you that God has put there in order to use it as He has opportunity. *He* has given it to you. We do not get our spirit from our parents; we get it from God. It is something additional to what the lower creatures have. God gave the spirit, we are told by the wise man in Ecclesiastes. The time comes when the pitcher is broken at the fountain, and the dust returns to the earth as it was (a very humiliating thought!), but the spirit returns to God who gave it. And in giving it, He had in mind that He would have access to you sooner or later, at these gospel meetings especially! But the spirit of the man, the Word says, the spirit of the man is the candle of the Lord. That is something that every person has, and he has it because God intends to have to say to you as differentiating between you and the cow or the sheep or the goat or the camel. He puts that there so that He might have an entry into your soul to search the inner chambers of your soul -- perhaps chambers you hardly know are there! Were you to know just what is there, were you to penetrate, yourself, into these chambers with the light that God affords, I believe you would be appalled. Things are far worse than you are aware of. When you
{70}
think of the figures used of an unconverted man, you can see the force of what I am saying. "Their throat" spiritually "is an open sepulchre", we are told (@Romans 3:13). What must be below it! And the Lord Himself gives us a remarkable list of things that proceed out of the heart of man. I do not go over them. @Mark 7 gives them, a terrible list of them. He says they proceed out of man's heart. If these things *proceed* out of the heart, what must there be there? What kind of principles? What state and condition must be there? And so, this light that God has set in us, this candle or lamp that He intends to use, is that *you* might, not that *God* might, find out what is in your heart; He does not need a candle; although He may use terms so that we may understand. He does not need anything of that kind. The candle is for you, for you to go and look at this chamber, and at that chamber -- the hidden chambers of the soul, and see what is in there. You will find it far worse even than anything you had thought of. Now God is calling upon all here tonight, who have not had any such accompanying service of God hitherto, or who have resisted, it may be, to let God into your soul with His light this evening. He will be there in a friendly way, for friendliness is the character of the moment. God is dealing on the principle of reconciliation, that is to say. He is not imputing trespasses. He is not occupied with those. He would convey to you that all His overtures and services are in your favour. He is friendly towards you. It is a time of great divine friendliness. Jesus Himself as the representative of God -- He was God Himself indeed -- was called the Friend of publicans and sinners, and He is that now. He can serve you even better now than He could have done when He was here on earth, and all His overtures are friendly, as divine overtures are. That is, God would not bring up anything at all to prejudice your mind unnecessarily. He will be true and faithful, and as He proceeds round the domain of your
{71}
inner being with His candle, with the light of His word in it. He will not depress you; He will give you to understand He is in your favour, and if He exposes these things, it is to shew you that you may be clear of them, and that He has dealt with them judicially in Another; that He has dealt with them effectively in the cross of His beloved Son, in Him who alone could be a Substitute, who could represent us vicariously in death. That is what God would impress upon you.
Now the point in this verse is for any here who have not come to terms with God, who have not had any transaction with God knowingly, who have as yet just remained in their natural state, "having no hope, and without God" (@Ephesians 2:12). The overture in this verse is for you, that the spirit of the man is the candle of the Lord searching into the inner chambers of the soul. Now will you not let God in? I am presenting the facts to you, presenting the truth in as friendly a way as I know how, in order to rightly represent the evangelical spirit, and God would impress you with this, that you are really regarded by Him as in reconciliation, that is, in a provisional kind of way -- especially in gospel meetings -- not for judgment. It is a place of friendliness, of grace, where the whole atmosphere is in your favour, and where God would say to you, "Now is the well-accepted time" (@2 Corinthians 6:2), and "There is ... a time to every purpose" (@Ecclesiastes 3:1), and if ever there is a time for man to come to close quarters with God, it is in a gospel meeting, when you are surrounded with such friendliness, and such solicitude for your welfare.
And so I would ask you to think of this, not after you leave the hall, but now! It is the best opportunity that you can get. God is ready to do this operation, to take the light of His word through the thing that is put in you; through the spirit that you have and that is presently going to have to say to Him, to return to God who gave it. He would operate in this way, and just shew you things as they are with Him so that you might
{72}
take sides with Him, for as sure as you see them with His light, you will begin to see the situation is very bad indeed, and bodes much worse things than you already know; because the time will come, as I said, when the pitcher will be broken at the fountain and man goes to his age-long home, as the writer of Ecclesiastes says, and the dust returns to the earth as it was! What a humiliating thing that is! Who can turn aside from it? Who can dare to ignore the terrible thought, the most humiliating thought, the dust, that is what you are physically, returning to the earth as it was, and the spirit returning to God who gave it! What will become of that spirit when it goes back to God? That spirit will be reunited with the body, even of an unconverted man. There will be one thousand years, as most of you know, between the first resurrection and the second. "Blessed and holy he who has part in the first resurrection: over these the second death has no power" (@Revelation 20:6). What do you think the second death is for? It is for persons who have sinned and failed to confess their sins and to believe the gospel. Their spirits will be reunited with the bodies in which they sinned, and they will stand before God at the great white throne, as it is called. Every man is judged after the books are opened, and they will be consigned -- every man whose name was not in the book of life -- to the lake of fire, the second death. These are very solemn facts; there are no facts more clearly stated in Scripture than these facts: that the spirit will be reunited with the body, for the unjust have a resurrection, the same as the just: "the resurrection both of just and unjust" (@Acts 24:15). There are one thousand years between these two resurrections; the second will come as sure as the first. It will mean that all that are in the grave will come up; all in the sea will come up; and death and hell will deliver up the dead in them. All will stand before that assize, the solemn great white throne. It is well to be warned, and at a time like this to face the thing, and let God shew you
{73}
how bad things are; then to shew you the wonderful provision He has made for you in the death and resurrection of Jesus, His beloved Son, that you might not come into judgment, that you might know heaven now with the rest of us here, that you pass from death into life and do not come into judgment.
The second scripture refers to persons who are already believers, and there are a great many of them who have sinned and have not repented of their sins. David was a great saint, but he also was a great sinner. This is the last great sin that is attributed to him, this sin recorded in the chapter read. He numbered the people. You may say, 'It is not any sin to take a census'. Well, it was a sin for him to do it. It was the pride of his heart that sought to know how many people he ruled over. All our hearts are susceptible to that kind of thing. How much influence have I? How much power? What renown have I? David had sinned a great sin, and God told him so. But what I want to shew you is, beloved brethren, that David did not dismiss Gad, this great servant. He is a prophet, but he is called a seer. He is not called *God's* seer, but *David's* seer. For what I have in mind is your *conscience*, and, as you allow your conscience scope, it will tell the truth, and it will give you good advice too. It is another thing that God has supplied. It was not given to Adam when he was created. His spirit was given to him, but not his conscience. His conscience came later. God supplied him with a conscience when he sinned, as if God were to say, It would be dreadful if man were to be in this condition without something to reprove him'. That is what a man's conscience is. David's seer here is a man he did not dismiss. Had he been altogether away from God, he would have dismissed Gad. He would say, I will not have this man here; he will trouble me'. Some do that; they sear their consciences. The word of God comes at times, and the testimony of God comes, and they
{74}
just put it away from them; they turn a deaf ear; as Felix said to Paul, "Go thy way for this time" (@Acts 24:25). Felix trembled. Why did he tremble? If the apostle Paul had spoken to a horse as he spoke to Felix, the horse would not tremble; he might preach judgment to him, but the horse would not tremble. Felix did. Why did he tremble? Because he had his conscience; he did not have it as David had Gad; if so, he could have dismissed it. He dismissed Paul, but he could not dismiss his conscience. He sent away the messenger of God. That is what many of you have done. One has done it oneself. As the light has come, you dismiss it, but there is the conscience there. God says it is there, and it will come up again, and it will be with you, and I believe it will be with you for all eternity "where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched", (@Mark 9:44). It is a terrible outlook! What I am speaking of is this servant. Gad, this seer that David still retained in his employ. He was David's seer. You can understand how, when he had committed this great sin, he would say, 'That is Gad's house; I am not going near that'. He did not dismiss him. He would be afraid, you can understand, but he did Hot dismiss him. That was his salvation. We are all liable, Christians too: David was a Christian, so to speak; he was a great saint. On two occasions after he became a saint, he became a great sinner. It may be there are those here who have sinned a great while ago, and nothing has been done about it. You have not gone near Gad's house. You have not entertained him at all. He is yours; it is your salvation that you have not dismissed him altogether. He is here tonight, so to speak. And now God says to Gad, "Go and tell David". And he is here tonight. That is the idea: a trusty person that you retain, and you admit all; in fact, you would not be here tonight if you were not ready to listen to Gad; that is to say, someone who will tell you the truth. It is your salvation that you are here tonight. He is
{75}
the one who has extended the invitation to you. Heaven has watched you coming. Perhaps someone has brought you. If you have come of your own accord, all the better. Heaven has watched it. It is that you might hear what Gad says. David was already a sinner, and he knew it. Gad is going to tell you about the judgment, and give you the opportunity to make a choice. How anxious God is! There will be no thought of a sinner making any choice at the great white throne. The judgment will be meted out according to Him who sits on that throne. It is a great white throne. But now, as I said before, is the time of grace. It is the reign of grace. Grace reigns and Gad is just serving here to tell David first of all that there is judgment, and that it is for him to take his choice of three things, and David said, as shewing what a true saint he is, "Let me fall, I pray thee, into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercies are very great". Suppose you say that tonight -- 'Let me fall into the hand of the Lord; His mercies are very great', what will happen? Will He say to you there are three things to choose from -- to be pursued by your enemies? or the pestilence? or famine? No; He will just tell you how all the judgment that stood out against you has been dealt with to His glory in the death of His beloved Son. May you not well say, "Let me fall ... into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercies are very great"? One would love to know that of some heart who had sinned, it may be years ago, and had allowed matters to drag. If you are utterly without feeling, you would scarcely be here tonight. You would avoid this meeting. But you are not; you have not dismissed your Gad. You entertain the thought of Gad, and you are ready to listen to him, and the more you listen to him, the more you say "Let me fall ... into the hands of Jehovah, for his mercies are very great". And now he gets another message to David. David humbles himself, and he puts on sackcloth, an excellent dress, one of the finest garbs there is, a garb
{76}
made of sackcloth; that is, on certain occasions. When it is a question of sin, it is the proper garb to use. One has often pictured the amount of it used at Nineveh. But I cannot stop to dwell on that, the amount of sackcloth that was there! The point here is not *the amount* of it, but that David and the elders were clothed in sackcloth. God does not care about light-hearted people, people who confess their sin tonight, and tomorrow are shallow, and give no evidence of deep-rooted feeling. David was not a man of that kind. He was a true saint, and generally the truer a saint is, the more deep his confession would be when confession is needed. The deeper the work primarily, the deeper shall be the feeling of sorrow, of contrition. God loves those feelings; He loves the tears of contrition; He puts them in His bottle. So David shewed the depths of his feelings, and his Gad is again employed. David says in verse 17, "It is I that have sinned". Now you see how David takes the thing to heart. Others were suffering. It may be that your sin has caused suffering to others. It does usually. These sins of Christians, and alas there are many, affect others as a rule. It may be your wife, or your family, or your relatives, or, particularly, the brethren. I am sure that anything that has offended against heaven, and God's rights, occasions sorrow not only to the sinner himself, but to others. The saints readily share the sorrow in view of the recovery of the sinner, for discipline means that the sinner is to be recovered, as in the case of the man at Corinth: that his spirit may be recovered. The saints readily join in with that. David is not asking for this here. Here were seventy thousand men suffering on account of this man's sin! See the suffering! David says, 'They do not deserve to suffer; I deserve to suffer. They do not'. That is a sure evidence of genuine work in a man's soul. We may look for the speedy recovery of a man like that. It says, "The angel of Jehovah commanded Gad to say to David, that David
{77}
should go up and rear an altar to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite". Now you see Gad's message is the dawn of a new day for David, and so it would be to any soul here, who is truly repentant. David reared up an altar there. Now you do not have to do that. The altar was that on which Christ died. He suffered on it outside the gate. He bore our sins in His own body on the tree. That is all a settled matter. David set up an altar, and we are told that he offered burnt-offerings. God told the angel to put the sword into the sheath. There is no permanent judgment at all against the believer. So David now is clear, and he offers further sacrifices; in fact he says, 'This very spot is the house of Jehovah'. This is like a converted sinner who is also a saint, if you can understand me, coming into the light of the death of Christ, the meritorious death of Christ which bears upon us as believers as well as upon our sins before we were believers. He can say, 'Well, it is all over now. My place is in the house, amongst the brethren. This is the house of the Lord, and the sword is sheathed; that is, the house is set up, free from judgment, where God is to dwell'. And your place is there. You will not come into judgment; you have passed from death unto life; you are in the realm of life already.
The final word is in @Romans 10, and that refers to the fact that the gospel of God has been preached in your ears since you have been born. It is near you, says the apostle in this passage. It is the righteousness which is of faith that is speaking, "Say not in thine heart. Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from above): or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead). But what saith it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach". This has been sounded in your ears since you had an ear to hear, and it is all around you; it is near you. Beloved young people,
{78}
and it is to you I would speak, you have been born into it, born into the light. It is said of Paul, 'The light shone round about him'. If you would only let it into your heart! "The word is nigh thee ... the word of faith, which we preach". You say, 'It is in my heart; and if it is in my heart, I am saved'. No; you are not against the Scriptures; you are not against the gospel -- if you were against the gospel, you would not be here tonight. It is in your heart, and yet it has not become effective. That is the point the apostle is making. He conveniently cites from Deuteronomy: "It is not in the heavens, that thou shouldest say. Who shall go up for us to the heavens, and bring it to us, that we should hear it and do it? And it is not beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say. Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it to us, that we should hear it and do it?" (@Deuteronomy 30:12,13). He says, 'Do not say that'. But he refers to it to shew that the ascending means that Christ has gone into heaven, and the descending that Christ went into death. Righteousness of faith says to you, young people, 'Do not say that; do not question in that way'. There is nothing tries one more than to hear young people who have been brought up in the meeting, and have had the Bible read every day in their houses, questioning. Young people are full of this kind of thing, if not outwardly, then it is inwardly. Righteousness of faith is speaking to you. He says, 'Do not say this; do not say. Who shall ascend to bring Christ down'. It is one of the principles of the gospel -- He has been there and has come up from the depths. These are the very foundations of the gospel; do not question them. It is your questioning these things that is keeping you out of salvation. Do not question. Do not live in the land of questioning. The righteousness of faith says to you, "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved". How simple that is! Could anything
{79}
be simpler? You cease questioning. And so the word to questioning young people here tonight is 'Keep away from this questioning; it will bring you into damnation; keep away from this modernism; the world is full of it -- this questioning'. But the righteousness of faith is in the land of certainty. It speaks of certainty. It tells you things simply and plainly and with great certainty, and the first thing is, "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved". I could not say it any plainer than that. There is not one in the world could say it any plainer than that verse. It is so simple, so plain, so conclusive that the person who simply takes that attitude and uses his heart and his mouth will be saved! And it goes on to say, "For with the heart is believed to righteousness; and with the mouth confession made to salvation. For the scripture says. No one believing on him shall be ashamed". These are wonderful verses. These three verses (Romans 10:9 - 11), and verse 12 adds to them "For there is no difference of Jew and Greek; for the same Lord of all is rich towards all that call upon him" (@Romans 10:12). He is rich; but He is rich *unto*  all that call upon Him. That is the idea. The riches are unto you who call upon Him, and He knows how to administer them to your soul, as you call upon Him.
May God help you! Young people, abandon this questioning. It is right enough to ask the meaning of things, but the righteousness of faith tells you what *not* to say. Do not question the death and resurrection of Christ, and His ascension into heaven. These are *facts*, they are the basis of the gospel; without them, there is no gospel; with them, there is eternal salvation to every one that believeth.
{80}
LIFE
@Mark 4:26 - 28; @Genesis 1: 9 - 12; @Isaiah 44:3 - 5; @Matthew 4:16
My remarks, dear brethren, will have to do with life. That is, life in a spiritual sense, life, as I hope to make clear, as in believers, for believers are made to live. They are said to have passed out of death into life, and not only have they passed into a realm of life, but are themselves alive. I am speaking now of Christians characteristically. They are alive, and life is seen in them, in an active way, so that they may be said to live, and that is why I have read these scriptures about the earth, that it brings forth fruit of itself. In this sense believers bring forth fruit of themselves, not that they are at all the source of life. God is the source of life, and God only, and this is seen in the Lord Jesus, as become Man; it is said of Him, that "In him was life, and the life was the light of men" (@John 1:4), meaning that it was only for men, that is, that men are supremely privileged. As becoming Man, it was man He had in view, and the life in Him shone as light, so that the whole human race should be enlightened. It was the light of men. So that believers in themselves are not the source in any sense of life; God is the source of everything, "Of him" as it says, "and through him, and for him are all things", (@Romans 11:36). But we come into it, and that is why I read these passages about the earth, because they symbolise what I have in mind, the earth symbolising believers as having latent power in themselves, as believing, but not before they believe.
There is nothing virtuous at all in man after the flesh, whatever others may think. He is absolutely ruined through sin, so that the Lord's remarks to Nicodemus have intelligible force to us; to him He said: "Ye must be born again", (@John 3:7). Nicodemus did not understand, but the Lord says, "That which is
{81}
born of the flesh is flesh" (@John 3:6). It is nothing else. Were a man simply born after the flesh, cultured so that he knew everything that it is possible to know in the schools, blameless as regards human ethics and principles, he would, after all that culture, be flesh, just flesh, and the Lord Jesus says "flesh profits nothing" (@John 6:63), and that is what the Lord Himself says in the passage I quoted, "That which is born of the flesh is flesh" (@John 3:6).
Nicodemus needed to know this and the Lord explained to him by figure that the wind blows where it lists. "Thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is everyone that is born of the Spirit", (@John 3:8). It is a sovereign action of God that affects a person, a human being, so that he can be said to be "born of the Spirit"; and the Lord also says that "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit";(@John 3:6). Not *the* Spirit, but it is of that kind, it is of that quality, it is spirit as over against flesh.
Now from that time the person operated upon has something that a person merely born of the flesh has not, and if there is anyone here tonight who has not had any knowledge of that operation in himself, he is simply born after the flesh, and just flesh, however religious he may be, a member of a congregation, or communicant, as we say, of the Lord's supper. He may be a respectable citizen and all that, but he is just born after the flesh and no more, whereas a man in whom God has operated, according to the Lord Jesus¬ own words, has something in him entirely different, something that is eternal, that will go through, that will survive death. Through it he comes into relationship with God by believing the gospel as presented to him. The gospel is presented to him and he believes it, and comes into the knowledge of Christ as his Saviour; he comes into the knowledge of redemption, and as believing in Christ and as obedient to Him, he receives the Holy Spirit; God gives the Holy Spirit to those who obey Christ: and thus he has more,
{82}
he has not only the effect of the new birth, but he has the living Spirit of God in him, who is said to be life in @Romans 8; that is life in a potential sense. It is a principle he has that no one else has: born after the Spirit. The Spirit is life in view of righteousness.
Now that is the sum total, dear brethren, of all that this is, that the believer or believers have something in them, a latent thing that operates in fruitfulness, as the Lord says in His parable here, "The earth bringeth forth fruit of herself". A man sows his seed in the ground, and he rises night and day, but he does not add anything to the growth; it is God that adds to the growth; it is latent power in the earth that causes growth of the seed -- "The earth bringeth forth fruit of herself" the Lord says, first the blade, and then the ear, then the full corn in the ear. There are three stages mentioned before the reaping; that is, the earth does that.
Now I want to work on these lines in what I have to say: to go back to @Genesis 1 to show you that these principles are not new, that God was ordering things for us as we have them today in the creation; He ordered the waters, that were at that time enveloping the earth, to recede, and that the dry land should appear. That was the divine fiat, that the dry land should appear, and it did appear. A wonderful result for God, that the dry land that we call Australia, and Europe, and America, and Asia and the Islands of the Sea, the dry land appeared. What a mighty exploit of God! But then it came out of the waters, and had in it latent power, as I said, so that God says to it now: "Let the earth cause grass to spring up, herb producing seed, fruit-trees ... the seed of which is in them, on the earth. And it was so".
Now what I wanted to show is that we here, as Christians in this room, with myriads more, thank God, in many parts of the earth, are regarded in this way by God, that things are to spring up, that we are not like
{83}
dry sticks, that we are not like dead professors of Christianity; we are a living people. If there is anybody here who does not understand what I am saying, or has had no experience corresponding with what I have depicted, then it is for you to begin to think about these things, as for the moment you are outside of this realm of life, and certainly there is nothing at all in the way of fruit for God. God is looking for fruit in His creatures.
Well now, in order to make this clearer as applicable to Christians, @Romans 6 tells us that as Christ was raised from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also are to walk in newness of life. Now the subject treated in that passage is baptism, which is called the first ordinance of Christianity. Every believer is to be baptised. The Lord says to His apostles, in sending them out, "He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved", (@Mark 116:16). Whether he is baptise before his conversion or after, "He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved";(@Mark 16:16) and this chapter, @Romans 6, deals with baptism, not as a mere rite attached to Christianity, but as a figure of Christ's death, a real thought, the Lord speaking of it feelingly; He says "I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!" (@Luke 12:50). That was really death for Him, a real thing, dear friends, which we should think of and speak of feelingly, that the Lord Jesus Himself entered the waters of death. He said, "All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me", (@Psalm 42:7). Deep calling unto deep, as it were. In His case it was the real article of death, and not only so, but the forsaking of God; He entered into death in all its reality for us. He never entered it on His own account. He was immune from death; He was the Prince or Author of life Himself, but submitted Himself to wicked hands, to be crucified and slain, and so He entered into death, and lay in the tomb three days and three nights, as He tells us Himself.
{84}
But this passage in @Romans 6 says that He "was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father" (@Romans 6:4). What a beautiful expression that is! It means that the Father, having watched over that precious body as it lay there for three days and three nights in the earth, as the time arrived He raised it by His glory, not only by His power, but by His glory; His whole affection was in it. So it says, "As many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death";(@Romans 6:3) baptised unto Christ, of course, but the full bearing of that is that you are baptised unto His death, and the passage goes on to say that "as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life",(@Romans 6:4). Now newness of life there corresponds with this passage in @Genesis 1. It is as if we were coming out of the waters of death. We have come out with Christ, buried in baptism, and also risen with Him through faith of the operation of God, as Colossians teaches. The epistle to the Romans does not go that far, but it does say, "Walk in newness of life",(@Romans 6:4) meaning that there is tender fruit of life in Christians as they accept the death of Jesus, and come out of it. There is tender fruit in the way of life, delightful to the eye of God, and it corresponds, as I said, with the passage in @Genesis 1, which really alludes to *tender* grass; it is fresh in life. That is what God is looking for. The passage in Romans does not refer to freshness but it refers to newness -- it refers to something different from any life you can depict in this world. There is no life like it. It is a new kind of life, and that is what God is looking for, dear friends, that we also should walk in newness of life. In other words, there is this man, he is a carpenter, or this, a stone-mason, or this, a clerk behind a counter, and he is converted, and he gets the Holy Spirit, and you look at him on Monday morning and he is different, he is not what he used to be. There is no logic in talking about being converted, or a believer, aside
{85}
from this, aside from some evidence of latent power in the soul to bear fruit for God. It refers to our everyday walk, Monday, Tuesday to Friday, Saturday; that in our daily toil there is a difference, there is a change, and God is looking for it, and without it our pretensions to be Christians are futile. I mean, how could anybody tell you are a Christian without such evidence? God may know there is something in your soul, but how can men know? It is by their fruits ye know them, and these fruits are the tender grass, that is what is meant.
Well now, that is what God is looking for; that is what I had in mind in these passages, and the passage in Mark is especially significant, because the Lord in that chapter gives us the celebrated parable of the seed sown by the sower, and He was that Himself, the Son of man, and He brings in this instruction, which every farmer will verify, that the earth brings forth fruit of itself. And now dear brethren, or friends, if we desire fruit, the next thing is what kind of seed are we to sow? The word of God is the seed; the Lord calls the seed the word of the kingdom, but Peter speaks of the incorruptible seed, "the living and abiding word of God", (@1 Peter 1:23).
Well, if I am, to use an agricultural figure, to look for the crop, I must sow the seed according to what I wish. Every farmer understands. It is the kind of crop you wish, so that I must be particular as to what is sown, what I sow in my field, or what I allow to be sown in my field. The idea of a field is additional to the thought of the earth; the earth is a great general thought, the field is a special thought, but the garden is a still more special thought. The idea of the field is taken up in Scripture as applied to one person, and that is Jacob. You will all remember the story of Jacob deceiving his father Isaac, but still, God was in the deception; He overruled in it, for Jacob was to be blessed. It was in the mind of God that Jacob was to
{86}
be blessed. His mother knew this for God told her before the children were born that the elder should serve the younger. So there was no question but that Jacob was to be blessed above Esau, and he was. He had recourse to subterfuge, which is not to be commended, but nevertheless God saw to it that His purpose was carried out, and Jacob was blessed; hence it says, when Jacob drew near to his father with the venison, the savoury meat, that Isaac says to him "Come near .., my son" (@Genesis 27:21), as if God would speak here tonight to some young man, and say to you, "Come near".
Well, that is one great thought in God's overture, that He would bring us near, a people near Him. Isaac says, "Come near ... my son", and he smelt his son Jacob, and he said, "See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed" (@Genesis 27:27). A field! There is one person. He is called a field. It is an agricultural thought, and the father Isaac, representative of God in that particular instance, understands and with the use of his nostrils is able to tell that that young man has potentially the power of growth in him; he is potentially a field that will yield abundant fruit for God. He said, "See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed" (@Genesis 27:27). Now that applies to every Christian in this room. I do not know anything more comforting and which is to be accepted and cherished, than that one is as the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed; and then that field is to be worked out, so that God should have what He seeks in it, what He has designed in it, and in due course the fruit will come, as the Lord's illustration shows, the earth brings forth fruit of itself; as you will observe He says, "First the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear". There is perfect order, there is nothing irregular in God's order; in God's creation everything is in order, everything is perfect, "First the
{87}
blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear", and then the harvest.
Now let us face all this, dear brethren, young people particularly, as to whether the blade has come up, as to whether there is any growth for God at all, and whether the ear is taking form as a real fruit that can be appropriated and used. The *full* corn in the ear is in view for God, as God has no half measures in His mind. He has presented Christ in this world as His ideal, and His thought is that everyone of us should come up to that, to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. God has furnished us with the means of it and He is looking for it: He is looking down from heaven every moment. Let us not think God is quiescent in heaven; God is active all the time. I am speaking with the greatest reverence. He is constantly active and sees things, and He looks down from heaven to see if there is any fruit and He is looking now for the full fruit, the full corn in the ear. Let us all face this in this town, and in all the meetings represented here; think what fruit there is for God!
Well, I want to go on and show from Isaiah how the children are to be brought into all this prosperity. There has been a tendency for years to segregate children in their education, spiritual education, but the divine thought is that they should be with those that are spiritual, that they should grow up where there is spiritual prosperity. That is the divine thought. Not that they should be in another room from the parents, or the parents in another room from the young at the meeting where the Spirit of God is functioning in the assembly; but the divine thought is that the little ones should be there, that they should be in the place of warmth, and the place of prosperity, that they should be where the Holy Spirit is active, and so Isaiah by the Spirit says here, "I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring; and they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water-courses".
{88}
Now notice "among the grass", and remember that this word is used in connection with the third day in @Genesis 1. It is one of the things that God orders from the earth, that the grass is to spring out of it. Now He says of the seed here, that is the children, "they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water-courses". There is not much grass where little children are taught by persons who may not themselves be Christians, or if Christians, perhaps not spiritual. There is not much grass *there*! But there is grass, there is prosperity, spiritually, where the brethren are together over the word of God, where they are together for prayer, where they are together to worship God; the Holy Spirit is there, and every true Christian present is characteristically emitting the warmth of life, and the children feel it. A child has got five senses, as have his father and his mother, and as he feels it he is comforted by it; he may not be able to say anything about it, but he feels it and he grows up in it. There is prosperity there. If there is a happy state among the brethren the children experience it. I am not saying there are no exceptions but I am speaking of what the Scriptures present to us, that the children are to grow up as amongst the grass, and subsequently as willows by the water-courses, and the water-courses refer figuratively to the living action of the Spirit of God, the even flow of the Spirit of God, as He ministers Christ in one way and another, and through one and another, amongst the brethren.
Is not that the place for our children? It is a wholesome place, a warm place; it is the place of growth where they grow up; it says so here. "They shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water-courses". You will see them growing. You try it. God is helping the brethren everywhere on these lines. The enemy's great effort today is a very wide attack of the devil to get the children, to destroy them by the influence of the schools and other influences; the Spirit of God is aiming through
{89}
His people to get the children into the place of spiritual prosperity and warmth and instruction, where they should grow up among the grass, as willows by the water-courses. Let us be on the lockout for our children God expects it. Bring them where they can get help. You say they will not understand. Never mind, they will understand; the most exalted truths in the types are presented as a matter of enquiry by the children.
In the book of Joshua you get the placing of the twelve stones at Gilgal, and it is said, "When your children hereafter ask their fathers, saying. What mean these stones? then ye shall let your children know", (@Joshua 4:21,22). These stones refer to the epistle to the Colossians, exalted truth, and the children of the people of God will ask about these stones. Where will they hear about them, but where the teaching of the Spirit is? Then they begin to ask. Let us listen for the children's enquiries. The Lord Jesus is the great example for children, as in all else. It says that He was in the temple when He was twelve years of age. He was in it when He was a Babe, His father and mother brought Him there, and Simeon took Him in his arms; let all you children think of it, the Child Jesus in the arms of Simeon; he spoke wonderful things about Jesus, about the Babe; but later on the Boy Jesus is in the temple by Himself without anybody taking Him in his arms, and He is sitting in the midst of the doctors. 'Oh', you say, 'a child of that age should not be amongst the doctors, he should be taught by somebody in school with children of his own age'; but Jesus is there amongst the doctors; the doctors allude to spiritual brethren, if I may extend the figure. It is no question there of evil in these learned men at Jerusalem, the point is that the Boy Jesus -- He is called a Babe, He is called a Boy, He is called a Child, and then He is called a Man -- the Boy Jesus was there. These are stages of growth. When He is called a Boy, that is a potential Man. He is getting on to manhood and He is preparing for
{90}
manhood, and so He is sitting amidst the doctors; He is sitting where instructed men are sitting; He is sitting there and what is He doing there? He is hearing, that is the first thing, and that is what every child should be doing; God will help them to do it, as in faith we place them there, God will help them to do it. He is hearing, and the next thing is that He is asking questions, and the third thing is, that they were astonished at His understanding, and His answers. Why should we not pursue that course, dear brethren, so that our children should come into the testimony in due time and fill up the ranks in the house of God, as the Lord takes one old brother and one old sister after another? Satan said he must have the children, Pharaoh said he must have them. No! the Lord must have them! They belong to Jesus, and they must be cultivated, there must be fruit, they must be taught. Where can they be taught according to God save where the Holy Spirit is? And the Holy Spirit is in the assembly where the dear brethren are together in the temple in the light of the house of God, that is where the Holy Spirit is operative.
Well now, I want to finish with @Matthew 4; it says, "The people which sat in darkness saw great light; an to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up". It is not light shining down from heaven here, as elsewhere; from the sun, light shines down; it does not spring up from the sun. Christ is also exemplified in the sun. The light shines down from the sun, that is a great objective thought, but in this passage it is springing up, light is springing up, and it corresponds with what I have been saying, dear brethren, that the Lord here as Man was the light: "in him was life, and the life was the light of men", (@John 1:4). He was down here. He had been in Nazareth, and we are told that He left Nazareth and went to Capernaum, and the Spirit of God quotes from the prophet Isaiah in a passage that covers the position; this passage unfolds that the Lord Jesus was in that
{91}
town, resident in some house, in some street, in the town of Capernaum, and that light was springing up there. Think of living next door to Jesus. Think of that. Some did. Some lived in the same house with Him. As He came out of the house in the morning you would see light. What a different kind of man He was from all others, and yet there were some in that town who could see all this. Light had sprung up. It is not a question of light coming from heaven, but a Man here, a Man in ordinary circumstances, living in a house in some street in the town of Capernaum. There He was. You would see Him in the morning, in the afternoon, and in the evening, and you would see light, it was springing up. It was the energy of life, but then it became light, the life was the light, we are told. The light that had sprung up was really the outcome of the life that was there. The life was the light of men. There He was in Capernaum and the light was springing up. Now, dear brethren, that is what God is looking for, the continuation of that, as I was saying before. In John's gospel we have the Lord as the life, and that the life is the light of men. In John's epistle we have it that that same life is in Christians; the same life, the true light that shines; where is it shining from? It shines from Christians, "Which thing", says the apostle, "is true in him and in you", (@1 John 2:8).
John speaks abstractly but he speaks certainly. He speaks of what is characteristic of Christians, that the same precious light that was seen in Capernaum, that sprung up there, is now in Christians by the Spirit. It is the true light; there is no other. The devil is suggesting things today that are wicked. They are not the true light. The true light has shone in Jesus and it is shining now characteristically in Christians, and God looks for it in this place, in this town, and in every place where we are who are here tonight, that the true light, something that is true, should shine. The word true is applied to many things; it is applied to God,
{92}
it is applied to light, the true light, and this true light already shines; moreover the apostle says the darkness is passing. It is passing. You might say, 'Well, it looks to me as if the darkness is increasing, that the light is about to be put out', but it is not so. Although little may be evident, yet the great fact remains that the darkness is passing. It has passed in my soul, it has passed in the soul of nearly everyone here tonight; that is what is meant, and where it has passed it is replaced by the light; it is replaced by the same kind of light that shone in Jesus and shines in Christians. That is what God has in His mind, that in twos and threes, in His people in every part of the world, the true light should be there, that the reflection of the light of Christ should be in us.
That is what I had in mind to present, the light in you, so that there is a real testimony. The Lord says, "for a testimony unto them" (@Matthew 8:4), however small, for a testimony to them that the real thing is there, it is that which corresponds to the light of Christ, "Which thing is true in him and in you" (@1 John 2:8); the true light already shines.
May God bless these thoughts to us, for His name's sake.
{93}
DOING RIGHT
@2 Corinthians 13:7; @Matthew 3:15; @2 Timothy 2:22
What I have in mind is the idea of doing right. The first saint, or man of faith, in the list given in Hebrews is accredited with doing right; that is Abel. There can be no doubt that he is intended to furnish a lead for us in this respect, but God Himself must be the Initiator of all things according to Himself. And so we learn righteousness from God. Indeed, His is a peculiar kind of righteousness, righteousness which is of God. And it is significant that the father of all believers is said to have been accounted righteous on the principle of faith. His faith was reckoned to him as righteousness, it is said; so that the father of all believers is accounted righteous, and no one could be accounted righteous from amongst sinners, save on the principle of faith. It is on that principle that we are righteous, that is, righteousness is imputed to us. But in the possession of imputed righteousness, Abraham learned how to be righteous; and, as far as I remember, he is the first one to use the word aright, and he attributes it to God, rightly. Abraham says, "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" (@Genesis 18:25). A very excellent question which has its own answer, and settles a thousand questions. We can understand how the father of all believers, as reckoned righteous on the principle of faith, should have the idea in his mind and attribute it to God in the most absolute way. But he also had in mind that there were righteous men on the earth, and he interceded for such, which is also beautiful. He began the great principle of intercession in that way for the righteous: "Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?" (@Genesis 18:23) He had fifty in his mind; he had forty-five in his mind, then forty; then thirty, then twenty, then he had ten in his mind, to intercede for. We may be sure that it was delightful to Jehovah to see the foreshadowing of
{94}
Christ in this great intercessory service of love in Abraham. Abraham was extremely limited, but still, relatively the principle was there. It is said of Jesus, the Priest in heaven, that He ever lives to make intercession. What infinite myriads are included in His service, in His intercession! Beyond our reckoning is the number in His mind! It says, "He ever liveth" as if that were His only employ for the moment in the mind of the writer of Hebrews. "He ever liveth to make intercession for them", @Hebrews 7:25. And so in order to confirm Abraham's spiritual correctness, the New Testament says that Lot was a *righteous* man. There was at least one in the city. Abraham did not come down to *one*, but there was at least one there. And instead of saving the city on his account. Lot was saved out of it, and that is the principle. There may be the promulgation of the gospel on account of the intercession of Christ on high, and our intercession too, but it is not to save the world; the effect is to save us out of it, dear brethren, a very great matter! It is current all the time; our High Priest above regarding us for intercession, particularly those who are right -- I mean, *practically* righteous, for imputed righteousness, obtained by faith, is only confirmed as righteousness is practised. So that John in his epistle makes much of the practice of righteousness. And so the apostle in these two remarkable epistles finishes up with "That *ye* may do what is right". The Corinthians, who were generally on the way to recovery, were indeed restored, and he commended them as such. That is to say, restored to grace is one of the greatest things here. "He which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins",(@James 5:20) a remarkable thing! The apostle effected it in his letters, God working with him. But he was under reproach in the eyes of many in Corinth for it, although not so much at the end as at the beginning; but God's way is to recover gradually, but where it is a
{95}
collective matter, it takes time, and patience is greatly needed. We do not know what the ultimate result was as to all at Corinth, but the apostle in this epistle (@2 Corinthians 10;6) had good hope that their obedience would be fulfilled; that is, he writes on the principle of the moral whole. The assembly is simply dependent on every person in it, but in the moral sense on the many, the moral whole. The whole idea is in the many, and we can be sure the many had already begun to deal with evil and the appearance of it, and had cleared themselves. They had the assurance that the work would go on, for God is very patient, and Paul was patient; and God would teach us to be patient, especially when restoration is needed in a collective sense. As I said, we do not know just what was the final result as to detail, but there cannot be any doubt that the assembly at Corinth was set on its feet according to God. "Having in readiness to avenge all disobedience(@2 Corinthians 10:6)". Nothing was to be omitted. Let no one assume that any detail of disobedience will be passed over or glossed over by God. It may take days or weeks or months or years, but the process will go on and God will have His way. It is wisdom to let Him have His way immediately. The apostle says, "Having in readiness to avenge all disobedience";(@2 Corinthians 10:6) that is, the obedience of the mass at Corinth was fulfilled. He ends up here regarding any that might think him reprobate. It was terrible to think that there were those who had such thoughts about him. He says, "Now I hope that ye will know that we are not reprobates. But we pray to God that ye may do nothing evil; not that we may appear approved, but that ye may do what is right, and we be as reprobates". That is to say, each Corinthian was to take heed to himself and see to it that *he* was doing what was right, for, as the conditions were amongst the many, there were those who fell in with that without much question, and without much challenge to their own hearts, whereas the Spirit of God would challenge every heart, and say to each --
{96}
'You have heard what this brother says about Paul; they say his speech is naught; they would discredit him'. The Spirit of God would say to every young person at Corinth, 'See to it you do not do what is wrong. Leave Paul for a moment. See to yourself. See you do not do what is wrong'. That is the word, dear brethren, at all times, especially in crises and difficulties amongst us; it is for each to see to it that he does not do what is wrong. That is what the apostle stresses here. He says, 'My prayer for you is not that we should appear approved, but that ye should do that which is honest or right'. That is, every one. If I am under a cloud, I may say others have put me there, but then *I* must do what is right, whatever *others* may do. I must do what is right. See then you do what is right, and that is the sure way of deliverance, whatever the deliverance may be. Righteousness is stamped across the position at the present time -- it is a question of what is right. If I pursue what is right, I will reach the end I desire. If I am a righteous person, I do not want any other end, and every time I do what is right, I am nearer to the end I desire.
So that is the point the apostle makes here: that ye do what is right and what is honest. Each one is to take that to heart. And then as the Lord shows in His word to John, there is the idea of fulfilling all righteousness. It is not only righteousness in general, or in the main features of any matter, but *all* righteousness. I am speaking now of standards. I know full well what each of us is. James says, "We all often offend", (@James 3:2). One ought to say that, feeling that he is the one mentioned. But then the standard is the point, and the Lord here is the standard. The more we adhere to the standard in spirit or in attitude, the more we shall be conformed to it. The Lord here sets a standard. "Thus it becometh us". It is not "Me", though He is supreme in it, of course. It is one of the finest statements in
{97}
Scripture. Scripture says He loved righteousness and hated lawlessness. He *loved* it. So here He says, "It becometh us", not you, or me, but "*us"*, and, of course, that has to be extended to every Christian. "It becometh us to fulfil all righteousness"; not simply to say 'I do so and so, and so and so'. It is *all righteousness*, whatever there is entering into it. "It becometh us". It is the kind of dress we should wear, that is, the attitude of our minds. There is a standard set, and I do not want to lower it; it is a question of 'all righteousness'.
So as to the third point, in Timothy, the idea of leadership is a very great thought of God, one of the greatest thoughts of God, and in view of current conditions, that is, in view of the general breakdown contemplated in this well known epistle, the leader here is righteousness. Of course, Paul is still alive, and he enjoins Timothy to do what he heard and saw in him. No one led in such a way as Paul. He said, "Be ye followers of me" (@1 Corinthians 11:1). He is the only one who says or could say that. The Spirit of God says it through him. There was one man here who answered to the mind of God in so far as it can be in a creature. "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ", (@1 Corinthians 11:1). So he sent Timothy to Corinth to remind them of his ways; not simply of his teaching or preaching, but of his ways, as they were in Christ; that they might see them in the beloved child, Timotheus. So that the idea of leadership is clearly in a man or men, but in broken times, before we can clearly see a man as a leader, we must see righteousness as a leader. The first thing is to learn that leader, to know it, to keep it clearly in mind. It is simply this, that under all circumstances, I must do right. That is simply what is meant; not only that I do it, but I am pursuing it; not only that I am doing it now, but I am pursuing it now. It is a steady thing before the mind; the necessity for doing right is ever present in all emergencies in our histories here. The necessity for right would always
{98}
be present, and I keep my eyes fastened upon it. So in a crisis, I put the question to myself -- 'is that right? Is this right?' That is the point, you see. As sure as I ask a question like that before God, I shall find my way. There will be no mistake at all. If I challenge everything before God (not men) I shall not be unrighteous. It is right there are leaders, but righteousness in 2 Timothy is the leader, the first leader. "Pursue righteousness" is the word, meaning an energetic attitude of mind. That is the first thing to think of when anything comes up. Is the thing right or wrong? If it is right, pursue it; that is, I am vigilant in regard to that point. The next thing is to pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace. That is how it is. Then the next thing after these four is "with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". How can I tell people with pure hearts? This scripture requires that you and I should know, a very remarkable thing! It does not say *if* they exist; it supposes that they *do* exist. There is a certain moral triumph in the way the Spirit of God writes here that there are such in the world; those that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. The address to Corinth says, "With all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ",(@1 Corinthians 1:2) but here it is "out of a pure heart". People say, 'I do not know them'; but I am to know, I am to find out if their hearts are pure, and I am responsible to find out. That is the point. The Spirit of God puts it on us, if they are there, to know them; they are there; as knowing them, you are to see to it that you are with them, and that you are following these four things with them; first, righteousness, then faith, love and peace.
May God bless these thoughts to us!
{99}
THE LORD'S HOLY EMOTIONS
@John 11:41 - 43; @John 12:27 - 30; @John 17:1,26
J.T. Allusion was made this morning in thanksgiving to the Lord's holy emotions, and these scriptures serve to enlarge on this holy subject. It is a question whether we should have to look at John or Luke. In Luke we had a word from chapter 10, in which the Lord rejoices in spirit in a certain setting. The section in Luke treats of the Lord's reception into heaven. It says at the beginning of chapter 10, after it is said "when the days of His receiving up were fulfilled" (@Luke 9:51). He sent out seventy disciples into every city and place where He was about to come. The thought in His mind was how He would be received on earth. The present time would be in His mind when the saints are in the light of the assembly and the fulness of Paul's doctrine.
These seventy returned speaking of the success they had in their service. The Lord speaks to them of their heavenly calling, of their names being written in heaven. He rejoices in spirit on saying that, as if He would have them on heavenly lines. Then there is the parable of the man who fell among thieves, and the development of the principle of the neighbour, and the local assembly is indicated in a certain village where they were received into a certain woman's house. The conditions were not altogether suitable in Martha's house. Chapter 11 opens up Christ's thought for man and indicates the truth of assembly conditions which would give the Lord comfort. The prayer would bring out assembly furnishings. This is the setting of the Lord's holy emotions in Luke.
In John we have the extension of this thought in these chapters. We might profit, especially in view of the assembly meetings here in this city, in seeing that the Lord not only comes in theoretically but actually and gives a holy impulse to the assembly.
{100}
In chapter 11, for the sake of those who were hearing, the Lord lifted up His eyes to heaven. It says it was on account of the crowd. Then in chapter 12 He says, "Not on my account has this voice come, but on yours", that is, things happened for their instruction. The Lord had the present time in mind in this instruction and we are to learn from the speaking of God in the assembly. The impulse from Christ as Head serves in that way.
A.G.L. When you speak of assembly meetings what have you in mind?
J.T. The meeting we had here this morning for the breaking of bread. The only meeting spoken of the saints as together in assembly alludes to their attitude as together, that is, they are the assembly themselves. The assembly convened bears on all that follows throughout the week.
W.J.Y. Is your suggestion that the way in which the Lord speaks to the Father is instruction for us as coming together?
J.T. Well, I thought that. The Lord said it was on account of those who stood by; it was for their education.
W.J.Y. I think that is very helpful.
J.T. We are prone to be governed by theory in our meetings and I thought we should come to see more definitely that the Lord does come, but not in a corporeal way. He is in heaven; He has been received into the heavenlies. He is up there in a corporeal sense, but comes here nevertheless. Christianity is a spiritual thing. The Holy Spirit is a real Person here and is the means whereby the Lord comes here. The Lord sees the conditions and would take the opportunity, when our minds are engaged in recalling Him, to come into the assembly in a spiritual sense and give us to feel spiritually that He is present. This is a wonderful thing. Jehovah came angelically of old. An angel came to Gideon, but Jehovah was there. Now there is a greater Mediator. So the Lord comes and we must be ready for Him; recalling Him in our minds is an opportunity
{101}
He would seize to come in. His presence would give impulse in that way.
H.T.R. Can we realise His presence in the morning meeting?
J.T. That is what it speaks of. It is an occasion that the Lord would use to make Himself felt. It is love's opportunity as we have nothing else before us as assembled together but to call Him to mind in the Supper. He is more interested than we are, and so would be ready to come in at that time.
P.D.S. How does the ministry of the sanctuary, the true tabernacle, stand in relation to that?
J.T. That is the idea effected. The Lord being on our side, as we said. He is the objective to us; we worship and adore Him. He said to Peter "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me", (@John 13:8). On our side, as known amongst us, the ministry of the sanctuary fits. He is with us: He takes the lead. In this way impulse is given from the Head.
W.J.Y. Is your thought that His intimacy in speaking to the Father and the response from heaven is an indication of what is open to us?
J.T. These scriptures give a clue to it. There are results, at least, in chapter 12. In chapter 11 Jesus lifts up His eyes on high. "On high" is moral as over against the ordinary or common level of things here. This section is the section of His holy emotions because on approaching the grave of Lazarus (verse 33) He was deeply moved in spirit, or groaned, and was troubled. The first word is 'groaned' and the second, 'shuddered'. Then in verse 35 "Jesus wept". This is a remarkable scripture bringing out the reality of His manhood in regard of the conditions there. He was affected by them; then in verse 41, "Jesus lifted up His eyes on high and said. Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me; but I knew that thou always hearest me; but on account of the crowd who stand around I have said it, that they may believe that thou has sent me",
{102}
P.D.S. Is the suggestion that what was around caused Him to groan and shudder, while on high everything delighted Him?
J.T. Yes, in anticipation of the power about to be exercised. Now He is in glory, but as coming in amongst us He is still capable of being affected by what He finds amongst His people: whether sorrow or joy. He is affected by it.
W.A.S. It is said that He was known in the breaking of bread. How does He come in?
J.T. I think that this gives a clue from Luke's point of view. Luke tells us that He was made known in the breaking of bread, in keeping with what He had said already "This do in remembrance of me" (@Luke 22:19) -- calling Me to mind. The breaking of the loaf calls to mind. It is a question of the state of one's mind and is arrived at practically; we are capable of recalling things to mind, engaged with one thing at a time. The Lord would have first place in our minds.
A.G.L. In what character would you expect the Lord to come in at that time?
J.T. He comes in as Head in a spiritual way. It is His assembly that He is dealing with as its Head. He is Head of it. At Emmaus He took the place of Head although the head was there in the house. We must apprehend this.
W.H.S. Who would the crowd represent?
J.T. The suggestion is of persons profiting by hearing what passed.
W.H. When you speak of the Lord being affected by conditions, do you mean that which the Lord takes account of; He is affected by the moral conditions amongst His people?
J.T. Yes, the Lord is affected by the moral conditions of His assembly.
W.H. So that if there are right moral conditions He will rejoice.
{103}
J.T. Yes. He is a Man; He says, "A spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having" (@Luke 24:39). He feels as we do, rejoicing if He finds happy conditions.
P.D.S. Would the piece of broiled fish and the honeycomb be in keeping with this -- something that was enjoyed among them?
J.T. The point there is "Have ye anything here to eat?" (@Luke 24:41) and they had. It tests us all as to what we have in our respective localities that the Lord can take account of, that He can partake of. He did not ask for something specific. They had some fish and honeycomb, and He partook of it.
W.H. What do they suggest?
J.T. Fish suggest the thought of the sovereignty of God. No one knows what is in the sea but God; He knows what is there. Broiled means that it has been brought under the fire. Then the honeycomb suggests what is mutual, what is not regulated by the clerical principle, but by the mutual principle. The honeycomb is that in which all have part.
W.J.Y. Is the Supper to help us in our conditions?
J.T. I think it is. It is to bring us together in affection and in principle before we sit down. As we sit down it brings us near to one another in affection, not only in body. That comes by brotherhood. It is always in that way. In @Acts 2:1 it says, "They were all together in one place" and at the end of the chapter it says that "All that believed were together" (@Acts 2:44) -- it does not say in one place; that is, they were together in principle and together in affections. That they were together comes out in a real way: there is a realm of love; the undercurrent is affection. So that if we are sitting together for half an hour whilst the emblems are being passed round we enjoy the time. It is not irksome and we should not lose a minute.
W.J.Y. I wondered whether it might set us at rest. The love expressed in the Supper might prepare us for what comes after.
{104}
J.T. I think it does. The Lord comes into the conditions. He is not disturbed when He comes into Martha's house. We may receive Him, but conditions may not be right, I take it that the Lord would desire that the conditions might be right when He comes. In @John 20:19, He says "Peace be unto you". It would appear that there was nothing to reprove there. They were glad when they saw Him, and then He says again to them, "Peace be unto you" (@John 20:19) as if He confirms it. We are too theoretical, not feeling enough about it, not really believing. John constantly asserts the idea of believing. Believing is a great general principle.
W.J.Y. Is it right to regard the Supper as the principle on which the Lord ministers to us?
J.T. Well, it works out that way. We have something in our mind. We set out in the morning with the one thought of the Lord in our minds, that He is not here but absent. The idea permeates our minds that He is not here but is to be recalled: we would like Him here. That is what He observes. The Supper brings to mind what He said when He instituted it. The bread and cup recall Him to our minds. The Holy Spirit is always with us and His function in the assembly is to make it all a reality. So I believe what I confess.
A.G.L. In chapter 14, the Lord speaks of the Spirit abiding with us. Then He says, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you" (@John 14:18).
J.T. Living is contingent on the presence of the Comforter. In chapter 14, He sees us spiritually. He comes in that spiritual way. So that the Lord comes in alone, filling our minds and affections, and gives impulse; the thing is to wait on that. Here He lifts up His eyes to the Father and He thanks the Father that He had heard Him.
W.H. Would you say that the Lord shows us an example that we should lift up our eyes in that sense?
{105}
J.T. What we look at on high is not current in religious circles. It alludes to us. "Jerusalem above is free (@Galatians 4:26)". This is not on the level of man's way.
W.H. That is very important.
G.G.S. With reference to the Lord finding something in our midst, does the Lord set us in our localities for that reason?
J.T. I think so. What we have is in a collective way.
G.G.S. He would see to it that it is so.
J.T. And He comes in and recognises what is there and is pleased with it. Martha's case needed adjustment, there were *many* things, whereas it is profitable to have one thing in our minds, not many.
W.J.Y. Would the lifting up of our eyes on high indicate that we look beyond all that which has to do with sin and death?
J.T. Just so. It is leading in that direction. In chapter 17, He lifted up His eyes to heaven. Heaven is a place. The thought of "on high" takes us out beyond man's range of things.
P.D.S. In both scriptures the looking up leads to the Father.
J.T. "Lift up now thine eyes",(@Genesis 13:14) God said to Abraham. Faith taught him to do that very early. Abraham was challenged as to what he could do in counting the stars. It belongs to us to look up. In Jacob there is the thought of the ladder linking him with what is above. It is the Spirit's means of communication, The Lord comes down here and we go up. It is in the power of the Spirit, not in mental action. The Spirit takes part in these heavenly things,
<blockquote>"And see, the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heavenly door". (`74:5) </blockquote>
W.H.S. Would you say that the outcome of the impulse from the Head is that there would be a similar thing in the assembly?
J.T. We learn in @Luke 11 to pray to the Father. It is the first word that He says in the prayer.
{106}
P.D.S. The Lord says "I knew that thou always hearest me". Would we have the same confidence?
J.T. It is a question of confidence; every Christian should cultivate that. The Lord says "Enter into thy chamber ... pray to thy Father who is in secret" (@Matthew 6:6). Every Christian should acquire the sense of confidence that God hears.
W.H.S. It is a question of right feelings or right speaking in connection with what exists immediately around. We are not detached from it. We are up against the realities of being here in this scene.
J.T. So that we are not stilted in our minds, but on our feet dealing with actual conditions.
H.C. Was not this seen in the Lord in His pathway involving the will of God: the holy emotions came out from His heart, pleasurable to God?
J.T. Quite so. What struck me was how our incidents affect Him. He is capable of being affected by incidents, known beforehand, but as they come up He is affected by them. That should be a great incentive for us to have conditions suitable for Him, as they affect Him. So we should rejoice in spirit, we should rejoice that our names are written in heaven. He opened up a vista for them of what heaven would be. @Hebrews 12:22,23 alludes to a great system of things set up in Christ in heaven, "Ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven". This caused joy, the joy set before Him, and so He rejoiced in spirit and praised God, If He were with us and did that there would be an impulse. We are a living organism which is sensitive, extremely so.
W.J.Y. In looking up He is conscious both of the thoughts and power of God, although surrounded by that which speaks of sin and death?
J.T. Quite so. Here in @John 11 He is conscious of power, but He groans and weeps as He looks on the
{107}
negative side of what sin had effected. Now on the positive side we see how God is meeting what is negative with holy buoyancy. The assembly is the realm for all these things.
P.D.S. I would like a little help as to the feelings of the Lord in regard to what takes place on earth. He groaned; He wept.
J.T. He said to Saul "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4) He feels the persecution. He feels the joy and sorrow of what there is amongst us, conscious of it in the service of God. He sings in the midst, that is. He sings organically. What He has got here He uses. Headship indicates that He is the mind governing the assembly as He is amongst us.
W.A.S. Would you say that spiritual emotions today are a continuation of the emotions of Christ and so, as such, reach the ear and heart of the Father?
J.T. The Lord is affecting our organism with the view of praise to God. Christ is the sweet psalmist of Israel; "Thou ... inhabitest the praises of Israel" (@Psalm 22:3). He would go on and establish this great thing, the assembly, in the midst of which He praises God.
D.D. Is an instrument often strings applicable here?
J.T. It is stringed instruments; it is more refined. There are no wind instruments in heaven: the harp is the only instrument in heaven.
P.D.S. Is "To the chief Musician. On my stringed instruments" (@Habakkuk 3:19), a help?
J.T. Yes Habakkuk helps. His prayer touches various notes and then reaches "high places".
W.J.Y. Is the thought of leading the praises a characteristic one?
J.T. Characteristic. That is what I had in mind; then it becomes concrete.
D.D. Is 'ten' the thought of responsibility?
J.T. Very likely. We have a remarkable song; one has often thought of the new song in the Revelation. Revelation deals with prophetic matters and keeps
{108}
the atmosphere on the proper level in principle. In chapter 14, verse 2, it says "And I heard a voice out of the heaven as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of great thunder. And the voice which I heard was as of harp-singers harping with their harps; and they sing a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders. And no one could learn that song save the one hundred and forty-four thousand who were bought from the earth" (@Revelation 14:2,3). Their attitude is becoming. Revelation maintains the level of things. What a great matter this was! A loud sound and yet in perfect harmony. It was a new song, nothing hackneyed. We need to be kept in freshness. Only the hundred and forty-four thousand learn this: how exalted and exclusive this is!
W.H. Do the words suggest intelligence and the harps emotion?
J.T. Very good. The first song we have in Scripture bears that character: "Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song to Jehovah, and spoke, saying (@Exodus 15:1) ...". There were words, beautiful, intelligent, poetic, and we go right on from deliverance from Egypt into the sanctuary, "The Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared" (@Exodus 15:17). The song rose, ascended. Then Miriam comes out with her tambour and all the women followed her with tambours and with dances, and they also sing. There were not only words but there was a state in Israel which was equal to the song. The Lord looks for that. Miriam would represent the subjective side; there was something, though it was little. It was the measure of Israel at that time; it was little, but valued. It would emphasise the importance of keeping in tune.
W.J.Y. Those who were not in tune said it thundered.
J.T. Quite so. In @John 12 the people did not understand the voice.
A.G.L. What is the voice from heaven in the next chapter?
{109}
J.T. In chapter 12 the Lord is speaking about His death. In verse 23 it says, "Jesus answered them saying, The hour is come that the Son of Man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you. Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit. He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal. If any one serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there also shall be *my* servant. And if any one serve me, him shall the Father honour", (@John 12:24 - 26). All that is in His mind when this happened, so that He says, "Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. But on account of this have I come to this hour. Father, glorify thy name". Then there came a voice from heaven saying, "I both have glorified and will glorify it again". That is, the Lord is affected by what is said and He looks for us to be affected by what passes. He speaks to the Father and there comes the answer from heaven, the interchange between divine Persons. It is great to be able to hear this voice from heaven full of assurance and confidence.
W.A.S. We should recognise that voice as the Father's voice.
J.T. Yes. That is how it is presented. When the Lord came up out of Jordan it was the same. Unmistakably the Father's voice from heaven addressed the Lord as 'my Son'. Here it is simply, "I both have glorified and will glorify it again". Heaven is announcing His power in the resurrection of Christ: any intervention from heaven would involve power. When they prayed at Jerusalem, in @Acts 4, the place was shaken; power is conveyed.
P.D.S. Do we gather that the Father would speak from heaven today?
J.T. That is, what comes in in the assembly comes from heaven.
{110}
W.J.Y. People would recognise the glory of Christ as in resurrection, and not in cathedrals and the works of man's hand.
J.T. That is what you see in His second remark. God was unfolding His glory to the assembly.
P.D.S. Surely it would affect us very greatly always to have the Father's glory before us like this?
J.T. What a sense of God intervening! Speaking to Him in this sense implies divine intervention; our souls are enveloped with something; the introduction of power resulting in that the place where they were assembled was shaken and that they were all filled with the Holy Spirit.
P.D.S. If a company loves the Lord in that way is the Father bound to come in?
J.T. That is, the Lord is in our midst as Head. He links us up with heaven in a dignified way. He links us up with a dignified heavenly company. He brings out the greatness of what we are connected with. We can understand how in the type in @Exodus 40:34 "the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle". There was complete correspondence with what is in heaven.
In chapter 17 we come to the Lord's direct speaking to His Father. The whole chapter is an account of His prayer to the Father. It is entirely about the saints and at the end of it is "that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them".
P.D.S. In chapter 12 it is "Father, glorify thy name", and in chapter 17 it is "Father ... glorify thy Son".
J.T. I think that glorifying His name is in resurrection -- "Raised ... by the glory of the Father",(@Romans 6:4) while glorifying the Son would give Him a place up there in heaven.
W.J.Y. While He is unique, would you say that intimacy with God is possible on our part?
J.T. Well, that is what is in mind, that we might know how to speak to the Father.
{111}
P.D.S. Is this a priestly prayer or something beyond that?
J.T. It is one divine Person speaking to another. It is on a higher level. The priest maintains and guards what is due to God. He lifts up His eyes to heaven, to the abode of the Father in a sense, and is concerned about the hour. The hour had come. He says "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee". He still has in mind the glorification of the Father.
P.D.S. In the last verse it says, "I have made known to them thy name". Is this an advance on the first part of the chapter?
J.T. In verse 6 it is "manifested"; here it is "made known to them thy name". It is a real service that He has rendered to them; it involved an inward process of instruction, so that they really knew it.
P.D.S. Would the inward process result in what it speaks of in the first part of the verse?
J.T. "The love with which thou hast loved me may be in them", that is, the kind of love with which the Father loves the Son is in the saints: it is *that* kind of love, in keeping with the Father's love for the Son: we have part in that love.
P.D.S. That is, consciously.
J.T. It is the Father's love for the Son; and so we are qualified to have part in the assembly.
W.H.W. "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known". Is that His personal activity in the assembly today?
J.T. 'Will make it known' is more continuous. That is the allusion in chapter 20, Chapter 20 is in resurrection when the Lord says "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God" (@John 20:17).
P.D.S. Is that continued today?
J.T. We are brought into it, it is something new, it is education.
{112}
WATER
@Judges 1:12 - 15; @Judges 5:6 - 11, @Judges 7:l-8; @Judges 15:18,19
Caleb represents the element of continuance; he continued against great opposition and maintained freshness till a very great age. The element of continuance depends on what the daughter suggests here, that is, the springs of water. The daughter comes in on the family line.
The incident in chapter 5 alludes to another woman who speaks of the places of drawing water, places where the word of God is available, as it says, "The voice of those who divide the spoil in the midst of the places of drawing water". She celebrated a great victory in which we also are sharing in our own way, a victory which others have achieved. There are places where these acts are rehearsed -- "there they rehearse the righteous acts of Jehovah, his righteous acts towards his villages in Israel". These are meetings formed in the light of the assembly.
Chapter 7 brings in the thought of the denial of the natural in the service of God. The denial of the natural is seen in the lapping of the water for the sake of sustenance and not for indulgence.
Finally, the spring which Samson draws from in chapter 15 was opened up at a moment of exigency, a moment of great need. Samson was about to die of thirst when God clave the rock and water came out of it. His need was met by the immediate act of God.
Achsah denotes a church feature, that is, the saints coming to understand the church in relation to Christ. Knowing how to act, she sprang down in respect to her father, and asked for what she needed -- "Give me also springs of water". Achsah denotes a state; she understands that her father could give; she knew the wealth of his position. She is comely in attitude, recognising the man, her husband; then she speaks
{113}
to her father in a comely way: she sprang down from her ass. Caleb speaks directly to her. She is seen here as understanding the range of his position and his resources. Our prayers are based on the known resources of God. Then her word is "Thou hast given me a southern land; give me also springs of water", that is, he had done well for her and she recognises it, but she needed more to maintain her in what she had. Our prayers, then, should never be complaining.
Kirjath-sepher is the city of books. What a volume of written ministry there is for us to read today! This is a word for young people especially: Achsah did not read novels and worldly monthly magazines, she was maintained in married life by spiritual power. She is a fine type of young person in life starting out with the Spirit of God. Books are most pernicious things today, the most remarkable thing about them being the power of suggestion which they have. You say, 'But the children have to read them at school' and so on, but it is not what is obligatory that does the most damage; it is what is not obligatory that is so harmful. Daniel was on this line -- he accepted all the education of the court, but not the delicate meats. He refuses that which would qualify him socially. The women in the wilderness gave up their looking-glasses and it is remarkable that these were used in the tabernacle. Achsah was concerned about sustenance; she was a *young* woman. The enemy's effort is to get the present generation, the older ones will die out. In Russia and Germany the enemy *is* getting the present generation today, and the assumption is that, if their principles are instilled in the young and as the older ones die out, their system will be continued in this way.
Caleb gave her exceedingly abundantly above all that she asked or thought. In our prayers we ask things and God gives according to what is in us. It corresponds to what we have in the two prayers in Ephesians; these are intended to keep us going in our position.
{114}
He "is able to do far exceedingly above all which we ask or think, according to the power which works in us", (@Ephesians 3:20). The first point to see is that the answer is greater than the prayer. The nether springs correspond to Romans, to fulfil the righteous requirements of the law; it is a great point before going up; it must come first. Then the upper springs correspond to Ephesians, they are to maintain us up there, "raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies", (@Ephesians 2:6).
Othniel became a great leader and overthrew the king of Mesopotamia, which is literally the Syria of the two rivers. He was a man of great resources as suggested in the rivers; rivers greatly enrich a country. Othniel got his power on the line of the Spirit; it is by the Spirit that we overthrow worldly attacks.
Chapter 5 gives the celebration of a great victory in relation to the places of drawing water. Deborah represents the formation of meetings, the means of coming together locally. These were not in existence before Deborah. "In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the roads were unused, and the travellers on highways went by crooked paths. The villages ceased in Israel, ceased until that I Deborah arose". Deborah represents the victory that brings in the thought of the local meeting, "those who divide the spoil in midst of the places of drawing water: there they rehearse the righteous acts of Jehovah, his righteous acts toward his villages in Israel". We are justified in treating this as the local meeting. This victory of Deborah leads on to the meetings having their place. The meetings are as villages, each stands on its own feet. In England the thought of villages is very prominent; some villages are greatly distinguished, more so than many of the cities. The thing is developed locally.
There was the fire kindled for Paul, the barbarians did it and then Paul added to it. The local assembly is
{115}
to have warmth and then anyone coming should add to it. Deborah is a person who dwelt under her own palm-tree. She was a woman prophetess. While she did a man's part, she remained a woman in character. As a prophetess she had the mind of God, but in womanly way.
This victory was not against a man but against a great military organisation. Jabin, king of Canaan, reigned in Hazor and had nine hundred chariots of iron, and he mightily oppressed Israel twenty years. His captain dwelt in Harosheth-Goim. This was strategy, the military man was placed where he would be of best service. Today, this is Rome. Hazor is head of the nations in Joshua. There has never been a military organisation like Rome. Through a great victory its power has been broken. Victory comes through some person laying himself out to get power. First the power must be over himself, the victory over himself; there must be a personal victory first. I must overthrow myself. Deborah sat under her *own* palm-tree.
In all our meetings there should be spoil, we should get something. "Then the people of Jehovah went down to the gates". They administer things in the gates. Gates suggest a place of power. "The Lord loveth the gates of Zion", (@Psalm 87:2). The movement to the gates suggests the care meeting.
Deborah is one of the few mothers in Israel. She was first a wife. No one can be a mother without first becoming a wife. She was the wife of Lapidoth, which means 'light'; she was thus related to one who was in the light. Deborah does not represent just one sister, but a subjective state among God's people. When the whole assembly is come together in one place there is that which is prophetic and then comes the victory: the man falls down. We are to discern the word of God, no matter through whom it comes.
{116}
Springs are a great general thought; they are self-acting, not pumps. The thought is self-acting energy. Water has its own place. The woman in @John 4 drew water, but she left it and went into the city. But she had it. These places of drawing water suggest what Achsah had, the springs.
In chapter 7 we have the well Harod which is a place of testing. We have a good meeting and then go home and take our ease: there is no sacrifice. It is a question of *how* you take it: you do not take a can and then let it down, but you lap like a dog. You take what you need for the moment and then go on. It is drinking to live. What the Lord gives in the meeting is in view of a conflict. The meeting is to test; if God is ministering, there is something to be tested. "I will try them ... there". It might just furnish me enjoyment. To drink with comfort means to consider for oneself, while the test is that everything involves sacrifice. It is not an armchair matter. Scripture speaks of those "that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice", (@Psalm 50:5). The flesh is never to be considered; it is always sacrifice.
Midian was naturally linked with Israel. They are persons linked with us on worldly lines. The camp of Midian was beneath him in the valley: this is a touch giving an advantage. Having this advantage over them, being thus in moral superiority, he was already victorious.
In chapter 5, persons in affluence are called upon to consider. "All seek their own things, not the things of Jesus Christ", (@Philippians 2:21). The whole thought of Christianity is sacrifice. On this line the Lord Jesus is the victorious Leader in sacrifice. In Luke the word is "Take heed ... how ye hear" (@Luke 8:18). The three hundred had a keener apprehension of being in the service of God. Only spiritual men could stand what they had to contend with. Paul speaks about bearing about in his body the dying of Jesus. The flesh does not like this. There is no woman here; it is a man acting for God.
{117}
With Samson it is pre-eminently what one man can do. He never had an army, it is what he did himself. Judges gives us what God can do with one man. One is apt to give way. Samson was very thirsty; he "called on Jehovah, and said. Thou hast given by the hand of thy servant this great deliverance, and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? And God clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi, and water came out of it". It is God furnishing what was needed in a crisis in answer to Samson's calling, At a time when you feel at an extremity, the greatest spiritual history is made. All our so-called 'sorrows' have culminated in this way in crises where it is felt that the enemy has the advantage, and then God comes in. "God clave the hollow rock ... and water came out of it". It is not here speaking to the rock or smiting it as with Moses but "God clave the hollow rock". The rock is Christ. The cleaving is the bringing to light of some new feature of Christ: something which they never saw before. The refreshment came out of that. Every crisis brings out something distinctive, some new feature of Christ. Any name which signifies an event is a landmark in spiritual history.
{118}
DIVINE PLANTING
@Matthew 15:13; @Psalm 1:3; @Psalm 52:8; @Psalm 92:12 - 14; @Psalm 104:16
In my word at this time, dear brethren, I have in mind to enlarge on the idea of planting, divine planting. It is a very old idea, as old as man, and, according to the Scriptures, God is the first who planted. He planted a garden, we are told. The earth in itself had the power of fruit-bearing; it was to bring forth and cause grass, herbs and trees to spring up, suggestive of what we call natural latent fertility, but later it is said that God planted a garden eastward in Eden and He caused a river to flow out of the garden to water it. It was a spot that henceforth would be of special interest to Him, but the growth was not left to nature. It was to be watched over, Adam was placed in the garden to dress it and keep it. It was of divine planting, God planting a garden. Every gardener who had the opportunity would visit the garden for it was perfect, every tree in its place. God not only considers for fruit, but shelter and ornamentation in the garden; He made everything perfect and the garden would certainly have been worth visiting as divinely planted and rooted, to say no more. We know what happened in the garden, but I am speaking of it now as the first instance of planting. The interval between it and @Matthew 15 was long, but the Planter is the same, only instead of the Lord God planting we have the Father planting. The Lord Jesus is the speaker. He is not enlarging on the planting, but alludes to the Father planting; others planted also, but the Lord alludes to the Father's planting by way of contrast. There were other planters, as there are today. "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up". The Lord made this remark in answer to His disciples, "Dost thou know that the Pharisees, having heard this word, have been offended?" (@Matthew 15:12) The Pharisees! These men were
{119}
mentioned by His disciples. We have to mention such men in our prayers and ministry. In our prayers the Lord takes account of what His people mention. They made mention here of a class called the Pharisees. They were a sect. They were sectarian people, and no sect was planted of God. One of the first evils mentioned by the apostle Paul in regard to Corinth was the existence of sects in that city. He names them, He alludes to them in the eleventh chapter of the first epistle: "I hear there exist divisions among you" (@1 Corinthians 11:18). There are many of them today, far more than there were, or have ever been in the history of the world, and not one of them is planted of God. There are some of great antiquity, apparently so well founded and rooted that no wind can overturn them. But there is a wind coming that will overturn the stoutest of them. No doubt the Lord had in mind the prophecy concerning a great religious system with three hundred million members, or more, so extensive that it appears that it must go on for ever. One of the most celebrated sages of men has predicted that it would go on indefinitely, but the Scriptures have a different mind about it, and we who know the Scriptures have a different mind about it. We know that this great sect and all like it shall come to an end -- like a great millstone it shall be cast into the sea never to appear again.
The gospel of Matthew has in mind, not the coming of the Lord for us, terminating things here, but His intervention to remove out of His kingdom everything that offends. He tells us in His own words, with His own lips, in this gospel of the days in which His angels will remove everything that offends, great and small. Then He says, "Then the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father", (@Matthew 13:43). This is the viewpoint in Matthew, and we may as well make up our minds that it is the truth of the holy Scriptures. The wicked have to go; all that is not subject to Christ will have to go. He is to remove all
{120}
that offends, and then shall the righteous shine forth in the kingdom of their Father. Now in Daniel it says, "They that turn the many to righteousness" shall shine "as the stars, for ever and ever" (@Daniel 12:3). Now what is in mind in reading the verse in Matthew is to bring out that the righteous are planted. In this gospel they are called the sons of the kingdom. We have in chapter 13 the sowing of the seed which is the word of the kingdom (verse 19), and the sowing of the seed which is the sons of the kingdom (verse 38), persons developed in the kingdom who will be subject, and these are the righteous. The Son of Man sows these and the enemy sows tares. The tares are called sons of the wicked one. These are persons, too, developed in wickedness. They shall grow up together till the harvest, when the Son of Man sends His angels to take out of His kingdom all that offends; "then the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father" (@Matthew 13:43). In this world no void shall appear. The Son of God has come and come to stay; His coming here was to take possession in testimony. He has come and come to stay. The Revelation says, "He set his right foot on the sea, and the left upon the earth, and cried with a loud voice as a lion roars. And when he cried, the seven thunders uttered their own voices" (@Revelation 10:2,3). He takes personal possession of the sea and land. Who can dispute His title here? Where are the armies and the navies that can cope with the lightning and thunder of God subservient to the Son of Man when He comes to take possession? So that it is a question of being righteous if we are to stay. You see all who are not God's people taken away; of course there is the rapture, but that is only a detail relative to the appearing. We shall appear with Christ; then shall we appear with Him with the holy angels, holy myriads, all shall come forth in the dignity of power. The whole domain is under His
{121}
hands, all that is of evil must go; it is only a matter of time and "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up".
Now I want to enlarge on the righteous as viewed in this way. How important it is to be amongst them in our several localities as divinely planted, for this is where the development of the testimony lies. The righteous are planted. We have a very beautiful word in Romans about Christians. There is a correspondence in the baptism of Christians to Christ's death, for they are planted by baptism, and the apostle says, "If we are become identified with him in the likeness of his death, so also we shall be of his resurrection", (@Romans 6:5). But we shall be in the likeness of Him in heavenly glory too, for our bodies are to be transformed, not only raised, but glorified.
@Psalm 1 touches on this point; it shows what a godly man is like. Anyone making enquiry into the Psalms can look at him. It is said that "he is as a tree planted by brooks of water, which giveth its fruit in its season, and whose leaf fadeth not; and all that he doeth prospereth". This is a very remarkable verse, often noted by Christians. If you enquire about yourself, you can determine from this scripture something as to yourself, as to whether you belong to this class. There are those who are not certain and yet the truth in this corresponds to the godly man as he is normally. He is a tree planted by the rivers of water, and therefore anyone who is neglectful of opportunities of spiritual ministry is not characteristic of this class; he is not planted by the rivers of water. In Isaiah it is said of the children of believers that they grow up as among the grass, as willows by the water-courses. Children of that class become men of this class. It is said here that his leaf shall not wither and whatsoever he does shall prosper; that is, he is ever fresh spiritually, he is never stale, never too engrossed with ordinary affairs to take on spiritual conversation. He is never too preoccupied
{122}
with what defiles to take up his part in the assembly. His whole business in the assembly is that the service of God is foremost; all is subservient to this. All else is incidental. His business here is the service of God, and he is the confidant of God, and God has confidence in him, and whatsoever he does prospers. If I am of this class I can go out in the morning knowing that whatever my calling may be, God will prosper me today. We are reminded of David and Joshua; God was with David whithersoever he went; that is, God was with that man. He had confidence in that man, and so here whatsoever he does prospers. God delights to look down from heaven and see such a group of persons; these are infinitely more to Him than the garden of Eden with its beautiful trees literally. Here we have a living man under the eye of God in all his freshness spiritually, and whatever he does prospers. Who gives prosperity? God gives prosperity. There is no prosperity that He does not give. Nature depends on God; a grain of wheat goes into the ground, God gives it a body; the prosperity is from God. A man may prosper, as men say, as a green bay tree, but only for a moment. All true prosperity is from God.
Then there is the consciousness of this as in @Psalm 52 "I am like a green olive tree in the house of God". "I *am* like ..." -- the consciousness of it, the sense of it! A green olive tree is a figure of a man; it alludes to the Spirit, the power of the Holy Spirit, here indwelling believers and incorporating them in the house of God. That is, one is then in the house and he says "I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever", (@Psalm 52:8). I am not keeping myself there; he does not take that ground. How can we continue in the place of testimony save as kept by the mercy of God? See the stability of the man planted in the house, consciously there, a green olive tree, trusting in the mercy of God for ever. Storms will come to uproot things; no wind, no storm can overturn or uproot what God has planted. It is
{123}
set here in relation to stability. This is the consciousness of it, of being set up here, conscious of the greenness of the sap of the olive tree, of the oil.
Then in @Psalm 92 "The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree". The word 'flourish' is to be noted now, flourish like a palm. I know very little of botany, but have observed palms; how they suggest the thought of flourishing! To younger brothers and sisters I would say they should begin with the first psalm, which is the moral side of the position. The second is the official side. These two psalms stand on the threshold of the whole book of Psalms; you will not understand the five books of the Psalms unless you understand the first. To older brothers and sisters, @Psalm 92 alludes to us who are older: "They shall still bring forth fruit in old age".
In verse 12 it says "The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon". The palm I understand spiritually as victory, the cedar as nobility, the cedar of Lebanon. Moral victory allied with nobility is what is for our souls to take in in this verse as of divine planting, flourishing as the palm and growing as a cedar of Lebanon. The cedar of Lebanon had its place in the temple, the wood denoting dignity. The idea of victory should attach to the righteous man as he advances in years, victory and dignity! The greatest victory is over himself, victory over all his natural propensities; the Holy Spirit enables him to obtain this victory. Deborah sat under her own palm tree; she did not give out her own great personal qualities, she did not need to advertise, people came to her for judgment, they recognised her moral greatness and victory, sitting under her own palm tree. And so they will come to us if we sit under our own palm trees, and so gain the victory over our own spirit. It is said of Deborah that she dwelt under her own palm tree between Ramah and Bethel. People will come to us as they came to her for judgment. How
{124}
they came to Him! It is a great matter to avoid advertising; it is a sure evidence that we have not the victory over our own spirit: "He that ruleth his spirit" is better "than he that taketh a city" (@Proverbs 16:32). One that rules his own spirit can overthrow Og the king of Bashan. He will be enquired of; people will ask him questions as they came to her for judgment. In that victory there is conscious dignity, not lying in one's own ability, not lying in birth or ancestry. Nobility does not lie in anything of our own, but is in what I am in God, what I am in Christ, the man in Christ. And so, as I said, this scripture bears peculiarly on those who are older in the faith; those that are planted in the house of the Lord flourish in the courts of God, in the care meetings, in the public relations of the assembly, in eldership, deaconship. All this comes within the range of one who is planted in the house of the Lord and flourishes in the courts of God. We have the flourishing in the courts of God: he is an ornament in the testimony of God, and the older he gets the more it is so. He does not boast in old age, he flourishes in the public relations of the testimony of God and becomes a model for the younger brethren. There is nothing more important than a good example to the young. This flourishing in the court's of God comes under the notice of the younger brethren. For example, if one reads @1 Chronicles 23 - 29 one is impressed with David flourishing in the courts of God: it speaks of his affection for the house of God; he sacrificed his best for it, the gold of Ophir indicating fine spiritual qualities, adornment for the house of God. And so an example is set in David; he passes off the scene gloriously and Solomon his son, young and tender, sits on the throne of Jehovah. The throne of Jehovah is occupied. There is a man great enough to sit on the throne of Jehovah. David would show how the king should rule. "He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a
{125}
morning without clouds" (@2 Samuel 23:3,4). And so Solomon is fit to sit down on the throne of Jehovah.
"They shall still bring forth fruit in old age ... to shew that the Lord is upright". It is a great matter for older brethren and sisters to keep bright and fresh in service. A spiritual man is a burden on no one; God will see to that. God has great regard for freshness in His own saints because they show the power of Christianity, and so in @Psalm 104, "The trees of the Lord are full of sap", that is, they are satisfied; they never complain; they are perfectly restful in what God has brought them into. There is nothing better in the whole universe than what they have got. They cannot be tempted by any worldly offer; they are satisfied. The pressure will grow more and more. "Except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved" (@Matthew 24:22). The temptations for the Jewish brethren will be terrible, even the elect will be in danger, the pressure is bound to get greater and greater. It is very important for the young and old to be satisfied. We have nothing but the best there is, the very best we could have. There is nothing better than what we have. Satisfaction is what is becoming. The secret of it is drinking into the Spirit, being filled with the Holy Spirit. The Spirit occupies us with Christ. No dissatisfaction is contemplated in the eternal state where things are filled to the fulness of God.
{126}
THE SUBSTANTIALITY OF CHRISTIANITY
@l Corinthians 10:17; @Hebrews 6:4 - 6; @2 Peter 1:4; @Hebrews 3:1
I have read these scriptures because they each contain the word 'partaker'; by the Lord's help I wish to dwell on the word in these four settings. I have particularly in view to stress that Christianity is substantial, not merely theoretical or doctrinal, as in ancient and current religions accepted by the world.
Christianity is substantial in a spiritual sense, based on the great fact of the incarnation, which is substantiated by Paul, and is an essential thought. God is said to be a spirit, but in the economy He has come into He is known in manhood, as it is said, "God ... manifest in flesh". Much is developed from that fact, to establish the great principle of substance in a spiritual sense in such wise as to be within the range of the creature, to be intelligible to us whose constitutions are substantial. True indeed, man's condition involves spirit. 'Spirit, soul and body' is the formula by which he is known, and our Lord Jesus has become partaker of this condition. The word used is 'partaker'. It is a real matter, not imaginary humanity, but a real humanity; so much so that the angel Gabriel, speaking of the Son of God to Mary, the mother of our Lord, said to her, "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God" (@Luke 1:35). It is not holy Person or Babe, but holy *Thing*.
John says by the Spirit, any spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God. It is not that He was Jesus Christ before becoming flesh, but the allusion is to the Person who had part in the Deity as presented in John. In this gospel he presents the Word as with God, and the Word was God. But to make this come within our range involved the fact of the
{127}
incarnation. It is Jesus Christ come in flesh, and moreover He came by water and by blood; that does not refer to birth, but to His death. Jesus Christ come in flesh alludes to incarnation. Jesus Christ coming by water and by blood refers to the death of Christ. Incarnation alone would have been ineffectual. There could be no redemption save that He came by water and by blood. The condition in which we were needed water for cleansing of our moral state, and blood for dealing with our transgressions, offences and guilt. His coming in flesh refers to tangible things, and pours contempt on mysticism and spiritism.
Christianity is founded on substantiality and divinity, and so, as I said, Gabriel begins with that thought, that holy *Thing* which is to be called Son of God. How much and how effectively the Spirit of God enables the saints to understand the holy name of Christ, and would impress upon our hearts that although it is in relation to birth, it, nevertheless, marks Him off as divine, such as is in mind in @Romans 1:4, "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". A wonderful thought. He is marked off. The writer of the Hebrews says, "Since therefore the children partake of blood and flesh, he also, in like manner, took part in the same", @Hebrews 2:14. The children alluded to were the saints in Old or New Testament times. "He does not indeed take hold of angels by the hand, but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham", (@Hebrews 2:16). It was a genuine real thought. He took flesh and blood in that condition, in order to yield what was in the way of divine blessing for the children, the divine thought for man. So that is what I have in mind in these remarks.
We are dealing with what is substantial, and God would bring us into substantiality in ourselves, and not to be mere hearers, as many are, mentally assenting to doctrines and principles without substantial results in our souls. And so the first scripture alludes to the
{128}
saints as a body, and this is a substantial thought. What I have in mind corresponds with our Lord as He partook in flesh and blood, and took a body. We have to distinguish between the idea of the body, and the idea of the condition. Of course the condition involved the body, but the idea of the body furnishes an instrument, and the thought is carried on to the saints from Christ. The thought in this verse is -- we being many are one body, all partakers of that one loaf. The bread which we break is the communion or the fellowship of the body of Christ. We Christians, although many, are one body, expressed in the symbol in the Lord's supper, but expressed spiritually, and in spiritual substantiality. The links and bonds by which we are held, held by joints and bands, all that enters into the organism. The saints sitting down to partake of the Lord's supper as a unit are held as a body, and the idea corresponds with what was said by the Lord, coming into the world, "Thou hast prepared me a body",(@Hebrews 10:5). It was not something previous to, but begins with, incarnation, coming here, as in Luke, and He speaks in it, and intimates to God that He would glorify Him in it. All the divine will should be, and was, carried out. He has now gone up to heaven bodily, but the idea of the body remains in a substantial way in the saints collectively. They are usable to God as units. But the one great idea of God in the saints in relation to Christ, and of the saints answering to the thoughts divinely seen, such as "So also is the Christ" (@1 Corinthians 12:12), is that the saints are baptised by one Spirit into one body, and are viewed as a holy vessel here. It is a wonderful thought.
Attention is called to the partakers in a locality here, a local assembly; we have the wonderful statement "So also is the Christ" (@1 Corinthians 12:12). We are of Christ, not that we are the body; it is a question of the character of it here, not the whole thought, but the character of it, the collective idea; "Ye are Christ's body" (@1 Corinthians 12:27), where two
{129}
or three are walking together in the light of Christ and the assembly. So this verse, as I said, suggests we are one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread and that one body, partakers in a tangible way in the Spirit, experiencing a real substantial feeling as we are together. The allusion is to the body as the vessel of the Lord. In Matthew's account of the Supper, the Lord uses the word "Take, eat: this is my body" (@Matthew 26:26) and in Mark's, He says "Take this: this is my body", (@Mark 14:22). In John He does not speak of His body, but in chapter 6 He speaks of eating His flesh, which speaks of His condition that is to be appropriated. Both flesh and blood are connected with life. John has in mind life, that the saints are a living people here, because of His blood which has purified us. This is food with negative and positive effects on us. The Lord took up the state of death to terminate flesh and blood. God's object is not what we are in flesh, that is not what God had in mind as to the Lord.
In @John 6, one of the most substantial chapters in Scripture, the Lord has in mind that we should be in life. So that at the end of the chapter, we have Peter saying, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God" (@John 6:68,69). We being many are one bread, one body. This thought is to be carried by the saints in every locality. It is very practical if we understand the great thought. We may be in the holy bond of fellowship. That is what God intends us to be in this town. Of course one could say much more, but I wanted to present four sides of the subject. It is very practical as to what we are going on with; it challenges us as to whether we are making room for these things.
In @Hebrews 6, the passage refers primarily to those who became partakers of the Holy Spirit, and then fell away. But that is not what I have in mind. What
{130}
is before me is this thought of believers partaking of the Holy Spirit. That one might do that, and then become apostate, is a solemn thought. It is a very solemn thing that one might partake of the Holy Spirit, and fall away, never again to be recovered; for such there is no recovery. It is a terrible thought that one might fall away. The Spirit of God deals with strong terms in this epistle, which refers to these times of apostasy, that one might fall away, although numbered among the people of God, never again to have repentance. What a serious matter to be lost, to have no interest in these things at all, one who had once enjoyed these things. A Christian may have part in spiritual benefits, and enjoy these things and yet become apostate. Now I am speaking of the Christian partaking of these things in a real way; he knows something of joy in the Holy Spirit, joy sent down from heaven at Pentecost, all sharing in the Holy Spirit. That is the first feature in Acts, so Peter says the believers were not full of new wine; he explained that God had made Christ Jesus, Lord and Christ in heaven, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, He has poured out this which ye now see and hear (@Acts 2:33), setting forth in figure new wine -- holy heavenly joy brought down and sent down from heaven, filling all persons, partakers of the Holy Spirit. It is a challenge to every heart, not what we find in our own hearts, but the love of God shed abroad in our hearts; joy in the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit makes the heart glad; joy is there. It is said of the early Christians that one hundred and twenty were all together in one place, and heard the sound out of heaven, a rushing mighty wind. It is what came out of heaven and filled the house where they were sitting. What a place it must have been! All the house was filled with that wonderful sound from heaven. This is what we can depend on. "There appeared to them parted tongues, as of fire, and it sat upon each one of them. And they were all filled with
{131}
the Holy Spirit" (@Acts 2:3). Next to the Lord Jesus the Holy Spirit is the greatest gift heaven provided; the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven. What a real thing it is to be partakers of the Spirit! These people referred to in @Hebrews 6 shared in the present effect of the Spirit's presence in the assembly. Much is said about the Holy Spirit of God. It is a real thing to be a partaker of the Holy Spirit, and to know how substantial He is.
One might just see what is said in John's gospel; the Spirit of God in that gospel is referred to in terms which present Him substantially, not as a theory, but a Person. In his first reference to the Holy Spirit, John the baptist says that he saw the Spirit descending as a dove on Jesus, a substantial thought.
Then in chapter 3 the Spirit's activities are likened to the wind, another substantial thought. The wind is invisible but everyone knows how powerful it is. In chapters 4 and 7 we have the figure of water, speaking of how substantial and tangible the Holy Spirit is. Later the Lord speaks of the Holy Spirit as another Comforter, who would bring divine comfort and support, just the same as Jesus had. Jesus came in by incarnation, but was about to leave them, but the Spirit was to abide with them as another Comforter.
In chapter 20 the Lord speaks to them and then breathes into them. His own breath, how touching that is! Adam became a living soul, the last Adam a life-giving Spirit; He breathed into them and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit" (@John 20:22), something most real and most substantial. One is afraid of our having theory, but not substance. Christianity is real.
Now to come to the third point, the divine nature. We are made partakers of the divine nature, not that we could partake in deity, but it is simply what is characteristic. Peter speaks of certain qualities, for instance, divine power, life, godliness, glory, and virtue, substantial things. Then Peter says that through these ye might become partakers of the divine nature. What
{132}
we get in this verse, what Peter speaks of here and in the whole chapter, is substantial. Peter had seen that sight on the mount of transfiguration. He says they were with Him on the holy mountain. They saw the glory that was His. He refers here to qualities which are now Christian features. God has called us by glory and virtue. That is a real thing, not merely mental, but power in which glory and virtue is effected. He has called us out of the world. These words are for our meditation; I would urge brethren to study these verses in Peter. This is substantial: may we be characterised by this substance, not simply believing in these things. They are substantial things which we have and we are to add them to each other.
So divine nature understands Christ. We could never partake in the deity of God. It is a question o what has come out in "Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant", (@Philippians 2:5 - 7). The Lord here was a real Man among men. Think of Him working as a carpenter, taking a place and moving here among men! How real it all was! and that, being found in figure as a man He humbled Himself. That is what He did when in figure as a man. Divine nature is what is in mind. The Scripture warrants divine nature. It is a question of character, what we can partake in, what God has set out here in men of God, not deity, but a moral setting out of what God is. We have part in that; it is a question of nature.
Peter says that our partaking of the divine nature is the outcome of certain qualities that have been given to us; he would have us possess them as a company.
In @Hebrews 3:1 we have, "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession". This is an appeal to all Christians, not excluding worldly Christians, by presenting greater things here. It is addressed to
{133}
"holy brethren", not simply 'brethren', as if the apostle would clothe the saints with God's thoughts of them. What greater incentive could there be than to be addressed as "holy brethren"! Holiness comes about by chastening, and we have the word 'partaker' in that connection.
The Lord Jesus is dealing with us as sons. The thought of enduring discipline proves that we are sons. Sons do not turn aside from God; the end is that we may be partakers of God's holiness, real holiness. We may be partakers of holiness; we are addressed as holy brethren and then as partakers of the heavenly calling; what a great prospect, dear brethren, it is to have part in this. The saints have a heavenly calling; what a great portion is ours in the assembly! This passage contemplates that we have part in it already for we are partakers of the heavenly calling.
In @Philippians 3:3, which is full of the energy of the man of faith, the apostle Paul says, "We are the circumcision", not the concision which refers to people who do not go the whole way. He goes the whole way. He wants to apprehend that for which he had been apprehended of Christ Jesus. We should never lose the sense of our heirship, it should be always in our minds: it is heavenly and is with Christ, who is in the glory with God. The goal Paul had before him was the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. John says we shall see Him and be like Him. In Philippians our body of humiliation will be transformed into conformity to His body of glory. That should be the great goal in mind for every Christian, and for the encouragement of the saints. Holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling. That is the word, dear brethren.
{134}
Pages 134 - 279 -- "Notes of Readings in New York", 1937 (Volume 138).
MINISTERING TO THE WILL OF GOD
@Acts 13: 36; @1 Chronicles 29:26 - 30
In referring to the will of God, we are reminded of how prominently it occupied our Lord's mind as having become Man, and as here in God's service, and in view of His departure. One is affected in referring to the unspeakable depths of feeling which, marked the Lord in facing death; He was "amazed", we are told, "and deeply depressed". So thoroughly had He taken up man's place, and so thoroughly did He understand the import of the will of God as to this position, that He felt it; hence the deep agony, and the words: "Not my will, but thine be done" (@Luke 22:42).
In David, as foreshadowing all this, we have a remarkable example in that he ministered to the will of God in his own generation. The Holy Spirit dwells on the life of David peculiarly. Although not, as we would speak today, a very long life, it was a life of compression, a life into which immense events were compressed. In referring to the idea of compression in such a path, one cannot but think of the compression of the life of Jesus, especially the three-and-a-half years of His service. What a life! What events of eternal import were compressed into that life, and how in every moment of it He ministered to the will of God! What He was in private we must leave, but He was cast upon God from the outset. Every breath, every pulsation, every movement in that life was for the will of God. What that was to God, beloved, who but He can fully express? He took occasion at the end of thirty years to speak of it: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 17:5). And what that scene in Gethsemane was, who but God knows fully? those moments of amazement, of depression, when He would at all costs minister to the will of God.
{135}
So, to David, a man of like passions with ourselves, we have this beautiful tribute by the apostle Paul: "Having in his own generation ministered to the will of God, fell asleep". This is a greater thing than to minister to others, for it fills out what the mind of God delights in. There may be great exploits without ministering to the will of God, without that steady adherence to and support of what pleases God. It is what God has in any one of us that is the whole matter. "Fear God, and keep his commandments", one has said, is "the whole of man" (@Ecclesiastes 12:13). It is what accrues to God that will tell; it is what *has told*, beloved brethren, and what *will tell* in that day when things are manifested.
"And the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer; with all his reign and his might, and the times that passed over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries".
How keenly David felt what was current amongst the people of God! "The times that passed over him", all the years of his service, involving serious crises and conflicts, yet he did not fail of the mind of God, nor shirk the responsibility that fell to him. Thus we may well imitate his faith, considering the issue of his conversation.
It is very beautiful that the Holy Spirit mentions such recorders of David's life as the prophets Samuel, Nathan, and Gad. We may be assured that the sum total of that ministry to the will of God was gathered up faithfully for the food, the encouragement, and the stimulation of later servants, as these books of Samuel, Nathan, and Gad were read. What a stimulation to ourselves, too, to pursue the path of faith humbly, unostentatiously, but letting nothing miss us that ministers to the will of God; that we may know how the will of God enters into the times that pass over us and minister to it. May the Lord help us, dear brethren.
{136}
RIGHT FEELINGS AND AFFECTIONS IN THE SAINTS
@Song of Songs 1:7 - 11; @Song of Songs 2:1 - 7
It is on my heart to speak of David and Solomon as marked by deep feelings and affections. These are expressed in their writings, and I may say they furnish for us the very heart and soul of the Old Testament. They remind us that God will have His people move in the expression of divinely begotten feelings and affections. Amongst other things it is to be observed that these feelings and affections come from two kings; that is, men of immense affairs. We might assume that poetic, and even any other kind of writings, should be left to others; and that such men as David and Solomon had to give so much attention to military and state affairs, that they could scarcely be expected to give time to such a service as this; yet they reflect what God is, and what Christ is, in regard of this service.
As an illustration of this, we see how God, coming to Abraham in company with two others, could afford to wait upon Abraham until he had prepared a meal; and in the New Testament we see how the Lord Jesus Christ could devote time to individuals; as, for instance, on the two wayward disciples going to Emmaus. It is touching to see how the Father and the Son can afford to devote Themselves to one individual, for in @John 14 the Lord says that the Father and the Son would come and make Their abode with one who loved the Lord and kept His word. Taking all these things into account, we can understand how David could find time to write psalms, and how Solomon could speak three thousand proverbs and write a thousand and five songs. Think of the great emperor of that day able to devote himself to such services!
Now this is the Song of all Songs; it is called "The song of songs, which is Solomon's" (@Song of Songs 1:1). It is a composition
{137}
by him, as a type of Christ, to celebrate the triumph of Christ's love for an individual, as if the Lord were to remind each of us of His triumph in securing us; so that knowing His love for us, we love Him. It is a wonderful thing to heaven that there should be lovers of Christ in this world. He values every one of His lovers, and each of them says. He "loved me, and gave himself for me" (@Galatians 2:20). I suppose the apostle Paul was the greatest lover of Christ, and the idea of a non-lover of Christ is utterly abhorrent to him, for he says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha" (@1 Corinthians 16:22). If anyone does not love our Lord Jesus Christ, he is incapable of loving.
This Song shows how love is begotten, and in chapter 1:7 the lover of Christ wishes to know where He feeds His flock and where He makes it to rest at noon. That is, he wishes to see how Christ serves all His flock, and this is what leads up to the Lord's service to the saints as of the assembly -- His best service is seen there. It is illustrated in Jacob, when he quickly rolled away the stone from the well's mouth as Rachel comes into view. So it is that the best service of Christ is expended on the saints who form the assembly. Therefore we can understand the desire of this lover of Christ to see Him thus serving, so that she says, "Why should I be as one veiled beside the flocks of thy companions?" Why should any one of us be under suspicion in regard to our love to Christ? If one has not come forward and put out his hand to the fellowship of the people of God, his love is under suspicion. Whatever you may say about your love, we cannot be sure of it, for love is not merely spoken of, but it manifests itself, as in the case of Ruth. She says, "Intreat me not to leave thee" (@Ruth 1:16); she would be a companion of Naomi. She would have Naomi's people to be her people, Naomi's God to be her God; where Naomi died would Ruth die, and there would she be buried. That is complete identification. Hence, if one is not
{138}
openly identified with Christ as rejected in this world, one's love is questionable. This one was a true lover of Christ, for she says, "Why should I be as one veiled?" And in verse 8, "If thou know not, thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock". The Lord is to be found by watching the footsteps of the flock, for you will find that they lead to where Christ is.
The two who were on their way to Emmaus were not marked as of the flock of Christ. Their love was apparently questionable, but the Lord, who knows all things, knew that they loved Him. But who else could have known? They had their backs turned upon the chief interest of Christ on earth. According to Mark they were going into the country, whereas the Lord had told them to remain in the city; so that as far as others could judge, they were not truly lovers of Christ. Those who have Christ's commandments and keep them not, do not manifest that they love Him, and *their* footsteps would not be any guide. After the Lord had manifested Himself to these two, they arose the same hour of the night and returned to Jerusalem, and their footsteps now led them to where the eleven were gathered together and those that were with them. That is the history of every soul that is truly gathered.
In verse 9 it says, "I compare thee, my love, to a steed in Pharaoh's chariots". It is as if the Lord would encourage one who is now returning to the only right path for the believer. "Thy cheeks are comely with bead-rows, thy neck with ornamental chains. We will make thee bead-rows of gold with studs of silver". It is now in the plural, for the saints are included, and you will be ornamented in accordance with the new sphere; for love in the saints is love according to Christ. If He wishes you to be adorned, so do the saints; but there is nothing in us for His pleasure according to nature.
{139}
In chapter 2 you will see that the believer is spoken of in the feminine, and regards herself as a "narcissus of Sharon" -- a beautiful product. The believer is thus coming into closer acquaintance with the Lord and with His people; and to realise what he is under the Lord's eye, "A lily of the valleys". The bridegroom says, "As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters"; that is what a lover of Christ is in a scene of contrariety; and as He gives her the lead, she goes on to say what she thinks of Him in comparison. The believer is thus marked by progress, in that he can say, "As the apple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons". He is not among the thorns, but among the sons, and that is where you wish to see Him. He will be eternally among the sons, but anointed above them. Therefore it is well to make this comparison, for in truth it is how we shall know the Lord Jesus in heaven; He will there be known among the sons, but the lover will detect Him among the brethren. In nothing is the bride more characterised here than by her ability to distinguish Christ, to mark Him off in His infinite excellencies as compared with others. Hence it is the beloved disciple, John, the one who was in the bosom of Jesus, whom the Spirit of God uses to portray Him here in this world, introducing Him to us as God. He is a divine Person, but a perfect Servant here below; love traces Him as such and sees Him at the end as the ascending One: "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God" (@John 20:17).
Now you will observe how she can speak of the way the Lord served, she had come to know Him so that she could sit down in His shadow in rapture; she says, "In his shadow have I rapture and sit down". She is not now perturbed in the presence of such an One. As He came into the company in Luke, they were perturbed, they did not know Him as He is described here. In John's record of the same event
{140}
he omits that part, for he would present the work of God as ever true to itself. The believer, viewed abstractedly apart from all that he is naturally, is raptured in the presence of Christ. In His shadow he sits down, and the palate is free to enjoy His fruit; so that he says, "He hath brought me to the house of wine, and his banner over me is love". That is the abstract view of the believer, but it is short-lived, for we are still in our condition of flesh and blood and a sense of weakness comes in, so that immediately she says, "Sustain ye me with raisin-cakes", a food containing a very attenuated or mild stimulant: "Refresh me with apples"; that is to say, there is a sense of need of sustainment, and she prescribes what it shall be -- raisin-cakes; and of refreshment -- apples -- fruit which suggests Christ as pre-eminent. Also she says, "I am sick of love"; this can only allude to the mixed condition in which we are, for there will be no such infirmity as this in heaven. She goes on to say, "His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me", suggesting the support of Christ in regard to one's intelligence, for how quickly one feels the need of support as participating in spiritual things! His left hand under the head refers to the intelligence, and His right hand embracing to the affections. So that through the gracious service of Christ, the believer is sustained in His presence in intelligence and affection. Hence, when she charges the daughters of Jerusalem by the gazelles and the hinds of the field, she is alluding to what she has experienced of Christ; that is, the speed with which He reaches us in the hour of need, we do not require to stir Him up, we leave it with Him. "Stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please". Love will do its very best for us, and hence we learn by experience that it is best to leave things with the Lord. Love never fails, so we may confide in the love of Christ and leave Him
{141}
to act as He pleases. There is nothing more important than this, that love in Christ will do its best for us, so that whatever our circumstances we will let love have its way.
I desire that we should keep before us the ministry of David and Solomon, for they both suggest the expression of right feelings and affections; these are the outcome of a personal knowledge of Christ, and of a personal link and relationship with Him.
{142}
THE WORD "PERSONS" AS APPLIED TO THE GODHEAD
J.T. The word "Persons" as applied conveys what is true. You may say the word "person" is not applied to divine Beings as such in Scripture, but the personal pronoun is used constantly of each of the three divine Persons. One old doctrine taught that what we call Persons were three phases of the Deity, but this is utterly erroneous. There are three distinct Persons, and nothing is plainer in the Scripture than that. There is nothing more definitely asserted in Scripture than the Trinity.
Ques. When we worship God, do we worship a Person in the Godhead, or the Godhead?
J.T. "To us there is one God, the Father" (@1 Corinthians 8:6) -- a most important expression. The other two persons are subservient to One, and Deity is presented in Him -- the Father. We worship one God, the Father. But then in @1 Corinthians 12 and @Ephesians 4 we have the Spirit first, then the Lord, and after that God. We thus travel along with the Spirit and the Lord to God. In certain connections we cannot exclude the other two Persons, the three Persons are included in the one God. But as we are standing in relation to the Mediator, we do not address God as including Him; He is on our side as towards God. In this supremely important matter wisdom lies in following the teaching and example of the apostles. The early disciples persevered in *their* teaching. What is clear throughout Acts and the epistles is the economy into which the Godhead has come; that is, one of the Persons, as already shown from Paul's writings, occupies the place of God, the other two Persons take a mediatorial position in order to effect the divine thoughts. There is abundant evidence that in abstract Deity the three Persons are in equality; and further, that the Son and
{143}
the Spirit as in the economy act severally *as God*. Thus the Scriptures fully assert Deity in all three Persons. This being accepted in our souls, we have liberty in our service Godward to appropriate the Son and the Spirit in Their gracious mediatorial service on our side, enabling us to approach and worship God. Hence @Ephesians 2:18 says, "Through him [Christ] we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", and other similar passages.
{144}
THE AUTHORITY OF CHRIST IN THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@Numbers 16:1 - 50
J.T. This chapter is universal in its bearing and deals typically with the great rebellion which has occurred in the history of Christendom, against Christ, as Apostle and High Priest. The attitude of Moses and Aaron in meeting this rebellion is noteworthy; in verse 4 it is said, "When Moses heard this, he fell on his face". Later, in verse 45, it says, "And they fell on their faces", that is, Moses and Aaron did so; then Moses provides in his love and forethought for the people. It says further, verse 46, "And Moses said to Aaron, Take the censer, and put fire thereon from off the altar, and lay on incense, and carry it quickly to the assembly, and make atonement for them; for there is wrath gone out from Jehovah: the plague is begun". Aaron did this; it says he made atonement for the people and stood between the dead and the living, and the plague was stayed. Christ typically, in His authority and priestly grace, maintains the assembly characteristically. Although many are lost, yet the assembly is maintained; verse 42 says that the cloud covered the tent of meeting and the glory of Jehovah appeared; the tent of meeting is preserved, and taken over by God in the midst of all this defiance, and the service goes on. Then we read, verse 43, "Moses and Aaron went before the tent of meeting"; there is thus complete recovery of the position.
A.F.M. Do I understand that recovery was made, but under limited conditions on account of what had come in?
J.T. Yes; it was an extraordinary experience. Moses had to take the position of withdrawing in verse 26. Jehovah said, in verse 24, "Speak unto the assembly, saying, Get you up from about the habitation
{145}
of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram", and then it says in verse 25, "And Moses rose up and went to Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed him. And he spoke to the assembly, saying. Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs". That is, he had to request the assembly to depart from the habitation of these persons. Earlier there is the thought of withdrawing from the assembly in verse 21: "Separate yourselves from the midst of this assembly", but in verse 26 it is, "Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men". That humiliating experience had to be gone through, but through the intercession of Moses and Aaron, and through the atonement effected, the assembly was preserved and goes on.
A.F.M. In the first instance it seems that God would destroy the whole assembly. It says in verse 21, "Separate yourselves from the midst of this assembly, and I will consume them in a moment". But the intercession of Moses limits the destruction.
J.T. Yes, the intercession of Moses and Aaron, as already said, effected the change; they say, "shall *one* man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with the whole assembly?" They are thinking of the assembly; then Jehovah spoke to Moses saying, "Speak unto the assembly". First Moses and those with him were to withdraw from the assembly; it is changed, however, through this intercession. Every man that loves God will wish to preserve the assembly, and that is what the thing resulted in; the assembly was preserved.
C.H.H. This passage corresponds with @2 Timothy 2:19 "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity".
J.T. In verse 21 it says, "Separate yourselves from the midst of this assembly, and I will consume them in a moment". Verse 19 of 2 Timothy 2, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", would refer to something collective, what is
{146}
leavened with evil. Then it says, "If therefore one shall have purified himself from these, in separating himself from them" (@2 Timothy 2:21), that is, from vessels to dishonour; there you have *persons* separated from -- vessels to dishonour.
A.F.M. Can you separate the two? I was thinking of what you said in those two passages in @2 Timothy 2, the one referring to evil principles and the other to persons that hold them.
J.T. Yes; I think separating from iniquity would be collective, some evil maintained in that way, whatever it might be. The persons are then alluded to as in "the great house", and it would be what they have done or are doing, involving what they *are* . You have an example in Hymenaeus and Philetus, in what they were *saying*. What a person is, of course, comes out in what he does and says. We discern them by what they do and say.
J.E.H. Would you say that the movement of about one hundred years ago was on the principle of what is suggested in the first scripture?
J.T. Yes; that is, verse 21 says, "Separate yourselves from the midst of this assembly"; then the time came when persons had to be separated from, so that they are *named*: "Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men ... And they got up from the habitation of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side".
A.R. Verses 21 and 41 refer to what is general, the assembly is in view; in verse 26 it is "these wicked men".
J.T. "And the whole assembly of the children of Israel murmured on the morrow against Moses and against Aaron, saying. Ye have killed the people of Jehovah" (verse 41). Their attitude arises from what had happened -- the judgment executed; this is common, alas, when discipline has to be imposed.
{147}
A.N.W. Which of these comes closer to us, practically, here today?
J.T. Well, we need instruction on both sides; what it is to withdraw from a company where iniquity is maintained; and then, withdrawing from persons without leaving the company. I think we need instruction as to how the truth of the assembly is maintained in such circumstances. It is very wonderful to see the grace of Moses and Aaron, how they take things, and serve, so that there is the least possible lost, and the assembly characteristically is preserved.
C.A.M. So that there seems to be the two appeals. The second appeal (verse 26), is final. The sentence was about to be executed, and this warning was given to all on that account.
J.T. I think it is instructive and exemplary, to see how Moses and Aaron meet the wrath; how they fall on their faces and intercede. Then the sentence is changed to men and their habitations, instead of to the whole assembly. In the second instance (verse 41), the whole assembly is said to have murmured against Moses and Aaron. Here Jehovah intervenes and takes charge of the tent of meeting. That helps as to the idea of the assembly as being the vessel of testimony. God takes charge of that by the cloud and protects it with glory; then Jehovah said to Moses, "Get you up from the midst of this assembly, and I will consume them in a moment". The same decision is stated by God again, which Moses and Aaron meet; it says, "they fell on their faces". Then Moses proposed to Aaron to "make atonement for them", by bringing in what is positive; the censer with fire from the altar and incense upon it, referring typically to Christ. Aaron was directed to go with it quickly into the midst of the congregation. The fragrance of Christ thus presented, stays the plague. Aaron "stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed" (verses 46 - 48).
{148}
C.A.M. Was it because of reaction among the people on account of the extreme severity of the judgment, that they murmured?
J.T. Exactly; that is what we have to contend with at the present time; the reaction against those who had to exercise the discipline, because of assumed severity, but here it was God who directly inflicted the judgment. The renewed threat against the assembly (verse 45), is met by the immediate intercession of Moses and Aaron; they fell on their faces, and Moses proposed the censer and the incense, and that Aaron should go into the midst of the congregation. What is needed today is to get the brethren right, by bringing them under the fragrance of Christ brought out by the fire from the altar. *He* had to suffer. You could not have this fire and incense aside from the cross. If we judge sin as God sees it, we shall be slow to speak of severity in regard of judgment exercised on account of evil amongst saints. Nothing could be more severe than the judgment of God at the cross; sin is *lawlessness* -- it is the exercise of will against God's commandments. It is seen in @Matthew 18:15 - 17, particularly in refusing to hear the assembly.
A.F.M. How do you apply the idea of Moses and Aaron falling on their faces?
J.T. I think Moses and Aaron represent the spirit that is needed today in these circumstances. Jesus fell to the earth and prayed as anticipating death in Gethsemane; so that it all comes back to what the cross means; how fragrant as seen there is Christ to God, and how we, too, come into that fragrance! So Aaron stands between the dead and the living; and though a good many are lost, yet the assembly is preserved characteristically.
A.F.M. Would you tell us the difference between the two hundred and fifty copper censers and this one golden censer?
{149}
J.T. The former were used by the two hundred and fifty men, and were taken and used for the covering of the altar as a memorial to the children of Israel, that no one but the true seed of Aaron should offer incense. These broad plates thus became a sign to Israel, that they be not as Korah, and as his band.
J.E.H. Would you mind telling us what this crisis was?
J.T. Well, it arose through Korah, a leading Levite, and Dathan and Abiram, who were sons of Reuben, the *eldest* son of Israel. These sons of Reuben were in the camp, south of the tabernacle, and this section of the Levites served in that locality; all were in a favourable position; thus it was a *party* formed by persons because of their contiguity to one another; this combination of evil is often seen in localities.
A.F.M. It says of Korah in verse 1 that he made bold. Is that not the secret of this whole movement?
J.T. Yes; the mustering of natural courage to attack what is of God. We know it is that which marks Christendom. It is particularly that brazen thing in Rome; persistent in boldness.
G.MacP. Was there not a semblance of truth in what Korah and his company said?
J.T. They say all the Lord's people are holy. Moses on hearing this "fell on his face", and "spoke to Korah and to all his band, saying. Even tomorrow will Jehovah make known who is his, and who is holy" (verse 5). That is a most comforting thought -- what God will do "tomorrow" in such circumstances.
J.T.Jr. We get the position narrowed down to two -- Moses and Aaron, do we not? -- those who are holding the position for God?
J.T. Yes; of course they represent Christ as Apostle and High Priest, but still as men of God they hold the ground; they become most exemplary in the way
{150}
they do it. Their service in preserving the assembly in its entirety at the end is striking, for the attack was immediately directed against them; they were the issue.
J.T.Jr. Do they not also represent the way the truth is held today down here? I thought the position was held by these two men in the camp itself.
J.T. Yes; it is a most stimulating account as to what two men can do, and I think it might be rightly linked on from that point of view with Matthew's gospel, which tells us about two demoniacs who were so bad that nobody could pass that way -- terrible opposition, but "two of you" is over against that -- two of the assembly, and what is needed is done.
A.P. The opposition was in laying claim to the whole assembly in verse 3. "It is enough", they said, "for all the assembly, all of them are holy" (verse 3).
J.T. Yes; the frequency of the word "assembly" throughout the chapter is remarkable. The tabernacle, of course, is typical of the saints, but the word "assembly" is very striking as seen throughout this chapter.
A.F.M. Would not the thought of assembly and congregation compare with what we get in @Exodus 12? I mean, "congregation" is the people as numbered, whereas "assembly" would be the spiritual setting of the congregation.
J.T. That is the meaning J.N.D. gives, and it seems to be borne out. The word "congregation" in @Exodus 12 is a word usually having a *concrete* significance; that is, the actual persons; whereas the other is also persons, only having the force of a moral whole, a corporate person before God, not necessarily including all, but maintaining the thought of what God owns.
C.A.M. As I understand it, the latter idea is what the gates of hell cannot prevail against.
J.T. Yes, as in remnant circumstances. "The virgin-daughter of Zion" despises the enemy, "the
{151}
daughter of Jerusalem" shakes her head at him. It was the word in Hezekiah's day in spite of the weakness (see @Isaiah 37:22).
C.A.M. As I understand, that is, in principle, what is emphasised in this chapter, as the thing to be maintained.
J.T. Quite so; then the tent of meeting (verse 42), more particularly referring to the divine dwelling, and where the saints met with God and one another; the cloud covers and guards that.
C.A.M. The other dwellings -- those of the rebels -- have disappeared. They could not stand in the light of God.
J.T. That is solemn. God maintains His dwelling; in it is His testimony; He protects it with the cloud; God was, as it were, saying, I am taking over all this, whatever the opposition may be; and then the glory appears, which today would mean the manifest presence of God in the assembly convened, in connection with which such an attack takes place.
A.F.M. The door of the tabernacle would be the meeting-place generally. When Jehovah comes down He appears at the door of the tabernacle.
J.T. Quite so; and so He continues to meet with Israel. He met Moses at the mercy-seat within, and the people outside. The tent of *meeting* had both in mind.
A.R. Would the last verse of the chapter confirm what you are saying, that Aaron goes between the dead and the living, and returns to Moses, who was at the entrance of the tent of meeting?
J.T. That is it. The position is maintained; that is a good reference.
J.S. The tent of meeting is really where God is, is it not?
J.T. We want to hold to that; to be in keeping with it. That is what the chapter would teach us, that we should hold things for God in a crisis.
{152}
A.P. It is said that Jehovah would make known who is His and who is holy (verse 5). Does that compare with Corinthians, where Paul speaks of the approved becoming "manifest among you"?
J.T. Yes. "There must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you" (@1 Corinthians 11:19); so that "tomorrow" is a word to be noticed: "tomorrow will Jehovah make known who is his, and who is holy; and he will cause him to come near to him; and him whom he has chosen, him will he cause to come near to him" (verse 5). I think the idea of tomorrow is, you *go through the night* God gives time for reflection, and He works, too. We learn in the book of Job, that God speaks to man in the night, so that he might judge himself in the night; the next day brings out the result.
C.A.M. Well, anyone that did not feel the intense solemnity of this pronouncement that the morrow would declare God's mind would be very brazen.
J.T. I thought that; how would we go to bed? What anxiety would there be as the test is gone through over night. In chapter 17 we have the decision as to Aaron's rod; it was laid up with the other rods over night. God gives decision in these matters, but He gives it in relation to our exercises.
J.S. So that the night season would be spent with God. Is that the thought?
J.T. The Lord Himself in a beautiful way says in @Psalm 16:7, "Even in the nights my reins instruct me", that is, the inward parts instruct you. @Romans 7 is the antecedent to the reins; the Lord did not need @Romans 7, of course, but our inward automatic organs need to be purified, as with the woman at Sychar's well; so that the fountain of water might spring up in her. If I am to be tested by the night, I certainly ought to search myself in the evening, so that I am not governed by any
{153}
bias or any personal feeling, or any natural influence, but that I am wholly transparent before God, and desire to be only for God and what is of God.
A.F.M. So we have to maintain the last verse of @Romans 7, as distinguishing between God's law and sin's law, by being on the side of the Spirit. That is the divine standard by which we should ever abide.
J.T. That is right; so you can see how the woman at Sychar's well would act when she departed from the Lord after the conversation with Him. She left her water-pot, and as she got back to the city she knew what to do, for she was wholly free from natural influence. She went to the men and said, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done" (@John 4:29). Christ was forthwith *the Man* for her.
A.B.P. The end of verse 3 of our chapter suggests that the rights of Jehovah were questioned. It says, "And why do ye lift up yourselves above the congregation of Jehovah?" They had not discerned that God had lifted up Moses and Aaron.
A.P.T. Would verse 11 supplement what our brother remarked? "For which cause thou and all thy band are banded together against Jehovah". It was really against Jehovah. I suppose that was really the position; the opposition is always against the truth.
J.T. I am sure that is right. Moses and Aaron, as has been remarked, were Jehovah's choice, and were taken up in a most remarkable way, according to divine wisdom. They represented God. It was said of Moses that he was to be God to Pharaoh, and Aaron was to be his prophet; so there was complete representation of God there.
C.H.H. Does that not, in principle, correspond with @Acts 4? They were gathered together *against* the Lord and *against* His Christ.
J.T. Well, there it is again. They were *banded* together, as the rebels here were.
{154}
A.F.M. Do you think the thing we are speaking of is emphasised in verse 28: "And Moses said. Hereby shall ye know that Jehovah has sent me to do all these deeds, for they are not out of my own heart"?
J.T. He places himself there in the hands of Jehovah as to what he was to do in the way of judgment -- a most solemn matter, for God will vindicate those who are right, in some way or another; not always in this signal way, but He will do it.
J.T.Jr. In a previous chapter the assembly carries out judgment, but in this chapter *God* does it directly. Will you say a word as to the difference?
J.T. That is, in the case of the man gathering sticks on the sabbath, which is like @1 Corinthians 5. It is a most remarkable contrast. These two chapters helped us greatly in a crisis about seventeen years ago. @Numbers 15 corresponds with @1 Corinthians 5:13, where direction is given that a wicked person is to be "put away from among yourselves", whereas chapter 16 is more 2 Timothy. Both chapters hold; they are Scripture, and are divine light for us. Only it is a question of comeliness now in having to separate from persons, not only individuals doing it, but the whole assembly doing it, and God deals with them. We do not put away or deliver them to Satan; we withdraw from them. God judges them, but in doing so He vindicates those that stand for the right; we may always expect Him to do this.
A.F.M. The point in 2 Timothy is to get right oneself; it is an individual thing. I was thinking about authority as seen in Moses entering into all that he did in our chapter. Those who submitted to Moses bowed to the Lord's authority. That was delegated to him, he did not need to make bold; he stood there with the conscious support of Jehovah.
J.T. Moses fell on his face; representing those who feel and acknowledge the current evil, but the others
{155}
stood with no acknowledgment at all. That was the cause of the judgment being executed.
A.N.W. Perhaps, then, there is a blending of @1 Corinthians 5, @2 Timothy 2, and @Matthew 18, divine authority entering into all.
J.T. I think there is. We want to see that we are in remnant times, and that we cannot speak in the full way, as they could earlier, of the assembly doing things, because we do not have the assembly in that complete sense, and so should move in comeliness. I believe the Spirit of God has provided scriptures for us to help us to act in remnant times, in dealing with evil. We should rather avoid the use of the word "assembly"; it being perhaps a little pretentious to say. The assembly is doing this, or This is an assembly action. There is no such thing, properly, today, as an "assembly action", because we have no assembly in that sense, but there is such a thing as an action that may be in principle the same thing, and God recognises it. We avoid the use of the word as the Scripture does; so in @Matthew 18:19, the Lord says, "Again I say to you". He had already spoken about the assembly and its authority, but now He says, "Again I say to you", as if He is contemplating another, a remnant state of things; "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens" (@Matthew 18:19). Now that little word 'you' is intelligible to a spiritual person. He understands that the Lord is accrediting those two with being *of the assembly*, without mentioning it; and then again, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name" (@Matthew 18:20), that is a very unpretentious thing, but we *must* recognise the Name, the name of the Lord Jesus, or we are not Christians at all. There is no ecclesiastical assumption in that, but yet the Lord says, I am with you; I am there in the midst of *them*. The personal pronouns are most interesting, and so the power proper to the
{156}
assembly is there. We can understand that the power is there and what is done is according to the assembly. Heaven understands it, but for the sake of seemliness and humility, we avoid official terms. We are not the assembly, but still the personal pronoun identifies us with it. It is a question of spiritual understanding and humility.
J.S. Is it the result of prayer?
J.T. I think so. It is very comely, and always right to ask God to act for us. No matter what is against those of the assembly, this united prayer will bring in deliverance.
C.A.M. Asking seemed to bring in the very spirit here that was so wonderful.
J.T. I think it enters into Moses and Aaron falling on their faces. Then we come to 2 Timothy, where we have the firm foundation of God. There is no pretension in speaking of God's foundation. It does not say. The firm foundation of the assembly. That is implied, but God brings in the moral thought. If we do not bring God in, we are not acting as Christians. "The firm foundation of God stands, having this seal,(@2 Timothy 2:19)" it says; that is, the foundation has the seal, which is, "The Lord knows those that are his; and. Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity",(@2 Timothy 2:19) which means that we are owned of the Lord as in remnant times.
A.F.M. Would there be a distinction between Matthew and John? The local assembly in @1 Corinthians 5 was to remove the wicked person from amongst themselves. Those that did so would answer more to Matthew when the assembly was intact; the withdrawing of today would be more like John. We do not get official names in John's gospel at all, but you have the thing itself.
J.T. That helps greatly. John's gospel avoids anything that would give us official status, and yet it
{157}
makes plain that the things are there. We know that all that enters into the assembly remains here, since the Spirit remains here.
A.P. In connection with the character of a meeting for discipline, would it be right to say at the beginning of the meeting, 'We are together in assembly character'?
J.T. Yes; provided the announcement is thus carefully worded; so that people do not get the impression that we are the assembly or assume the position of being the assembly; and yet we may *know* that God is with us.
A.N.W. What about the authority of @Mark 13:34? That was vested in the bondmen; the Lord gave to the bondmen the authority.
J.T. I think that is a moral thought connected with the servant's responsibility, as also the bondmen in the introduction to the book of Revelation. The book is on that level: "To shew to his bondmen" (@Revelation 1:1). I think that may be rightly taken up. 'Bondman' is not an official word; it conveys a lowly thought. The principle of obedience is involved in it, which affords the qualification to have the authority. He gave them the authority; that is, the *whole* of it. The whole thought now is linked up with obedience -- subjection to Christ.
C.H.H. I thought the idea of authority also comes to light in 2 Timothy.
J.T. There is a mandate in the foundation in that epistle: "having this seal", that is, the foundation has it. And the idea of the seal, I think, is mandatory. The Lord knows them that are His, but we admit that we are in remnant days, so that our responsibility is to withdraw from iniquity; then in regard to dishonourable persons, we are told how to purify ourselves from them, that is, by separating from them; then what we do *positively* is to pursue righteousness, that is the leader, and then faith, love, and peace with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart.
{158}
J.E.H. How would you know the "two of you" that were of the assembly? What features would you look for in them to convince you that the Lord was with them?
J.T. In the gospels we see what marked the disciples, and how they stood out in the testimony in the beginning of the Acts. Such features are to be found among the people of God today. The one hundred and twenty of @Acts 1:15 would be good models for us.
A.R. They would regard the authority and the priesthood of Christ?
C.A.M. In connection with our brother's inquiry as to how those of the assembly are known, what you said earlier should help; that the two in @Matthew 18:19 were, as it were, set over against the two demoniacs of chapter 8:28, where we have a combination of what is *against* God.
J.T. Quite so. Matthew has in mind to furnish material for the assembly, in that sense; so that chapter 18 begins with a little child. The personnel of the assembly is set out in chapter 17. We have the foundation material in chapter 16, but the personnel of the assembly is set out in the heavenly scene on the mount, then later in chapter 17, sonship is attributed to the disciples. In chapter 18 they say, "Who then is greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?" (@Matthew 18:1) They were saying this, which of course does not characterise those of the assembly. When it is a question of the assembly, the Lord calls a little child to Him; such a one would be amenable to the Lord's call. And He "set it in their midst" (@Matthew 18:2). That is important; indeed, I think, the whole chapter is to bring out what the child represents -- what "two of you" are characteristically.
C.A.M. It would seem that as soon as the Lord has brought into view these glorious things, Satan makes an effort to spoil it: he does it in chapter 16
{159}
and at the end of chapter 17. The Lord had just spoken about the liberty of sonship, when Satan makes an effort to foster rivalry.
J.T. That is right; the *dignity* of sons, I think, is seen on the mount in chapter 17; the *relation* of sonship, when they come down from the mount. The sons are free, the Lord says: we are in liberty inwardly, as before God, but then how do I deport myself among the brethren? The Lord takes the little child and sets him among the disciples. He is there for everyone to see. The Lord says, "Unless ye are converted and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens" (@Matthew 18:3). We learn thus something of the meaning of "two of you". The greater I am inwardly according to chapter 17, the smaller I can be outwardly.
T.E.H. Would this connect with the beginning of Matthew's gospel: Joseph was commanded to take the little Child and its mother? Should that mark the period we are in?
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. In @Acts 3, you have Peter and John going up to the temple to pray.
J.T. They certainly represent "two of you"; perhaps in a greater sense than that of which we are speaking, because they were apostles, but they call attention to "us"; Peter said, "Look on us", doubtless because of what they were.
A.P. I was wondering, since Paul brought out the truth of the assembly, whether Timothy and Titus might not represent "two of you" in a day like ours; for instance, he could speak of Timothy as being "like-minded", as caring for the saints, and Titus brought an encouraging report about the Corinthian saints.
J.T. I think the comparison and use of the numerals two and three in the Scriptures are most interesting. The Lord brings the number down to two, and John brings it down to one. John shows how one person
{160}
qualified becomes an abiding place for divine Persons; two is Matthew's number; his instruction shows the workableness of the Lord's thought even with two or three.
J.S. We see how heaven would act for the two: "It shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens", (@Matthew 18:19).
J.T. It comes by something happening in the locality, in response to the prayers of those taking account of things; feeling as to them, and waiting upon God about a low state among the saints. God has His way of coming in, and He will give such to understand that in coming in He is answering *their prayers* . I am sure you and I have seen that in this city, how God comes in at a difficult time, and gives us to understand that He has heard us.
J.E.H. It proves that the heavens do rule.
A.B.P. I was wondering why you emphasised the thought of *calling* the little child.
J.T. I thought of it as indicative of the humble state of one as available for the Lord, who knew him beforehand. Of course. He knows all about each of us. I believe in the history of the testimony that is to be seen over and over again. The most unlikely person is called and set down, as it were, in the midst of the brethren at a juncture.
A.P.M. What have you to say about the climax here? We have already referred to it in part, that Aaron stood between the dead and the living, and the plague was stayed; then after enumerating the dead, it goes on to say that Aaron returned to Moses to the entrance of the tent of meeting, and the plague was stayed.
J.T. You have these two representative men together at the entrance of the place of meeting. I think it is most suggestive that the end reached in al this is that the service of God goes on. The tabernacle of God is secured. God's wrath is appeased through the
{161}
atonement, and now Moses and Aaron are at the tent of meeting, which means that the service is to go on. The brethren, too, can meet together.
J.T.Jr. It says that Aaron took the censer and ran; the thing is done quickly. Do you think that feature comes out in Mark's gospel? Mark tells us that things are done immediately?
J.T. Yes. Haste is certainly important in these circumstances; we are not to delay, because the matter is most urgent. It is very remarkable that the running is by Aaron; no doubt to bring out the sympathy side on the part of the man who serves, because you cannot afford to lose a brother or a sister. The plague had started; people may be floundering about and hiding behind their ignorance, and thus be lost in darkness, but the true priest would do what he could to save all. It is solemn because the judicial acts of God enter into all this.
A.F.M. You make reference to darkness, what is in your mind?
J.T. People by disregarding right principles through bias on account of persons they like or dislike may thus become dark, ceasing to have part in what is living. It says that Aaron stood between the dead and living and the plague was stayed, although fourteen thousand seven hundred were lost. I think it is to be solemnly noted that there were so many lost, in spite of the efforts to save all.
A.P. If Aaron had not run, there might have been three or four times as many die of the plague.
J.T. Yes, and we ought to be on our guard in such circumstances to see all things clearly because *they may be thus seen* . Righteousness is our leader, and where it exists it may always be seen -- thus to fail to see it is either negligence or wilfulness on our part.
A.F.M. When things are plain, above-board, and clear, why do I not see?
{162}
J.T. Quite so; others see it, why cannot I? God may allow darkness, or even send it, because of a previous course. Here in spite of all the efforts put forth, and it is most remarkable the way Moses and Aaron acted in this terrible crisis, there were fourteen thousand lost.
T.W. Why is it that the whole assembly said of Moses and Aaron, "Ye have killed the people of Jehovah" (verse 41)?
J.T. It illustrates how quick we are to blame unfairly those who have to exercise discipline. 'You have been too severe', people say; whereas what was done was right, and *I ought to know it*.
A.P.T. In @Galatians 2 in connection with the matter of circumcision it says Peter separated himself; he knew the truth, but acted contrary to it. There was no excuse for him in what he did.
J.T. Exactly, and Barnabas was carried away too.
Rem. When Paul would correct such conduct, he says, "So I have become your enemy in speaking the truth to you?". (Galatians 4:16). I suppose Moses and Aaron were really regarded as enemies of the people because of what took place here.
J.T. When in truth they were serving the testimony and the people with might and main. It is very beautiful to see how they fell on their faces, and how Aaron *ran* to save the people, and stayed the plague.
J.S. His haste was to bring in that which spoke of the fragrance of Christ, on account of which the plague was stayed. I suppose we help one another by bringing Christ in.
J.T. We have "atonement" here, through the holy fragrance thus brought out, which speaks of Christ as entering into death to appease God, as dealing with a condition utterly intolerable to Him. The incense on the fire from off the altar placed in the censer denoted this. All is fragrant, so the plague is stayed; God was appeased in that most significant way.
{163}
W.B-w. At Galatia, there was another plague introduced by the judaisers. Paul said, "Far be it from me to boast save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ", (@Galatians 6:14). Paul uses the censer with incense on the fire there.
J.T. I think so. You feel how Christ seen thus is needed under these circumstances when there is a bad odour. The fleshly feelings of the people in @Numbers 16 prevailed; evil personal feelings arose; there must have been awful feelings among the people in this uprising. There were probably two millions there. What bitter remarks would be heard as one went around the tents! 'Think of what Moses has done! He slew all these people. I knew many of them, they were godly men', and so on. Of course, they were princes whom Moses used to summon to the council, but what were they doing when the judgment fell? They were banded together against God, against His servants and the testimony. The incense that Aaron brought in among the people was fragrant. This overcame the noisome odour that had permeated the camp, and God was appeased; thus Israel could go on, having God with them, and the plague was stayed.
A.P.T. Moses could not prevent the ground from opening its mouth; he was unable to do anything there. That judgment was determined of God, and it must go through; Moses could but acquiesce in what Jehovah did.
J.T. Quite; that is the thought; although some blamed Moses and Aaron for it.
A.P.T. The judgment determined was executed by God, but there was help for those who murmured.
J.T. Yes; "The whole assembly of the children of Israel murmured on the morrow against Moses and against Aaron, saying. Ye have killed the people of Jehovah" (verse 41). They would make them guilty of murder, charging them with killing the people of Jehovah. How extremely unfair! It was *God* who did it.
{164}
But I think, over against this, it is beautiful to see how Aaron and Moses meet the situation; the result is that the plague was stayed and the people saved; and they are at their appointed places at the tent of meeting, so that the service of God continues.
A.N.W. Jehovah's presence was manifestly there.
A.R. The authority of Christ would be seen in Moses remaining before the tent of meeting, and in Aaron returning to it; hence the priesthood is also preserved and active.
J.T. Quite so; nothing is lost in that sense.
J.S. The confirmation of what is right, I suppose, is in seeing where the glory rests, in any of these issues. It says in verse 42 that "they looked toward the tent of meeting, and behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of Jehovah appeared".
J.T. I think that is a very beautiful picture; Jehovah covers the tabernacle, as much as to say. This is mine. "Make me a sanctuary" (@Exodus 25:8). He had said, and then His glory appears there, too. Who can dispute that He is there?
C.A.M. I think that if every one of us would keep our eye on the presence of God, we would be helped, and be preserved from distraction. We must recognise His presence.
A.F.M. What would you say about the choice of Aaron's staff, as coming in on the principle of life out of death?
J.T. There we have another night of exercise; the priesthood is now set up in a *living* way. Who could dispute Aaron's priesthood after this? Truly, that is the test today; where life is, that is where priesthood is!
A.R. In the cloud covering the tabernacle, does that infer that God will protect the position?
J.T. I think so. He takes on the securing of it. The glory appearing is a witness of His presence, as supporting those who are standing by His rights.
{165}
THE AUTHORITY OF CHRIST IN THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@Exodus 32:26 - 29 @Numbers 3:5 - 16
J.T. It is thought that this subject, the Levites, may be divided in the two readings before us: the two scriptures read for consideration this afternoon, and in the evening a scripture in @Numbers 8 and one in @Deuteronomy 33. We should direct our attention to the facts recorded in @Exodus 32, where the Levites are seen as qualifying for their great service by taking the Lord's side in a crisis; this event evidently occurred before the one recorded in Numbers, and reminds us that levitical service hinges on faithfulness to the Lord. The apostle Paul speaks about being counted faithful and so appointed to ministry (@1 Timothy 1:12), and these four verses in @Exodus 32 show that the Levites came out in an unqualified way to the Lord's side in a crisis.
This chapter records the making of the calf and the mixture of good and evil; even after the position was clear and Jehovah came in, a mixture still remained, for the tabernacle was pitched outside the camp, and certain ones went out; that is, those that sought the Lord. Others remained in their tents, so that this section would teach us the importance of whole-heartedness in a crisis, to avoid mixed feelings, and above all, to avoid latitudinarian thoughts or a compromise between the truth and error. That is what was begun at Bethesda, a sort of straggle; there is always the tendency to put truth and error on the same plane, or perhaps to call good, evil, or evil, good. So I thought it would be wholesome to look at this incident as showing whole-heartedness and loyalty to God and to Christ; encouraging us to be on His side, and not on any other.
J.E.H. The challenge is, "He that is for Jehovah, let him come to me". It is a question of being for Jehovah.
{166}
A.P.M. You referred to the mixture of good and evil, as illustrated in what Aaron said: "Tomorrow is a feast to Jehovah!" (@Exodus 32:5) -- mixing up idolatry with the worship of Jehovah.
J.T. That is what I was thinking, the tendency to level good and evil.
A.N.W. Moses took his stand by the gate of the camp. Was that position designed?
J.T. Yes; it says he stood in the gate of the camp, as if it were the crucial position.
C.A.M. I was struck with that in reading it. The gate seems to be emphasised.
J.T. It is the public position that is in mind.
W.B-w. Why do you think it is the sons of Levi only that gathered to him?
J.T. It serves to bring out what we have in mind, that they qualified for the subsequent great calling and privilege of service, as proving themselves true at this critical time.
C.A.M. That gives a great emphasis to the numbering. I was struck with what you said about this preceding the calling, or numbering. When God numbers, there is some moral reason for it.
J.T. Yes. This evidently preceded the numbering of the Levites to take the place of the first-born in Israel; that is, they were elevated into a great position -- not simply because they are the sons of Levi, but because they had qualified morally.
A.P. Would you say more as to Aaron's position at the beginning of the chapter?
J.T. Well, he evidently is weak. It says, "When the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the mountain, the people collected together to Aaron, and said to him. Up, make us a god, who will go before us; for this Moses, the man that has brought us up out of the land of Egypt, -- we do not know what is become of him! And Aaron said to them. Break off the golden rings that are in the ears of your wives, of your sons,
{167}
and of your daughters, and bring them to me" (@Exodus 32:1,2). He, I suppose, represents one in responsibility prominently, and yet allowing himself to be drawn into the evil. It was not his own thought; he was brought into it. He tells Moses afterwards, "And they said to me, Make us a god, ... And I said to them. Who has gold? They broke it off, and gave it me, and I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf" (@Exodus 32:23 - 25). That is how he accounts for it.
A.P. Is the last reference to Aaron here an excuse, or how do you regard it?
J.T. He tries to reduce his own responsibility in the thing to a minimum, and puts the burden of it on the people. I think Aaron is the key to the mixed condition that existed, for, as the narrative goes on in chapter 33, it will be noted that Moses took the tent and pitched it outside the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it the Tent of meeting. "And it came to pass that every one who sought Jehovah went out to the tent of meeting which was outside the camp. And it came to pass, when Moses went out to the tent, all the people rose up, and stood every man at the entrance of his tent, and they looked after Moses until he entered into the tent" (@Exodus 33:7 - 9). They stood, each at the entrance of his tent. They were not against him exactly; they looked after him, as if interested, but they did not go out; that is, it is a half-hearted position. Those that *sought* the Lord *went out* to the tent of meeting.
A.P.T. Is Peter in a like situation in regard to circumcision at Antioch?
J.T. I think there is a correspondence there. He was amenable to influence, and when "certain came from James ... he drew back and separated himself" (@Galatians 2:12). He thus denied the truth -- for the time, at least.
A.N.W. What is the significance of the priesthood being allowed to fail, while the apostle becomes the rallying point? Moses says. Come to me. What is the point in that?
{168}
J.T. Well, of course, Moses was representative more of Jehovah. Aaron had not been called up to the point of "the mountain of God", to receive "the tables of stone, and the law, and the commandment" (@Exodus 24:12). Aaron, in this connection is *not* to be regarded as typical of Christ. He with Hur was left with the people while Moses was on high. It was provisional in the absence of the mediator, and Aaron proved unequal to his responsibility. Thus he cannot be viewed here as representing the priesthood, as associated with the apostleship of Christ. There is no discrepancy in the apostleship and the high priesthood in Christ. You have to take them here severally: Moses, representing the authority of God, being called to the supreme point on high, and being there forty days and forty nights without eating or drinking. Aaron was below with the people. They are not seen as acting together, for the people said they did not know what had become of Moses. It is like Christ, gone into heaven; and Aaron is the responsible element down here with the people.
E.E.H. How do you account for the fact that Aaron did not come under the judgment although he actually made the calf?
J.T. I suppose there is discrimination in his favour, for he really was brought into the evil. It was not a movement like Korah's, which had a leader; he being the chief instigator of the movement.
A.F.M. In that relation Hur would rightly stand with Aaron as supporting him. In chapter 24, as Moses and Joshua went up to the mountain of God, he said to the elders, "Wait here for us, until we return to you; and behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matter, let him come before them" (@Exodus 24:14).
J.T. Hur is not mentioned here at all. It is significant, for authorities say his name means *purity*. Evidently he was not brought into this evil matter, possibly was not consulted. It is, I think, the explanation in
{169}
part of the mixed state of things, that Aaron was amenable to the influence of others. He was drawn into the thing.
A.P. Would he give reputation to the wrong movement on account of who he was?
J.T. Quite so, and ostensibly had the right to make a proclamation; it says, "And Aaron saw it, and built an altar before it; and Aaron made a proclamation, and said, Tomorrow is a feast to Jehovah" (@Exodus 32:5). He did not proclaim the feast until he saw the idol, which is sorrowful. Instead of recoiling from his product, he proclaimed a feast to it, after he saw it, so that he was committed in that way, and the more responsible.
A.F.M. There is design, too, in the fashioning of this calf; he employed a chisel. But in the account of things to Moses, he says, "There came out this calf" (@Exodus 32:24), as excusing the thing, would you say?
J.T. Yes, it says he "fashioned it with a chisel and made of it a molten calf: and they said. This is thy god, Israel, who has brought thee up out of the land of Egypt!" (@Exodus 32:4) That is what *they* said; the people had wanted it, but Aaron saw it and built an altar before it, and Aaron made the proclamation and said, "Tomorrow is a feast to Jehovah!" (@Exodus 32:5). That is, I think, he is holding them back from idolatry in linking it up with Jehovah; it was a go-between. I suppose the instigators of the thing would go the whole way, because they wanted idolatry; indeed, the prophets say that this is the beginning of the idolatrous history of things, and that God would transport them beyond Babylon; but it would seem as if Aaron was holding them back and connecting the wickedness with Jehovah.
C.A.M. That seems to account for his way of speaking about it. It was a kind of muddled way he had of looking at the whole thing.
J.T. That is always the case where we are not out and out for the Lord. Our minds are dark and confused until we take a definite stand for the truth.
{170}
R.W.S. Joshua does not miss his way, but he seems to miss the issue in this crisis. What does he represent?
J.T. Well, also a mixed state of mind. He calls it the noise of war; he had bad hearing. That is, it is putting in the thought of war instead of mirth: they "sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play" (@Exodus 32:6). It was idolatry, and marked by this sort of thing, which is all around us now in the religious systems, connecting it with Jehovah, but giving way to natural mirth, which is idolatry. Joshua did not discern that it was the noise of that; Moses discerned it at once.
A.P.M. Although Aaron was foremost in making the idol, he is not cut off, as many were at that time; yet he was not immune from God's displeasure. It says in Deuteronomy, that Jehovah was very angry to destroy him. It is a serious thing to come under the displeasure of God.
A.C. Does not Aaron's position show us what is liable to occur in the most spiritual, at an unguarded moment if not near the Lord?
J.T. That is the lesson to be learned. We allow ourselves to be brought into evil, and then attach what good we can to it, to make it less wicked than it is. Aaron in connecting the calf with the name of Jehovah sought to modify the wickedness.
A.P. Would Aaron be a nominal leader, but really one led by the people? May that not be a tendency with us, to be led by popular opinion, rather than leading in accord with the thoughts of God?
J.T. Quite so.
A.R. What was lacking? Was it the absence of the authority of Christ? The priesthood was there, as seen in Aaron.
J.T. I think that was the fact; Moses was not there. Of course, it may be applied now; it is the state of Christendom in the absence of Christ. We have all this fallacy of truth mixed with error around us. It was typically an admixture of idolatry and Christianity;
{171}
the leaders, particularly, the Episcopalians, and Presbyterians, and others do not wish to go the whole road to Rome, but the mixture in doctrine and the unrestrained worldliness make them idolatrous; it is all because the Lord is not here. As soon as you make room for Him, you have recovery; so that Moses in coming down represents the drastic character of the Lord's intervention. It says, "And he took the calf that they had made, and burned it with fire, and ground it to powder, and strewed it on the water, and made the children of Israel drink it" (@Exodus 32:20). That is the first thing he does as to it: the complete demolition of the idol, and the people made to drink the water on which was strewed the powder of the idol. He makes them do it; showing the moral power he had: over against Aaron who had no power at all to stand against them.
A.F.M. What is the idea of the drinking of this water?
J.T. Well, it would bring it home to them. You have the thought elsewhere of water being drunk judicially; and we have also "the little book" (@Revelation 10), eaten. This water mixed with powder of the burnt idol going into the intestines, would mean the whole being absorbed it, so to speak, so that one would realise what one has done. You may not be affected really by something said to you about a matter, but in the drinking it is brought home to you in this palpable way.
J.S. Moses would make them taste the bitterness of the thing.
J.T. Quite so. That was what it really was. The Lord is asserting His authority even in Christendom today, bringing the current idolatrous conditions home to the consciences of some.
J.T.Jr. Would it be like, "Those that sin convict before all" (@1 Timothy 5:20), to bring home to the conscience the truth of the matter?
{172}
J.T. That illustrates how it works out. There is no resistance to Moses here; as he comes in, evil goes down before him. It is a question of letting the Lord have His way, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", (@2 Timothy 2:19). We want the Lord to have His way, thus there is power to deal with sin. He then says to Aaron, "What has this people done to thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin on them?" (@Exodus 32:21). Moses puts the responsibility of making the calf largely on Aaron, "And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord burn!" (@Exodus 32:22). It is remarkable that he should call Moses "lord" here, for the first time, I think. He was three years his senior, so that he must have felt the power of God vested in His servant at this time. He says, "Let not the anger of my lord burn! thou knowest the people, that they are set on mischief. And they said to me, Make us a god, who will go before us; for this Moses, the man that has brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what is become of him! And I said to them, Who has gold? They broke it off, and gave it to me, and I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf" (@Exodus 32:22 - 24). Well, that is not the *whole* truth.
J.S. Moses¬ attitude would show how displeased Jehovah was by the presence of the calf.
J.T. Yes; when Aaron saw it, he built an altar to it. As if to say, 'This is going too far, and we must retrench'. He built an altar, and proclaimed a feast to Jehovah; he was by this means toning down the sin. Aaron had been damaged and was terribly wrong; now he drops down to prevarication.
A.P.M. Do you think that is where a lot of trouble occurs, not only in Christendom, but amongst us, that only part of the truth is told? Is there not a lot of mischief done because of that? We want the whole truth.
J.S. Aaron was damaged and the mediator was displeased. How serious that was!
{173}
J.T. Yes, quite; so that Aaron drops out of view for a while here. He is out of view during the recovery all is linked with Moses. Aaron is not mentioned again until Moses returns from the mountain, when his face shone, and then he is afraid to come near the mediator. He is called "the Levite" earlier, this evidently being characteristic, but he is not in that capacity at all here, and that brings out the point in the verses we read, that faithfulness of the true Levites is over against Aaron's weakness, vacillation, and prevarication, because he is not declaring the thing as it is. He is hiding himself as much as possible from the responsibility for the sin he committed, but Moses holds him to it, because he said to Aaron, "What has this people done to thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin on them?" (@Exodus 32:21). He puts the onus of it on Aaron; *he* had brought the sin on the people -- although they, as we have seen, brought him into it.
Ques. Why did Aaron leave out that part about the chiselling?
J.T. He did not tell the *whole* truth. Job says, "Hast thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?" @Job 26:3.
G.MacP. Moses knew the truth before; it was told him by Jehovah.
J.T. Quite so. It is in verses 7 and 8 that the people's part in this wickedness of making the calf is stressed.
A.B.P. It says that Moses saw that the people were stripped; the footnote says, "unbridled". Does that suggest that they were not under control?
J.T. It was the shameless idolatrous state they were in. It looks as if Aaron helped them to complete their moral degradation!
J.T.Jr. Moses did not allow his natural relationship to interfere with his judgment of Aaron, did he?
{174}
J.T. He did not. Natural relationships were ignored in the striking loyalty to the rights of God which was manifest in Moses and the Levites. It was a question of the *Lord* and who was for *Him* . When Moses demands as to who is for the Lord, all the sons of Levi gathered to him. That it should be said "all" is remarkable, because a great many Levites must have been slain, so it must be the Spirit's way of giving the facts -- that the full thought of Levi in the crisis comes to light here.
A.P.M. Towards the end of Numbers, we see Phinehas going forward with the zeal and jealousy of Jehovah, on his own initiative, but here the sons of Levi come forward as subject to Moses¬ demand. Is there not something to be noted in that?
J.T. Well, it is a very fine passage in the sense of exhibiting loyalty. "All the sons of Levi gathered to him" (verse 26). You would be distressed to find yourself outside of that company.
N.McC. You made a remark earlier that Aaron was drawn into the idolatrous thing in which he was half-hearted; then he makes excuses. All that was despicable to those standing for God, was it not?
J.T. It was. You see how very weak his position was here. He was self-condemned really. If he had plentifully declared the thing as it was, he would have come out commendably. You have respect for a man that tells the whole truth, although it condemns himself. He says nothing about the chisel, nor about making the altar, nor of the proclamation. He puts the whole blame on the people; whereas Moses puts it on him, for, in truth, he was responsible. If he had stood out against the evil at the outset, God would have supported him, and it is likely there would have been no idolatry.
A.C. Do you not think that the faithfulness of Moses to his brother in this crisis laid the basis for further movements on his part in faithfulness to God?
J.T. Yes; he was faithful in all God's house. At no point in Moses¬ history does he shine, in this respect,
{175}
more than here. It is striking to see the power in which he acted in grinding the calf to powder and strewing it on the water and making the people to drink it, and then standing at the gate and calling upon those who were for Jehovah to come to him, and in all that followed, including the pitching of the tent outside the camp, he stands out triumphantly on moral ground, as a man of faithfulness and courage.
A.R. Is there not significance in the fact that the sons of Levi gathered to Moses first before he tells them to do anything? I was wondering whether it suggests the idea of coming under his influence first.
J.T. I think that is right. In a service so momentous, involving the loss of the saints, we need to be with the Lord, to be influenced and guided by Him.
W.B-w. Aaron being damaged, as you have been saying, how was he recovered?
J.T. It is an important question. We do not get the process of Aaron's recovery. It is said in Deuteronomy, as remarked already, that the Lord sought to slay him. He was in a very serious position. According to @Deuteronomy 9 Moses prayed for Aaron and thus evidently saved him from destruction. And we may be sure that Aaron went through much soul history with God in this matter at that time. He was a man capable of that. Undoubtedly he went through what was needed with God in order to be reinstated in His service.
A.P. Is there a danger of idolatry in connection with any issues that might arise amongst us, and how would it work out?
J.T. While no one seems to be against Moses as he returned, yet there was a mixed state of things in the camp. Some of them take the Lord's side, and the judgment is executed, Moses goes the whole road in placing the tent outside the camp, and those that sought the Lord went out to it; others looked after Moses from their tent doors, as much as to say, 'We have
{176}
respect for him, but we will not go the whole way'. You can understand that they would whisper and say that Moses was too extreme, too exacting; but those that sought the Lord went out to the tent of meeting.
J.E.H. They refrained from speaking disparagingly about him when he was with them, but when he was away they slightingly spoke of him as "this Moses"; then again, when he was with them they were silent and dare not do aught but respect him.
J.T. You will notice that he does not make himself the centre; he took the tent and pitched it outside the camp, far from the camp, and called it the Tent of meeting. He also stood in the gate, and said, "He that is for Jehovah, let him come to me", which would show that he represented divine authority; but in chapter 33 he makes the tent the centre, meaning that the tent was the divine thought, as the place where Jehovah *could* be. He pitched the tent outside the camp. It was an action of intelligence, for the tabernacle had already been spoken of. This act of Moses is alluded to in @Hebrews 13. As it was divinely owned then, so it is owned today. As having gone outside the camp to Christ, bearing His reproach, He is known amongst us.
A.F.M. There is evidently a succession of steps in this movement. Firstly, Moses addresses Aaron as to his part in relation to the calf; then he challenges those for Jehovah to come to him; following that the drastic movement takes place, of three thousand people being slain; and then the tent of meeting is pitched outside the camp. Is that the order of events?
J.T. That is right. It is a new start. The truth is now asserted in the position of the tent *outside* . The tent represents the divinely accepted place of meeting.
A.P. Does verse 11 of chapter 33 confirm that, for though Moses leaves the tent to go to the camp, Joshua stays there?
{177}
J.T. Yes. Joshua represents the appreciative spiritual element in the new position -- that outside the camp.
A.R. And you get the divine presence here now, do you not? The pillar of cloud descends, and stands at the entrance of the tent; that is, you get divine committal to it.
J.T. Yes. "And it came to pass, when Moses went out to the tent, all the people rose up, and stood every man at the entrance of the tent, and they looked after Moses until he entered into the tent. And it came to pass when Moses entered into the tent, the pillar of cloud descended, and stood at the entrance of the tent, and Jehovah talked with Moses" (@Exodus 33:8,9). Now the position taken up in faithfulness is consolidated and fixed by the divine glory. I think that is how the truth is re-set.
W.B-w. It is significant that in chapter 32 all the sons of Levi gathered themselves to Moses, but there is no word about the tent.
J.T. Well, would that not be our coming under the Lord? "Go forth to him without the camp" (@Hebrews 13:13) -- coming under the Lord, standing as in the gate, is a military position. He does not go outside yet; but when the tent is pitched outside, we go forth to Him bearing His reproach. But what happened militarily is actually inside the camp, and "come unto me" would mean that one leaves the domination of others and takes his place under Christ. They did not begin to use the sword, you will observe, until they went to Moses. "He said to them. Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Put every man his sword upon his hip; go ... and slay every man his brother, and every man his friend ..." (verse 27). The sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses; they do not act until he directs them. An believer today, in idolatrous association is to take his place under the direction of the Lord, and then consecrate
{178}
himself "with his son, and with his brother", which really means separating from evil.
J.T.Jr. The sword is connected with that; it is to be on the hip. Would the sword be the word of God in that connection?
J.T. Quite so, and there is a blessing attached to the action (verse 29). The place of meeting is another thing; that is not the military. It is what the word signifies. It is where we meet the Lord and one another. The military matter here is in the camp, where you have to do violence to other people and to yourself.
A.N.W. Would chapter 32 of Exodus fit in with the first letter to the Corinthians, and chapter 33 with the second letter?
J.T. Quite so, and chapter 34, too. The first epistle to the Corinthians is really the sword, the word of God in that sense for slaying the evil, as it were, but the second epistle is chiefly the new covenant relation. The call in Christendom is to the Lord -- Who is on the Lord's side? And as soon as one takes up fidelity to the Lord there must be violence. He will be able to leave his nearest and dearest if necessary and consecrate himself in that way. One says to his father and mother, "I see him not" (@Deuteronomy 33:9). That is the principle, that you do violence to natural feelings, and even to mere religious feelings. But chapter 33 is a question of our meeting together in peace, and where God comes in and speak with us, and the glory descends, so that the whole matter is settled. That is what happened about one hundred years ago; the position was confirmed, and has been preserved by God ever since.
J.S. It would show the conditions in which God can be with us as outside of the idolatrous camp.
J.T. That is right. The violence is in the camp and you come under great reproach for that violence, but the peaceful meeting outside by those who fear the Lord is in chapter 33, at the tent of meeting.
{179}
C.A.M. The military action is emphasised, but it always has an objective. The Levites would never acquire this setting in their normal service, would they?
J.T. No; so that I believe we may call the scripture in @Exodus 32 our *qualification* for levitical service. Through faithfulness you are worthy of notice in view of being employed in the service of God. You may have all the education the seminaries of Christendom can give you, and yet may not be qualified to be numbered among the servants of God. The initial qualification is this act of violence in the camp.
Then the next thing is the *acceptance* of the Levites by Jehovah. That is our next passage -- in @Numbers 3; as much as to say that He approved of them; they had qualified, and now He takes them on -- He says "instead of". "And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying. Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him; and they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole assembly, before the tent of meeting, to do the service of the tabernacle" (verse 5 - 7). You have the tabernacle or tent of meeting in @Exodus 33, and now these men have qualified themselves, and He is taking them on as servants instead of the firstborn in Israel.
C.A.M. They were really going to be a most peaceful people!
J.T. Exactly; they were not military people properly. Jehovah says, "Bring the tribe of Levi near".
A.P.T. Levi's name means "joined", does it not? Whereas this dealing with evil is the antithesis to that.
J.T. That is, you *disjoin* yourself, you dissociate yourself from what is evil. And now you are joined with Aaron, for in @Numbers 18 they are united with Aaron. The word was taken from @Genesis 29:34.
J.S. Would the Levites¬ faithfulness here suggest any prior history by the fact that they all came to Moses?
J.T. Why is it that they did this? There must have been some antecedent history as in the case of Aaron
{180}
earlier, of whom Jehovah said, "I know him". But the point is they did this, and God is taking them up on this ground, for they have gone the whole way in the crisis. I believe that what is creditable is that we go the whole road, without compromising; God would say of such, 'You are peculiarly pleasing to Me, and I wish you near'. Now they are associated with Aaron the priest, to be before him. They are to serve him, to keep his charge, also the charge of the whole assembly, to do the service of the tabernacle. In chapter 8, where they are presented to Jehovah and waved before Him, He says, as it were, 'I wish to have more of this', so He reduced their age from thirty to twenty-five. I believe that is the idea. God has something great for those who qualify in this way, a service in which we are to be united with Christ, in which we keep His charge, and do what is needed in regard of the whole testimony.
C.A.M. What strikes one as being so important is this: that if you are undecided in one crisis, you will fail in the next; you want to be sure of being clear in every conflict as it comes along; otherwise, you will fail when the next comes.
J.T. That is right. I think God's government goes on in that way. You may be clear outwardly in this crisis, but miss your way in another; the point for us today is to go the whole way, to go out to the Lord, to be entirely under His direction without modification; He will then take us on, as is said here, "Bring the tribe of Levi near". @Numbers 3:6.
A.R. They become the *best* that God has, be in taken instead of the firstborn among the children of Israel.
J.T. Quite so; they take the place that belonged to others.
A.P. What is meant by that?
J.T. I think it is God's way of showing what He approved in them because they qualified in this way. I believe that is our position today. The great revival
{181}
of a hundred years ago was seen in men who went the whole road; God took them on, and identified Himself with them.
A.F.M. We have come into that movement, through grace, and it is encouraging to look back to the faithful men of a hundred years ago; but what about today -- are we following in the steps of those men?
J.T. I think the danger, especially in a crisis, is to modify, and then put evil for good, and good for evil, to mix truth and error, instead of maintaining a single eye and going the whole road with the truth. If others see it, why cannot I? God will help me to see the full truth of the position. As I take my eyes off men and look alone to Christ, and ask what He is saying about all this, my view becomes cleared.
J.T.Jr. Do these Levites correspond with the vessels to honour in 2 Timothy?
J.T. I think that is the point exactly: "If therefore one shall have purified himself from these, in separating himself from them, he shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified, serviceable to the Master, prepared for every good work", (@2 Timothy 2:21). Thus we come out to the tent as pitched (verse 22): "But youthful lusts flee, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" (@2 Timothy 2:22). That is the tent of meeting.
A.P. I notice that they had charge of both the tent of testimony and the tent of meeting; what is the difference?
J.T. The tent of testimony is what God is setting out before men in the assembly, and the tent of meeting is where we meet one another; the two things go together.
A.P.M. In the action of Moses in pitching the tent outside of the camp, it says he called it the Tent of meeting, thus making it very prominent. The tabernacle is so designated forthwith.
{182}
J.T. It is not a pretentious name, but contains a very precious thought. It is where God meets with us and we can meet one another. We speak much about *meetings*, and the word thus used conveys the very precious thought of meeting one another.
W.B-w. These sons of Levi seem to be unified. They were all united on one thing. How was that brought about?
J.T. Well, we ought to be motivated by one thought. We have the Holy Spirit, we have the holy Scriptures, and we ought to be united in the truth. There is the unity of the faith and the unity of the Spirit. There should be nothing less than that amongst us; anything less, in principle at least, is simply 'open-brethrenism', and we soon get down to the level of current Christendom if we proceed on those lines.
W.B-w. I think that is very good. We want to get clear of all activity of the flesh. The flesh works in us one way or another to bring in strife and quarrelling, but there was no evidence of it among the sons of Levi here.
J.T. Well, why cannot we take the ground, you and I, for instance, or any two Christians, or any one hundred Christians? We are all blessed in Christ, we have the Spirit, and we have the Scriptures; is there any reason why we cannot be of one mind? If anyone says, I do not see that, then the question is. Have you good eyes?
A.N.W. Could we not say as to chapter 32, that what rallied them there was the man that thought for God? It seems that that cleared the situation; they rallied to the man that thought for God.
J.T.Jr. They all had the sword on -- that would be one idea?
J.T. Yes; it is the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
J.T.Jr. Each had it on his hip, where it was in readiness for use.
{183}
A.R.S. Do you not think that eye-salve is what is wanted if we cannot see the thing?
J.T. Exactly, and the Lord counsels us to buy it from Him. In every case it is a question of getting to Him. You need never be utterly shut in. The Lord gives understanding in all things.
J.S. The initial step is moving out to the Lord and then getting His thoughts -- coming under His authority and direction.
J.T. Quite so. Then the tent of meeting is the next thing. You are there as under the direction of Christ.
A.R. I was wondering whether what is seen in the Levites here would maintain unity in the whole assembly.
J.T. Well, as has been remarked, the word "united" was what governed the Levites. They are not said to be anointed. They come in under the anointing of the priesthood. In truth, the Levites are an integral part of the priesthood. In both Deuteronomy and Joshua they are regarded as priests, so that it is a question of adhering and submitting to the spiritual thought, and this is what is reached. That is, to give room to the Spirit of God in our service, however insignificant.
N.McC. Would you say something more about the query. Who is on the Lord's side? In every controversy, is it not true that each would say that he is on the Lord's side? Would you say more about that?
J.T. Well, it is a question now of the word of God. "To the law and to the testimony" (@Isaiah 8:20). Having the Lord, the Spirit and the Scriptures, we shall see eye to eye, if we are subject. As "God reigneth" and as He brings back Zion, the watchmen of Israel "see eye to eye", (@Isaiah 52:8).
A.P. I suppose there were many in Israel, as the Levites acted under Moses, that would say. There is another side to this.
J.T. Quite so. But surely the saints should be able to determine right from wrong. Does not the word of God settle everything? It is quick and powerful and
{184}
sharper than any two-edged sword. It discerns the thoughts and intents of the heart. If that is the weapon, we shall be transparent, and all will be clear. We must tell each other what we think and compare facts in dependence on the Lord, then as in the light of Scripture, differences will vanish; but instead of this we are prone to remain in silence, nursing our natural feelings and grievances, and darkness continues.
N.McC. Would you say we are confined to the word of God in a crisis?
J.T. Yes; each ought to have his sword. The sword of the Spirit is the word of God. It is a great weapon when the enemy has to be met. Where fleshly thoughts are harboured and divine principles refused the enemy has scope, and this situation must be met by the word of God.
E.S. In @Acts 15, after much discussion, and relating of facts, James stood up and quoted "the words of the prophets" (@Acts 15:15).
J.T. Yes, he spoke the *word of God*, as also did Peter, and thus the matter was settled.
{185}
THE AUTHORITY OF CHRIST IN THE ASSEMBLY (3)
@Numbers 8:5 - 26; @Deuteronomy 33:8 - 11
J.T. The passage read in @Numbers 3 at our last reading shows how the Levites, as qualified according to what we have in Exodus, are taken on by Jehovah. It says in @Numbers 3, "Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him; and they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole assembly, before the tent of meeting, to do the service of the tabernacle. And they shall keep all the utensils of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle. And thou shalt give the Levites to Aaron and to his sons: they are wholly given to him out of the children of Israel. And Aaron and his sons shalt thou appoint that they may attend to their priest's office; and the stranger that cometh near shall be put to death" (@Numbers 3:5 - 10), And then it goes on to say, "I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of every firstborn" (@Numbers 3:12). And then again, "and the Levites shall be mine"; and again, "On the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both of man and beast; mine shall they be: I am Jehovah" (@Numbers 3:12,13). And then they are numbered and their names are given.
It will be observed that there were three families of the sons of Levi: the Kohathites, the Gershonites, and the Merarites. The remaining part of chapters 3 and 4 is taken up with their services; they were to be subservient to the priests; that is, those of us who serve, and of course, all the saints are serving. It says, "To each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ" (@Ephesians 4:7), this having our service in view. But we are subservient to
{186}
the priests. The anointing is of the priesthood, and the Levites are united to Aaron, so that they come in subordinately; there is thus to be no independency in our service. Paul, the most exalted servant, viewed in this light, is the servant of the saints, as he said, "ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake" (@2 Corinthians 4:5). The directions given keep those who serve in their proper relations; then in the services appointed in chapter 4 Kohath is put before Gershon, showing that the sovereignty of God enters into this matter of service; whether our service be small or great, it is a question of God's sovereignty, but on the moral line, all being based on qualification; it means that we have qualified in coming to the Lord at the gate of the camp, with our weapons of war. And then the service is being effected as in chapters 3 and 4.
The three chapters intervening between 4 and 8, namely, chapters 5, 6, and 7, have to do with conditions amongst the saints, so as to make way for the service of the Levites. Hence all impurities in the camp are dealt with, and all lepers are put out, all trespasses must be dealt with, also all unfaithfulness to Christ, as in the woman whose husband becomes jealous of her. All that is seen in chapter 5. The nazarite's vow comes in in chapter 6, which is another side of the position, suggesting entire devotedness to the testimony; then comes the unity of the tribes in their substantial giving, included in which is the provision for the Levites: all this is to have its fixed place in our minds. We are thus prepared for being presented to God, as in the chapter we read. It is said the Levites were to be offered up. "Aaron shall offer the Levites as a wave offering before Jehovah" (chapter 8:11). Prior to this, they were to be cleansed as has been noticed. "Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them. And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: sprinkle upon them water of purification from sin; and they shall pass the razor over all their
{187}
flesh, and shall wash their garments, and make themselves clean" (verses 6,7). So that now we are set before Jehovah, and offered as a wave-offering, but as cleansed; not washed exactly, but sprinkled for public service. Moses is to do that, and they were to shave themselves all over, meaning that in our external appearance, what we are in life, everything is to be purified; whether it be ourselves, our business, all is to be purified.
C.A.M. This matter of purification is stressed in @2 Corinthians 7; we are to purify ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit. The matter of jealousy you referred to, in the intervening chapters, seems to have been met at Corinth in the first epistle, so that levitical service can be stressed in the second.
J.T. I think that is good. The apostle is relieved in the second letter, so that he is freer; his mouth is open to them. So long as the conditions at Corinth were as before Paul wrote his first letter, there was but little room for the exercise of ministerial service. What helps in chapter 5 of Numbers is that in the camp of God -- as we might say, in the assembly -- nothing is to be left unsettled. It says first, the lepers and other unclean persons are to be put out; and then it says, "And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying. Speak unto the children of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit any of all the sins of man to work unfaithfulness against Jehovah, and that soul is guilty, then they shall confess their sin which they have done; and he shall recompense his trespass according to the principal thereof, and shall add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath trespassed" (@Numbers 5:5 - 7). This is a very practical direction. In leprosy, of course, it is a pronounced thing that you can take account of easily, but there are those who can take account of gross things, but cannot detect sins that are directly against God, and His commandments; or it may be a trespass against another. These are apt to be minimised or made nothing of; that is
{188}
to say, there are those of us who can take account of things that happen which even natural conscience can take account of, but the passage speaks of "any of all the sins of man": "When a man or woman shall commit any of all the sins of man to work unfaithfulness against Jehovah" (@Numbers 5:6). It may be primarily against a brother, but it is really against Jehovah, and it cannot be left because such are guilty. They shall confess.
A.P. Would you think that @Matthew 18:15, "If thy brother sin against thee", would come in under this heading?
J.T. Yes. Of course it would be a big list to go over "all the sins of man", as seen here. Man has learned to sin since Adam's time. Some people say, 'The thing was not so bad'; but Adam's was not so bad from that point of view, he only took some fruit, but it was "against Jehovah" directly. Shimei in Solomon's time was told to build a house in Jerusalem and stay there, under penalty of death were he to go outside Jerusalem. But two of his servants ran away to Gath, and Shimei went and brought his servants from Gath. People might say, 'Why should Shimei not go after his servants, they were his property?' But he forfeited his life through doing so. The idea is of man disregarding the command of God, whether it be a small sin or a great sin. It is *an act of will;* so here it is, "any of all the sins of man ... against Jehovah" (@Numbers 5:6). Man has acquired a great ability to sin, from Adam down to the present time. I believe they are learning to commit new sins all the time, but all sins will be taken account of, and we must not say of any that it is not much. The sinner has to judge it, whatever it is. He is to *confess* and add the fifth part thereof, too.
J.T.Jr. Confession mainly settles the matter, does it not?
J.T. The fifth part is required too. He "shall add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath trespassed. And if the man have
{189}
no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, the trespass which is recompensed to Jehovah shall be the priest's" (@Numbers 5:8). So that the priesthood and the saints are enriched by this fifth part. We are richer brothers and sisters afterwards than we were before the thing happened.
J.T.Jr. Does the fifth part indicate that the confession was not merely an acknowledgment, but that a spiritual process has been gone through in the soul and the exercise which enables the person to bring in something that is profitable for the saints?
J.T. Yes, it is given to the priest. In result, it makes us all richer.
A.B.P. Why is it a fifth part?
J.T. Well, I suppose it is not so much as you might add if you were a spiritual man. It seems to be a light tax. Zacchaeus said he restored fourfold, and the Lord immediately said, "He also is a son of Abraham" (@Luke 19:9). He was very liberal in what he did and the Lord honours that.
A.B.P. I wondered whether the fifth part might also indicate the recognition of our weakness.
J.T. It is a reasonable demand, and the addition shows that you really judge the trespass. It does not say. If you are able to do it. The idea, I think, is that you *are* able. Wealth is assumed.
A.F.M. And then verse 7 shows that you give the fifth part to the brother against whom you have trespassed. There is a personal transaction between them. Sometimes we are slow in that; we confess, but do not measure up to the requirement of the fifth part.
J.T. I think when a tax like this is imposed, it is understood that you can pay it. God is crediting you with that, and I am sure if you face the thing, you find that you have ability to pay. The very facing of it makes you rich enough. If you are an honest man you want to make reparation, so there is no shade of doubt now about the trespass being fully recompensed.
{190}
A.P.T. Is @Psalm 51 like the fifth part? David goes over the ground fully, so that he really judges the sin, and says, "Behold, thou wilt have truth in the inward parts" (@Psalm 51:6), showing what God would get from the burnt-offering.
J.E.H. Is not sinning against a brother also trespassing against the Lord? If one were helped to look at the matter from that standpoint it would not be so hard to make confession to the brother. In @Psalm 51:4, just referred to, David says, "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned". As a matter of fact, it was against a brother, but the sense came into his soul that it was against the Lord.
J.T. The psalm is certainly an evidence of genuineness in the man, of how thoroughly he dealt with the sin. He was quick to note it from Nathan's parable, and to say what should be done to the "rich man"; and Nathan says to David, "Thou art the man!" (@2 Samuel 12:7). He does not at all excuse himself, but says, "I have sinned against Jehovah" (@2 Samuel 12:13).
C.A.M. As to @Numbers 5, do you not think it results in comfort to the man who trespassed, when the fifth part is added to the principal? Also there is really gain to the priestly element amongst the saints?
J.T. That is the thing to be noted; we are not impoverished by trespasses of this kind. There is sorrow connected with them, but through reparation being made the saints are enriched. I believe the assembly was enriched by the outcome of Peter's guilt. He went out and wept bitterly, we are told; then the Lord, as risen, appeared to him. The saints were enriched, when as gathered they were speaking about this very thing; saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon" (@Luke 24:34). They were enriched in the sense *of grace*.
A.P. The spoil which emanated from David's exercises at Ziklag, he sent round to the elders of Judah. Is that not right?
{191}
J.T. Quite so. There had been failure there too with David. Then we have the secret of unfaithfulness typified in the woman whose husband became jealous of her. That is the next thing in @Numbers 5: she is made to feel the thing inwardly in drinking the water, corresponding to what happened at Horeb. She has to drink what is called "holy water"; perhaps, the only place in Scripture where you get that term. It is a very remarkable thing that the system that speaks much of holy water is the very system that is in mind in this type as being unfaithful. This water is mixed with the dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle, and it brings to light whether she is guilty or not. There is in the tabernacle, in the presence of God, the means of disclosing secret unfaithfulness to Christ. And that being dealt with, we have the Nazarite, a man devoted to God; he is in renunciation of all natural rights, which is a most essential thing in service to God. He thus ensures the continuance of the testimony, which goes on to the end. Then we have the riches seen in the offering of the princes in chapter 7.
A.F.M. Does not the end of chapter 6 morally follow chapter 5, where, referring to the law of jealousy, the woman, if proven to be immune from guilt, bears fruit, which takes form in nazariteship? The chapters evidently connect.
J.T. I am sure they do; the blessing is secured through the Nazarite in chapter 6: "Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying. On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel: saying unto them, Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee; Jehovah make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel; and I will bless them" (@Numbers 6:23 - 27). The nazariteship of Christ thus secures a wonderful result.
A.B.P. Does Paul confirm this in @1 Corinthians 6:12 "All things are lawful to me, but all things do not profit;
{192}
all things are lawful to me, but *I* will not be brought under the power of any"?
J.T. That is the idea. You renounce your natural rights, and as chapter 5 is gone through, spiritual riches will ensue. Under these circumstances, recovery to faithfulness being restored, we have conditions of great wealth; this is seen in these spiritual men, who are heads of the tribes, and shows that they are united. It is very practical, underlying the unity of the Levites. The service of these princes is spread out. Twelve days are given to the service, and each of these men stood up for a whole day offering these rich things to Jehovah. The scene typifies a great product of the work of God among the saints resulting in wealthy men. Their wealth is not making them independent or rivals of each other, but uniting them, and all culminating in Jehovah speaking to Moses from off the mercy-seat. And then the Levites, coming through in that way, are presented to God, being offered as a wave-offering (chapter 8:11); that is, they are constantly before His eye as pleasing to Him even as Christ was on the banks of the Jordan.
J.T.Jr. Does David exemplify what is seen in chapter 7, in that he failed, yet at the end of his life he offers great wealth?
J.T. Yes; although 1 Chronicles does not give his great failure as to Uriah, it does give his failure in numbering the people; there was no doubt pride of heart in doing this; he thereby dropped to the level of worldly kings around him and would be inflated as well by the large number of people under him. That was a grave failure on his part, and God so regarded it; but David judged it thoroughly, and was accepted of God, as we learn in chapter 21 of that book. Then in chapter 22 you have a disclosure of the most remarkable wealth, seen in David's ability to provide *one hundred thousand talents of gold*.
{193}
C.A.M. The priesthood in Chronicles is a testimony to this spiritual wealth.
J.T. Yes; your soul is moved as you go through chapters 21 to 29: the wealth of David and the wealth of the princes. That is what we may see here also; that is, as we judge sin really, bringing God into it, and offer our fifth part, the saints are enriched. And then the bearing of seed, as the woman is cleared, as has been remarked, and then the Nazarite, and the blessing, and then these twelve princes with their wealth. I do not think we should hesitate in facing all the sorrowful matters that come up constantly among us, if the thought of God is that there should be the *accruement of wealth* , and that it should promote unity and richness in the house of God.
A.F.M. Then the thought of Moses going in to God at the end of chapter 7, when God, so to speak, anticipated him by speaking first, and then Moses speaking; would that be the order of events, that being so wealthy we are enabled to approach God according to His own greatness and dignity?
J.T. Yes; *we get communications* . It says, "And when Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with Him, then he heard the voice speaking to him from off the mercy-seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubim; and he spoke to Him" (@Numbers 7:89).
A.B.P. There is such a thing as wealth that divides. I was thinking of Lot and Abram.
J.T. That is a humbling suggestion. They were sundered by their great property; the same thing appears with the two-and-a-half tribes; their wealth held them back on the east side of Jordan; but here their wealth is utilised in unity toward God, for the enrichment of His house.
A.P. Is it because they were prepared to hold their wealth in relation to the *altar*?
{194}
J.T. Quite so; it was "the dedication-gift of the altar" (@Numbers 7:88).
R.W.S. Barnabas was a Levite who sold his land and brought the money and laid it at the feet of the apostles.
J.T. Barnabas is a good illustration of a prince. The Spirit of God gives him that place, I think.
A.R. These princes come forward after the tabernacle is set up. Why is that?
J.T. You can understand that it has in view the recognition of the tabernacle. It says, "And it came to pass on the day that Moses had completed the setting up of the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and hallowed it, and all the furniture thereof, and the altar and its utensils, and had anointed them, and hallowed them ..." (@Numbers 7:1). Now, if you connect that verse with the end of Exodus, you see that it synchronises with the glory coming in. It was when Moses had done everything and each part was in its place, and functioning, that God would say, 'I will take all that over', and He comes in in the cloud and fills it with the glory. You can see what a scene it was as the tabernacle is filled with the glory, and covered with the cloud -- how God was pleased with all this spontaneous giving. One would connect it with the assembly, where each of us in his place is functioning. There is no need for Moses to serve; for *all are subject* . God is saying, 'This is pleasing to Me'; and He appropriates it. What follows is this spontaneous giving by the princes, during the twelve days; then God says, 'I will speak to you now'. I think all this is very great and blessed.
You will notice in the beginning of chapter 8, Jehovah says, "Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick. And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the candlestick, as Jehovah had commanded Moses. And this was the work of the candlestick: it was of beaten gold; from its base
{195}
to its flowers was it beaten work; according to the form which Jehovah had shewn Moses, so had he made the candlestick" (@Numbers 8:2 - 4). In these opening verses you have the light of the seven lamps being caused to ascend, so that the quality and beauty of what bears it is displayed; hence the whole scene is typically wonderful.
G.MacP. Is the unity of the Spirit worked out amongst us in the light of chapter 7?
J.T. Where there is spiritual wealth amongst us, it promotes unity.
F.N.W. What is the difference between what the twelve princes contributed here and what the people generally contributed in view of constructing the tabernacle itself?
J.T. This is additional. There was no demand upon the princes. The material for the tabernacle was asked for, as you will remember, in @Exodus 25; then in @Exodus 34 and 35, where the law is given a second time, and Moses came down with his face shining, in principle with the new covenant, Moses again puts it on the responsibility of the people that they bring the material for the tabernacle, and it says they departed from before Moses and brought it; meaning, I think, what Paul had in mind in telling the Corinthians to put by for the poor saints on the first day of the week at home, that there might be no collections when he came. That is, he wished their giving to be the outcome of love operating in their own hearts, and it is again referred to after the new covenant ministry was introduced in the second epistle.
The people departed from Moses, each man to his tent, as you might say, in @Exodus 35, and brought the things required in great abundance. I think the idea is to show that under these conditions demanding was not necessary. The people would go to their tents and say, 'I will give this much', and they gave remarkably well; in fact, Moses had to restrain them from bringing;
{196}
it was too much! There was nothing of that character here. The twelve princes are not asked to bring anything. The giving was out of spontaneity -- they gave of their spiritual wealth; and how pleasing it was to God!
W.G.T. Would the "beaten gold" suggest exercise?
J.T. Quite so, it refers to discipline.
A.R. Does the tabernacle represent a system of love, and the princes in correspondence with that? Their movements were permeated with love.
J.T. That is right. There were the evidences of it there; anyone that looked at the tabernacle would see that it was a product of love.
N.P. Will you tell us why they all gave the same things, and in the same quantity and quality?
J.T. I think it is to emphasise the perfection and the unity. @Philippians 2:1,2 says, "If then there be any comfort in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and compassions, fulfil my joy, that ye may think the same thing, having the same love, joined in soul, thinking one thing". I think we have a remarkable expression of unity illustrated in the offerings of @Numbers 7.
A.N.W. I was thinking of the Spirit's care in giving through Moses seventy-nine verses; writing the details of what the princes offered twelve times.
J.T. I have often thought of it; each prince having his day for twelve days. Each of these men is thinking the same thing: it is Christ filling their hearts. They are not in rivalry with one another; they are not devouring one another; they are living on Christ!
A.R. I was wondering whether the spirit at Antioch was characterised by the features that we have been speaking of. It says, in @Acts 11, they were first called Christians in Antioch; then later, "As they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them" (@Acts 13:2). The true levites came to light under these circumstances.
{197}
J.T. That is right. We may regard that as the antitype of this, we are given there the names of five persons who were ministering to the Lord and fasting. That is, they were denying themselves. What good times they must have had at Antioch! Upon that the Spirit says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul" (@Acts 13:2), showing He had entire confidence in them.
A.B.P. The very word "separate" seems to emphasise the unity.
J.T. Just so; He contemplates, I think, that there is no rivalry, or disposition to get rid of any of the brethren. They were not an obstacle there. The brethren were reluctant to let them go on their anticipated work.
A.F.M. Chapter 8 goes on to speak of the Levites being offered as a wave-offering before Jehovah; is that a result of what the Levites have passed through experimentally? They are now a wave-offering to Jehovah, in view of His service.
J.T. That is the next thing as showing how we are viewed as in service. It is a subordinating thing, something that subordinates me to others, but God is pleased with me there. I believe that Christ Himself sets out the great levitical thought in that sense. He came up out of the Jordan as about to enter upon His service, and heaven's voice says, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3:17). His service was in view.
G.MacP. Is that how we understand the wave-offering as linked up with the oblation and the meat-offering as seen in Him?
J.T. Yes; the wave-offering and the heave-offering suggest spontaneity. The wave-offering gives evidence of what God specially likes. What is waved before one attracts the eye. The wave-sheaf (@Leviticus 23:11), is Christ in resurrection occupying God's heart. Here the Levites are offered by Aaron as a wave-offering.
J.H.E. Would the day of Pentecost answer to that?
{198}
J.T. The two wave-loaves are typical of the saints -- what came out of their houses. The point is what comes out of our houses, and whether what happens in secret in our houses is pleasing to God; does He delight in it?
W.G.T. Would what Paul presented at Corinth be the wave-offering -- Jesus Christ, and Him crucified?
J.T. Quite so. That is what he presented; the wave-offering is of course presented to God, and as presenting Christ to the Corinthians, he would present Him to God also as speaking to Him.
J.T.Jr. Is the thought that we must be acceptable to God before we can minister?
J.T. That is the idea; you cannot be effective among the brethren unless you first are pleasing to God. I believe that is what was seen at the Lord's baptism, as coming up from the water when the Father's voice is heard, for Christ was infinitely pleasing to Him. The Father speaks *of* the Lord in Matthew, and *to* Him in Mark and Luke. In Matthew it is, "This is my beloved Son" (@Matthew 3:17). In Mark and Luke it is, "Thou art my beloved Son" (@Mark 1:11 and @Luke 3:22). The first, what others should know. The second and third, what is between the two Persons.
A.F.M. Does the idea of God's committal to Christ enter into His baptism? The Spirit came down upon Him in bodily form as a dove. Then in regard to ourselves, I suppose, God commits Himself to us in view of our service; in both cases the end in view is fruitfulness to God.
A.P.T. The Lord says of Paul, "Behold, he is praying" (@Acts 9:11).
J.T. In that Paul corresponded to Christ, who was praying when the heavens were opened upon Him.
J.T.Jr. The word, "in thee I have found my delight" (@Mark 1:11 and @Luke 3:22), being directed to the Lord Himself in Mark and Luke, would correspond with the Nazarite, as seen in @Numbers 6. It is what God found in Christ as measuring up to His own thought of service.
{199}
N.MacC. Does it always follow that because your service is acceptable to God it will be acceptable to your brethren?
J.T. That is the order normally. If in ministering to the Lord we are fasting, we show we are self-denying; that is what went on at Antioch, and the Spirit said, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them. Then, having fasted and prayed, and having laid their hands on them, they let them go" (@Acts 13:2,3). It was the Spirit's mind and they let them go. It is a striking example of the working out of levitical principles.
W.B-w. It says in @Numbers 8, "And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: sprinkle upon them water of purification from sin; and they shall pass the razor over all their flesh, and shall wash their garments, and make themselves clean" (verse 7). How does that process work out now?
J.T. It seems to be the service of Christ. Moses was to perform this first part -- it is like, "sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience" (@Hebrews 10:22). But then they were to shave themselves and *wash* themselves. The sprinkling is from the divine side. The Lord says, "He that is washed all over needs not to wash save his feet, but is wholly clean" (@John 13:10). I think it honours the Levites. It was not a bath that they needed, it was just sprinkling, as a matter of testimony; that must be understood at this juncture. I am now brought near to serve; and hence I am sprinkled, but I must also shave all my flesh and wash my garments. I must see now to all matters in which my life is manifest. It is manifested in my house, in my business, and among my brethren; it is a great general thought. The flesh, the natural growth, is there, and I have to watch it. It is that in which my life is manifested as a Christian. I cannot say it is a question only of myself and my house; I must include my business. It is a matter of where my life is manifest; I think that is what is meant, and all
{200}
that is to come under the work of the razor. That is the idea, I think. Then there is the washing of the garments. Some of us recently were speaking about Peter's boat, of how the Lord went into it, but Peter was washing his nets; that would allude to his business affairs.
W.G.T. The apostle says he was conscious of nothing in himself, but he was not justified in this. Is it the thought, that he would continue washing?
J.T. Just so; you cannot be sure that everything with you is right, so that there is need of *constant* exercise.
A.R. After that they were to bring the Levites before the tent of meeting and before the people, who were to lay their hands upon them.
J.T. Yes; it goes on to say, "And they shall take a young bullock and its oblation of fine flour mingled with oil; and another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin-offering" (verse 8); the burnt-offering would be what was pleasing to God, that which goes up to God; but there was also the sin-offering. There is no peace-offering here. It was not a matter of coming together for mutual spiritual enjoyment, but of service. A meeting like this would be in line with the peace-offering as offered and eaten, where the Lord has part, but verse 8 is not that. It is a question of service; so that these two offerings are in view. They are peculiar offerings, and then the oblation with the burnt-offering. "And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tent of meeting; and thou shalt gather together the whole assembly of the children of Israel. And thou shalt bring the Levites before Jehovah; and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites. And Aaron shall offer the Levites as a wave-offering before Jehovah from the children of Israel, and they shall perform the service of Jehovah" (verses 9 - 11). So that it is "the whole assembly"; the saints are all identified in this.
{201}
A.P.T. I am not quite clear as to this service of Jehovah. It is entirely manward?
J.T. Not necessarily. They were finally set around the tabernacle, and were amenable to the priest at all times. They were also to carry the tabernacle. Their attitude was "ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake" (@2 Corinthians 4:5). It is not enough merely to say, I am a servant of the Lord. I may be, of course, but I am a servant of the saints, and hence I must be always ready to serve them.
R.W.S. There were over twenty thousand of them. Is not that a relatively small number? I was wondering how it would work out; whether it would imply that there is not much for us to do, if each one did his own work, or whether the converse would apply today -- more work to do than there are levites to serve.
J.T. Well, I think the latter is quite obvious. There is more work to do than is done. The number of Levites actually in service was eight thousand five hundred and eighty (chapter 4:48). This number would be increased as the entry age was reduced to twenty-five (chapter 8:24). They were evidently sufficient for the service. There were enough; there were three families of them, and each had its own work to do, and there is no evidence that the work was not done. They were appointed to carry the holy things, and then the curtains and the boards. There was no suggestion that there were not enough of them, but is it so today? Are the holy things, the things in relation to the Deity, and the most sacred and precious things looked after? And the utensils of the holy place, the curtains, the boards, bars, pillars, pegs, and cords -- are these things all looked after? The precious things of the Deity, are we concerned enough about them? Zacchaeus would be a man like that. He wanted to see who Jesus was. He would be a Kohathite, I am sure. And then the brethren who are looking after the principles, the Gershonites, carried the curtains and so on. We must see to the principles
{202}
in everything that we do, the principles that govern what we do; and then finally the persons -- the boards -- particularly the boards, bars, and pillars. Who is looking after those? This was the work of the Merarites. So we have to make a comparison in this way. In the primary thought of God there were enough. It was strenuous labour, but there is no suggestion that there were not enough to do it, but our concern should be, is it being done now?
J.E.H. Would you bring principles in in relation to the pegs?
J.T. The principles would be the curtains, things that stretch out and cover the whole position, that which properly makes up the tabernacle.
A.R. Do you think we are apt to reverse the order? The Kohathites rightly come first. They were always thinking of the holy things. I was wondering whether we are not thinking of people more. We have a great number of brothers who can preach the gospel, but very few possibly who could give an address upon the Person of Christ.
J.T. I am sure that is a very important suggestion. Can I give an address on the Person of Christ? And why not, if I know Him and love Him?
C.A.M. Do you not think, in that connection, it is marvellous how the Lord has the personnel of all the local companies of His people under His own hand?
J.T. Yes. Every meeting of the saints requires these three services. The first thing is to keep God before the saints, God in the three Persons, and I believe Zacchaeus, as I was saying, is typical of that. "He sought to see Jesus who he was" (@Luke 19:3), and he saw Him. The Lord had challenged the disciples as to who He was. He had asked them what men were saying about Him, and what they were saying. That enters into the service of the Kohathites. But then there are the principles that govern our position. The Gershonites see to the principles. The Merarites look after the
{203}
people, for you must have the people to sustain the principles; that is, the boards were to sustain the curtains.
A.B.P. In that connection, the service of the Samaritan in @Luke 10 seems to be distinctly the care of the person, but in doing so, there was a principle asserted -- that of the neighbour.
J.T. Quite so. Those that were neighbours to him literally did no good to him; they passed by on the other side; so the Samaritan became the true Merarite and also the Gershonite.
A.F.M. You are speaking about the disparity between the number of Levites and the people generally. I was wondering whether you could tell us how that applies to the temple? There evidently were plenty to do the work there.
J.T. The same comes out here, as we have been saying. In the closing verses of the chapter, after they are presented to Jehovah, the age is reduced to twenty- five years. It is as if Jehovah would say, 'All these persons are delightful to Me. Now I can increase their number by reducing their age'. We do not get a word about this until they are waved before Him. Then under David, the age is again reduced to twenty years. There were thirty-eight thousand Levites according to @1 Chronicles 23, but then David added to them by reducing the age five years, and I think it is in keeping with the then new order of things. Solomon was "young and tender", and he sat on the throne with David. I think the idea is that God was pleased with him from the outset. Jehovah had loved him even as a babe. I think the divine thought under David was to bring typically all the young Christians into correspondence with Christ, that they are normally young and tender spiritually. There is a freshness about them, and I think we all can say that when we hear a young brother taking part in the meeting for the first time, there is
{204}
something particularly fresh and attractive about it, and we thank God for it.
J.S. The freshness in this sense is delightful to God, and hence the age is reduced.
J.T. That is what I thought; it is in keeping with the new order of things; you have Solomon as king, who was about the age prescribed by David for levitical service.
A.R. If young brothers knew what they are in the eye of God and in the eye of the saints, they would more readily take on the service.
A.P.T. What you say would help as to the matter of age when receiving into fellowship; it is a question of what we see in them for the Lord, not so much their age in years.
J.T. We may say they are too young, without thinking of their spiritual formation. Sometimes our young people are older than their years, and it is for the brethren to discern this.
E.E.H. What would you say about Paul's first preaching, in @Acts 9? He preached Jesus, that He is the Son of God. It was "Jesus" whom he saw on the road to Damascus. He seemed to have gained additional light as to the Lord's Person, would you say?
J.T. Quite so. He was the first to preach Him as Son of God, as far as Scripture records. I suppose all that enters into what we are saying, that Paul advanced rapidly. He is called a young man in @Acts 7. Peter had the knowledge of the Son of God, and so had all the apostles, but what is so remarkable is that they do not say anything about it in their early ministry. Paul, however, begins with it. This is evidently in view of the full thought of the house. Sonship comes in also in David in relation to the house of God. It came into David's mind to build the house, which brought out the necessity for Solomon; that is, *a son* , and I believe the introduction of the full divine thought of the house synchronises with the appearance of Paul.
{205}
So that he preaches that Jesus is the Son of God. At Corinth, he and Silvanus and Timotheus preached the Son of God, Jesus Christ, so that it was evidently the great burden of his preaching. I believe Solomon on the throne suggests the idea, hence for David things were not as burdensome as they had been. So today, it is really a question of the part our young brothers are taking, or should take, *in the assembly* , not now carrying things as in the wilderness, since the ark is at rest, all of which gives character to the present *assembly position* , and as showing it is their time of service.
C.A.M. All that seems to indicate the end of the assembly's history -- that we are at the end of the dispensation; it is such a privileged moment, the truth of the Son of God and all these wonderful things connected with Him, being brought to our attention.
J.T. Would to God that we all took that thought in!
C.A.M. We should take it in, it is really very wonderful. It should be exceedingly stimulating to any saint that has his Christian career ahead of him, as illustrated in the young Levites of David's day.
J.T.Jr. What is the thought of the fifty years? Does it mean that we should never reach that age?
J.T. That would be the thought. God expects from us our *best* . In the greatest servants mentioned in Scripture, their best went on to the end of their days. There are really no pensioners or superannuated persons connected with the testimony. That the Levites were to minister with their brethren after fifty indicates that whatever ability there is will be accepted, but restricted according to what it may be.
A.R. In Paul's *first* preaching, he was morally a Kohathite you might say, handling the holy things.
J.T. That is right. And in the epistles to the Corinthians we have also Gershonite and Merarite services, i.e. principles governing the assembly are
{206}
laid down, the curtains of the tabernacle largely representing these; and then he is concerned about the wicked person being put away, that his spirit should be saved, and that, as repentant, he should be restored.
A.P.T. What kind of man do you think Timothy was? Was he an all-round man?
J.T. The three levitical features would apply to one levite. It is not, in the antitype, that one set are Kohathites, another Gershonites, and another Merarites. You want to have the three ideas united, to present Christ as the Son of God, to keep the principles right, and then keep the persons right.
A.P.T. Paul says to the Philippian brethren that he would send Timothy to them as he had no one like-minded who would care with genuine feeling how they got on. I was wondering whether that refers to the service of God and where it would fit in.
J.T. Quite so; that, as having the saints in view, would be, in character, Gershonite service -- how the saints get on. Epaphroditus was concerned about the saints, too.
A.N.W. Yet Timothy was to do the work of an evangelist.
J.T. Quite so; all the levitical features appeared in him.
W.B-w. When the Lord Jesus was with the disciples on the mount (@Matthew 5, 6, and 7), He taught them. Is the teaching there, the principles?
J.T. I think so; very largely the principles of the kingdom.
A.P. He spoke as One having authority. I was going to ask whether the limited number of levites would be an obstacle in any way to divine Persons speaking in a full way.
J.T. Divine activities are greatly limited and retarded today, because of the shortage of those who serve,
{207}
and because of our low state generally and consequent spiritual poverty.
W.B-w. Have you a suggestion to give on @Deuteronomy 33?
J.T. We might finish this subject of the Levites with the understanding that their history is given retrospectively in that chapter. We have often noticed regarding Levi in @Deuteronomy 33 that the Thummim is put before the Urim, meaning that the Levites had the needed quality and so were perfect. According to the best authorities, Thummim means *perfection*, which would show that all we have been speaking about had become effective in them, so that we have perfection. Then the meaning of Urim is *light* , which comes out in that setting. They endured the test at Massah and at Meribah; they denied natural claims: he "said to his father and to his mother, I see him not, and he acknowledged not his brethren, and knew not his own children; for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. They shall teach Jacob thine ordinances, and Israel thy law" (verses 9,10).
A.F.M. You were saying earlier that their priestly and levitical service combined in Deuteronomy, so in this blessing the two thoughts are united. There was the teaching of Jacob Jehovah's ordinances, and the offering of incense before His nostrils. Is that the thought?
J.T. That is right; the priesthood is included in Levi here even as to teaching. "They shall teach Jacob thine ordinances, and Israel thy law". So we have teachers now; not man-made teachers, but those who are spiritual, who teach divine ordinances and laws.
A.R. Will you define the difference between Jacob and Israel here?
J.T. Well, it is a common distinction in the Scriptures; the first alluding to us in responsibility, and the second as spiritual.
{208}
J.H.E. The Lord appeared to *Simon*. Would that be the Jacob side? and then He appeared to *Cephas*  -- would that answer more to Israel?
J.T. That is right. He appeared to Simon after He arose. But Paul says He appeared to Cephas; that is the spiritual side, for this name denotes material for building.
{209}
THE AUTHORITY OF CHRIST IN THE ASSEMBLY (4)
@1 Corinthians 4:21; @Revelation 12:5, @Exodus 4:2 - 5; @Exodus 7:14 - 17; @Exodus 14:16
J.T. It is thought that the subject of "the rod of God" might come under our consideration. The verses read in the New Testament are suggested because they show the connection in which the rod is used; firstly, in relation to the ministry; how the minister, having qualified in moral power with God, has certain authority. Of course, in this case it was apostolic, but still the Lord said that He gave to His *bondmen* the authority, as if it were left here on that principle, as in the bondman. Then in Revelation we see it in its extreme severity, as in the hands of the Lord Jesus in the world to come, when He will rule the nations, not only with a rod, but with a rod of *iron*. We have it in Revelation also as a means of measurement. In chapter 11 the temple, the altar and the worshippers were measured by the rod that was given to the prophet; the New Testament thus showing the significance of the rod of God, but the Old Testament opens up the details of it. It is connected with Moses, who peculiarly represented God in the sense of authority; for the idea of authority runs through and is connected with the rod. The word used is sometimes translated "staff" in the New Translation, which probably alludes to its use by one in his pilgrimage or journeying, or, as in Moses¬ case, in caring for the sheep of his father-in-law; it evidently represents therefore the experience that the believer acquires with God, and according to that measure he is used and becomes authoritative in a moral sense amongst the people of God. Then also, we shall see, as we proceed, how it works out against the resources of Egypt in @Exodus 7, and in chapter 14 against death,
{210}
that is, the Red Sea; then we may see its use in other connections on a later occasion.
W.R. Would you say underlying this authority there is the need for bringing forward the man child?
J.T. Yes; the "male son" is a remarkable appellation of the Lord Jesus. It might seem to be tautological, but it is not; it is to stress the idea of manhood, I think. The government is not vested in the woman, but in the man, so that if the woman governs at all, it would be as recognising that government is rightly in man.
A.F.M. In @Isaiah 9:6 Israel in faith says, "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder". Does @Revelation 12 support that prophecy?
J.T. I think it does. The government is on His shoulder.
A.N.W. Why is the idea of shepherding connected with the severity of an iron rod?
J.T. Well, it would show that extreme measures will obtain in the millennium as having in mind the preservation of all. In Corinth, the extreme measure directed by Paul to be taken against the incestuous person, has in view the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; it was not for destruction really, but for preservation. Paul says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", which means that if one is not true he will be accursed when the Lord comes. The rod will mean a curse; so that in the millennium the sinner of one hundred years is to be cut off, yet the general principle is shepherding and there is an effective means of doing this. It will be carried out in righteousness; "When thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness", @Isaiah 26:9. Severity is the best kind of service to render; the effect of it is to break down the flesh, and preserve the person from walking after it.
{211}
A.F.M. Is that the force of "iron" in the words "iron rod"?
J.T. I think so; iron is a type of what is strong. In the book of Daniel, chapter 7, the teeth of the fourth beast were of iron, which "devoured, and broke in pieces" (@Daniel 7:7).
W.B-w. In @Revelation 2 the overcomer in Thyatira shepherds with an iron rod. How does he use it in the way of shepherding?
J.T. It says, "To him will I give authority over the nations, and he shall shepherd them with an iron rod; as vessels of pottery are they broken in pieces, as I also have received from my Father" (@Revelation 2:26,27). I suppose that would be as over against the rule of Rome. It had ruled the nations; now the overcomer that suffered keenly at the hand of that persecutress, shall be ruling in his day.
W.B-w. Has that an application to the assembly today?
J.T. Well, I think the rod of iron is future in each case. It refers to the millennium, I think; not that the idea of severity is future; the apostle speaks of coming with a rod as implying severity. He did not want to destroy anybody, and yet he said, "Having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled" (@2 Corinthians 10:6); that is, when the saints generally at Corinth were brought into subjection there were still those he would deal with in the most drastic way, those that had sinned and were not repentant.
A.N.W. What you say about the constructive character of the rod would be confirmed in @Psalm 23:4 The psalmist said, "Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me", both of them.
J.T. Yes, I think that line of thought seen in the Psalms and the prophets would bring out that idea; even Job speaks about it. The rod is usually discipline, but it may go so far as a rod of iron in complete destruction --
{212}
"as vessels of pottery are they broken in pieces", the Lord says (@Revelation 2:27).
J.S. I suppose it shows that He has authority to deal with evil, wherever it presents itself.
J.T. I think that is what is meant. The material of which the rod is made being iron is irresistible. Paul does not say what his rod was made of; I suppose it alludes to the power of the ministry with which he would come, but the rod of iron must have in mind the unrelenting character of the judgment against evil in the millennium, so that the sinner of one hundred years is to be cut off.
E.E.H. Why is the staff mentioned negatively in @Matthew 10? It says, disciples as sent out by the Lord were not to provide themselves with a staff.
J.T. It is connected with other things they were not to take; that is, the Lord has in mind that they are not to be like ordinary missionaries, with all that man in his calculations would supply, but in entire dependence upon God. I think that is what the Lord had in mind.
J.S. They were really sent out in weakness, to be as sheep in the midst of wolves.
J.T. Yes; nothing in the way of weapons for defence or even an agent for support -- a staff. A staff would support you in your journeyings. I think it is to induce absolute dependence in the service.
C.N. Is the primary thought of the rod, as in Moses, intended to shepherd, but as wielded against the enemy as in Pharaoh, it is the opposite idea?
J.T. I think it would be enough to suffice for all emergencies, all opposition, even death itself. It is a matter of the authority of God, of the rights He has. God invading even death itself; what man thinks impossible, God shows is subordinate to His rights.
C.N. In attempting to use it, you have in view recovering or gathering together the Lord's people.
J.T. Quite so; so that it says, "Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron", @Psalm 77:20. That is in the benign sense; but the first
{213}
application of the rod is against Pharaoh and his resources in view of releasing the people of God. God exercises His rights in this world, not to overthrow it, nor to destroy it exactly, but to bring it down so that it might release its grasp upon God's people. That is how the saints can count upon God to exercise His rights in any given circumstances, whether it be employment, for example; for God has His rights there; He can intervene with your employers or regulate other conditions around you to release the world's hold on you.
C.A.M. The previous verse in @1 Corinthians 4 refers to the kingdom of God -- "not in word, but in power" (@1 Corinthians 4:20). We might be satisfied if we have it in word, but that is not sufficient, it is to be in *power*.
J.T. So that we have various designations of the gospel in the Scriptures, and one of them is "the gospel of the kingdom" (@Matthew 4:23); that would mean that it has power.
A.B.P. Would you say that in Paul's use of the rod at Corinth, it would be just as much an expression of the spirit of Christ as if he were to come in meekness?
J.T. I am sure it would. He preferred to come in meekness. Of course, to use the rod would be only an extreme necessity.
J.S. As an apostle, he had the authority; he could have come with it.
J.T. Quite so; we hardly realise what power he had: if he wished to wither up or rebuke a person, the power would be there to do it.
G.L. Is that power seen in Peter in the judgment on Ananias and Sapphira?
J.T. That is a very solemn illustration of the thing of which we are speaking.
C.A.M. In @Deuteronomy 17, we are instructed as to any controversy that could not be decided; God had a place where there were priests and a judge (verse 9), and if anyone did not listen to them, that man would die. It was a very severe but right action to take.
{214}
J.T. I am sure it is a word for us. Although Deuteronomy is so full of Christ and the Spirit and the covenant, we have these severe words. "The priests, the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days" (@Deuteronomy 17:9). A weak state of things might be implied, but the judicial and spiritual elements are in mind, and although there may be a refusal to submit to them, it brings down the severest judgment. Paul says, "For indeed we are weak in him, but we shall live with him by God's power towards you", (@2 Corinthians 13:4).
It may be helpful to point out that the introduction to this subject in @Exodus 4 arose from Moses¬ conscious weakness. He says to Jehovah, "But behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice; for they will say, Jehovah has not appeared to thee. And Jehovah said to him. What is that in thy hand? And he said, A staff. And he said. Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it. And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand and take it by the tail -- and he stretched out his hand and caught it, and it became a staff in his hand" (@Exodus 4:1 - 4). And then the explanation is given, "that they may believe that Jehovah, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee". This was the first sign and it was to induce faith, so it says, "that they may believe that Jehovah ... hath appeared unto thee". So that authority is a great matter; it induces faith. Paul received grace and apostleship for obedience of faith among all the nations; that is, authority was vested in him.
A.F.M. Do you think the reference you made to power would come in here, not only was this rod an inducement of faith, but Moses had leaned upon it for support in the earlier days, and it was now an evidence of power to others?
J.T. I think that is the idea: "What is that in thy hand?" (@Exodus 4:2) The servant is taken up according to what he
{215}
*has* , and that is the reason why I think we should begin with this passage, as to the real meaning and the moral significance of the rod; that it begins with oneself. If I am to wield it, it must be what God has taken account of. It is not a mere accident if I have something in my hand. God knew what Moses had in his hand, and knew the history of that staff. How often Moses had leaned upon it and shepherded the sheep with it; so that it is a question of beginning with oneself. If one is enabled to wield the rod of God in any measure, it is as God takes account of oneself according to what He knows is there by formation of Himself; He can link Himself on with that.
C.A.M. That is very interesting; I am sure God would not use anything in an arbitrary way, so that if He does use severity, it is of necessity because of conditions. As using Moses in this way it would be because of fitness through long training.
J.T. Quite so. Jehovah knew the staff better than Moses did. Moses would probably have forgotten many things in connection with that staff. We know how we forget such things very easily, but God forgets nothing. He knows the latent things in you far better than you do. He has been watching the effect of the work in you, ever since you were converted. Then, especially with young brothers and sisters, God watches the effect of the word on you, how it enters into your experience, and one day He may say to you, "What is that in thy hand?" You may have a desire to serve; but may say like Gideon you are weak and your father's house is poor, and all that, but the test is what you *have*. He calls Gideon a mighty man of valour. With Moses it was what he had in his hand; that is, it is something you control, that you have proved and used already, that you are accustomed to; God will take that on.
J.T.Jr. Does taking the serpent by the tail denote that God takes up man in a new way -- He does not take him up as he *was* exactly?
{216}
J.T. No, I think if any of us would revert back in our histories we will remember our proneness to begin as men begin, in a natural way. God would remind you of that, that that is how you did things, and up to the present time maybe you have not changed your mind in that respect. You think you can serve God as other men do, with good speaking, or learning, or the like. Well, I think in releasing it from your hand, letting it go from your control, you see the thing objectively, what you really are, what you are capable of, as moving on that line. The staff became a serpent, showing what one is capable of.
J.S. Would the staff becoming a serpent show that Satan had usurped the power of God over man?
J.T. I think so. I think that is what man became as coming under Satan's control. When man is insubject he is capable of anything. This applies even though one is a Christian, I must be kept under control. The spirit of control is one of the greatest things in the New Testament -- they continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ teaching -- the stress is on the *apostles¬* teaching, not Moses¬ teaching, but the apostles¬ teaching. That is divine authority in the apostles, and everything must be regulated by that; and as soon as I release myself from control, even though I be a Christian, I am liable to do anything.
C.A.M. Satan could do anything with one in that state.
J.T. If we are out of control, we are like an ox let go from its owner, it may kill a man. The oxen that drew the cart with the ark, stumbled or broke loose, we are told.
J.T.Jr. Moses killed the Egyptian. I suppose that was something like the staff becoming a serpent?
J.T. Well, that is an example of the sort of thing we are speaking of; Moses was not under control then.
A.N.W. I suppose, as coming out of Pharaoh's house he had hardly acquired his staff.
{217}
J.T. I should think not. If this staff were his at that time, then it would be all the more extraordinary; if he carried it through and took it into Midian, I think he would understand the more what this sign meant, that as free from divine control he would do anything.
A.F.M. Why is the direction given by Jehovah to take this serpent up by the tail?
J.T. Well, that is the next thing. We have seen the idea of release from control; man became in that state as having sinned. Adam released himself from control as disobedient; Satan got the advantage of him, we may say, and that is the history of man all along. Nimrod, for instance, was a mighty hunter before the Lord; he was without control; he did anything he liked with the creatures of God. Thus Moses would say, I can see now that I did as I wished. The Lord said to Peter, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst", (@John 21:18). I think that should be before us as a first lesson to learn, especially for young brothers, who have any exercise as to service: to come *definitely under divine control*. Romans is provided to teach us this great lesson of subjection.
J.S. You would view Moses as a type of Christ -- taking man as under the power of the serpent and bringing him under control?
J.T. Yes. I think the idea is that man was lost to God in Adam, but is recovered in Christ.
C.A.M. I suppose Satan knew what would happen at the outset, and so tempted man into disobedience, hence out of divine control.
J.T. Quite so, but the epistle to the Romans works out the power of control in the Christian. In learning sin in the flesh, I say. This is what I am capable of; hence I must have control. I must have the Spirit of God. If I have not the Spirit of God I am exposed to the devil. "I *myself* with the mind serve God's law" (@Romans 7:25). That is resolution, but in order to carry that out I need
{218}
the power of the Spirit; one of the fruits of the Spirit is self-control; so that taking the staff back, I think, typifies man abstractly in Christ -- perfection in Christ. All believers are taken up in Christ; Romans teaches that, and we are to accept the fact: "Reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus" (chapter 6:11).
A.B.P. Would you not say that what has been before us is seen in Saul of Tarsus; although having been under the teaching of Gamaliel, he was really like a serpent on the ground, persecuting the saints? When the Lord met him on the way to Damascus, He said he would be told what he *must* do. Was not that the Lord taking control of him?
J.T. Quite so; he calls himself an insolent overbearing man; he did not care for anybody's thought at all, but now he is led by the hand, and is subject to his brethren.
A.P.M. "It became a staff in his hand" -- that is, he was recovered.
J.T. Quite so; "this man is an elect vessel to me", the Lord said. He is in the Lord's hand now, for His use. This is a very important lesson; I do not know o anything more important for the Lord's people, especially the young people, because what you have in your hand is what you are accustomed to; and God uses that, but it is humbling and wholesome to keep in mind the previous history, when you were free from control, and did what you wished. If taken back by God, He would press on you that you are now to be for Him.
T.H. Would the suggestion of Jacob leaning upon his staff be included? He was in perfect control ere he passed away.
J.T. I think that is right -- worshipping, leaning upon the top of his staff. That is a New Testament reference. It was not natural power he was resting on, but divine, and well proved, I think, relating to his whole history.
{219}
G.MacP. Are we under divine control as the truth becomes subjectively effective in us?
J.T. Quite so; Romans teaches that. Chapter 6 is baptism; it is committal to Christ's death. That "even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life" (@Romans 6:4). It is a new thing, so that in application to us, we reckon ourselves "dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus" (@Romans 6:11). It is a change of man, as we have often heard. Now I am in a new status before God.
J.T.Jr. Would you say this element was lacking in Corinth, so that Timothy was sent there by Paul? He went there to represent this idea of subjection and control.
J.T. That is what the apostle meant. "I have sent to you Timotheus ... who shall put you in mind of my ways" (@1 Corinthians 4:17). He was a man under control even like Paul, who was "legitimately subject to Christ" (@1 Corinthians 9:21).
C.A.M. I think it is remarkable, too, in that connection, for in spite of the inroads Satan had made in Corinth, still there was that rod, that mighty power, a token really of Satan's downfall, and it was in the hand of Paul, was it not?
J.T. Quite so; what could we do without it? He has given to His bondmen not simple authority -- but *the authority* . I think the book of Revelation is based on that idea; that is, Christ shows His bondmen "what must shortly take place; and he signified it, sending by his angel to his bondman John" (@Revelation 1:1).
C.A.M. So that it would be a sort of key to that book -- confidence placed in the bondmen.
J.T. Quite so; so that in Mark, the Lord says in regard to the day of His coming, that even the Son does not know, nor the angels, but the Father -- the Father alone. I think the opening of the book of Revelation gives you to understand what is meant: it is the revelation which God gave Him to make known to His
{220}
bondman what must shortly come to pass; "he signified it, sending by his angel to his bondman John" (@Revelation 1:1). That is the ground upon which we get the Apocalypse.
J.H. I was wondering why, after Moses had this experience of control, he should be told to put his hand into his bosom, and that it should come out leprous.
J.T. That is the second sign. Jehovah says to him: "Put now thy hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom, and took it out, and behold, his hand was leprous, as snow. And he said. Put thy hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again, and took it out of his bosom, and behold, it was turned again as his flesh" (@Exodus 4:6,7). The first, I think, is man in his sinful state. The staff suggests what he was doing -- what he had in his *hand*  -- lawlessness, Satan working that in him; but now the second sign is what we *are* as in the flesh -- leprous as snow, but God has taken man up again in Christ, so that he is normal, as God *intended* him to be. That should help in the preaching.
J.H. I thought that taking his hand out would show what was in Moses¬ own bosom.
J.T. Quite so; "The heart is deceitful above all things, and incurable", (@Jeremiah 17:9).
A.R. It says in verse 5, "that they may believe that Jehovah ... hath appeared unto thee". What does that signify?
J.T. The signs were intended to induce faith, but then the appearing to Moses was in view of mediatorship, typically that there was a Mediator between God and men. It is to call attention to Christ as the Mediator. The appearings to Moses would be of that character; as you get in chapter 3 in the burning bush. I think that is to bring out the new mediatorial system of things. There is one man that God appeared to, and these signs are to witness to that, and to induce faith. If it be not that, Christianity is nothing more than an ordinary religion, but it is real and divinely accredited.
{221}
J.S. Does He establish Moses for the deliverance of the people? Power for this is now in the hands of Christ.
J.T. That is right. Moses now rises to the distinction of a mediator. The reference, "hath appeared unto thee", of course directs our thoughts to chapter 3, to bring out the effects of the appearing, but it is a question of faith; faith being active in relation to the mediatorial system of things; @Exodus 4 brings that out strikingly. Moses is given the authority, and Aaron is his prophet. The rod is the symbol of the power of both, hence as you go on through the book you find that Aaron uses this rod interchangeably with Moses. It is the mediatorial system in the hands of Christ that is in mind.
J.S. It is an evidence, is it not, of the power of Christ against the god and prince of this world?
J.T. Quite so; whether it be Christ in His apostolic authority, or in the priesthood, it is the same rod. It can be employed in either sense.
A.R. Is that why the Lord says, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth", (@Matthew 28:18)?
J.T. That is right. This rod typifies that. He exercises it either as Apostle or as Priest.
A.F.M. How do you look at @Numbers 17, where Aaron's staff was laid up before Jehovah?
J.T. In that instance Aaron gets a staff of his own; it bore fruit and thus marked Aaron off as the true priest. The testimony of life was there. In @Exodus 7 God specifies Moses¬ rod; it says, "And Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened: he refuseth to let the people go. Go unto Pharaoh in the morning -- behold, he will go out unto the water -- and take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him; and take in thy hand the staff that was turned into a serpent" That is, in this particular case, there must be no doubt as to what rod it is. In other instances, it is not so distinctive as this, but you are now dealing
{222}
with a monarch, the prince of this world, as you might say, and it is as one representative of the power of God -- one despised, that Moses is to stand before him. Of course, he was the same Moses that once was in the king's house; he is not to be so regarded now, but as identified with Hebrew slaves; one bearing the reproach of Christ, and "esteeming" it "greater riches than the treasures of Egypt", (@Hebrews 11:26). Thus here, as possessing the power of God, what is he other than insignificant in the sight of the monarch of Egypt? Paul speaks of having the treasure in earthen vessels, "that the surpassingness of the power may be of God", (@2 Corinthians 4:7).
R.W.S. Are certain bondmen qualified to use this rod more than others? I am thinking of Timothy and Titus, as examples.
J.T. Well, if God intends to use a man. He prepares him beforehand. He anticipates in our histories our usefulness, and so prepares us for His service; the apostle Paul speaks of serving God from his forefathers. He was like a lion, "mighty among beasts, which turneth not away for any", (@Proverbs 30:30).
C.A.M. There was in Moses an assurance of what he was going to do to the end. The appearing in the bush would be a guarantee that God would qualify him for his work before he really began it.
J.T. Yes; I think it is well to grasp the facts here as we have been speaking of them. It is what you have in your hand. You have never really used it in the sense in which you are now going to use it, but it is in your hand. You have been using it as a natural man; I mean, applying it to yourself. You have never come to a change of man as illustrated in Moses¬ rod becoming a serpent; you have to learn that you are apt to come under the power of the devil at any time. God's end for you is that you are to be under His control.
A.N.W. Moses later is said to be the meekest man in all the earth.
{223}
J.T. As having to do with God, he had become that. I do not think he was that naturally, but just a man like any of us. We can hardly say he was marked by meekness in Pharaoh's house -- "mighty in his words and deeds" (@Acts 7:22) does not fit in with humbleness of mind. You can understand that he would have had no difficulty in slaying an Egyptian.
Ques. Do you think Moses would ever forget that he had thrust his hand into his bosom?
J.T. I am sure he would not. No doubt such great experiences would often be related. Moses, David, and Paul could record many such episodes. It is for us to see how these things work out. The longer Moses lived, the more he would understand the tendency of the natural man to be leprous; on the other hand, now, as moving in obedience to God he would be pleasing to Him -- man as taken up in Christ.
J.S. There was moral dignity with him. In standing before Pharaoh, he was greater than Pharaoh, as conscious of the power God had given to him.
J.T. Quite so; Paul says to Agrippa, "I would to God, both in little and in much, that not only thou, but all who have heard me this day, should become such as *I* also am, except these bonds". (@Acts 26:29). Think of the support that Moses must have experienced when God said, "Take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him; and take in thy hand the staff that was turned into a serpent". He would be clothe with the power of God, as the Lord Jesus said, "till ye be clothed with power from on high", (@Luke 24:49). With such power what could he not do in the presence of a monarch?
W.B-w. That is why we need faith; I was thinking of the centurion in @Matthew 8. The Lord said of him, "Not even in Israel have I found so great faith" (@Matthew 8:10). He said, *"I* also am a man under authority" (@Matthew 8:9), he was under control.
{224}
J.T. He discerned the Lord in that way. The Lord was here with authority; He came from God, clothed with it. The Lord's comment implied that the centurion saw by faith the whole position.
G.MacP. Paul in writing to the Corinthians said, "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified" (@1 Corinthians 2:2); but the power of God was there.
J.T. Quite so; the apostle says, "My word and my preaching, not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power" (@1 Corinthians 2:4). Paul came "not in excellency of word, or wisdom, announcing ... the testimony of God", (@1 Corinthians 2:1). God would have His testimony rightly represented in that way. Moses was to stand in front of Pharaoh, but with the rod that was turned into a serpent. But it must not be turned into a serpent again. God must ever retain His control. That is the lesson to learn in it; if I am to stand in front of Pharaoh, I must not come under his control, otherwise I will lose my power.
A.MacD. Do we see the power of the enemy in the previous verses, where Pharaoh's men cast their rods down, and over against that we have the power of God in that Aaron's rod devoured the other rods?
J.T. Yes. They may imitate to a point, and they do. It says, "Aaron's staff swallowed up their staves. And Pharaoh's heart was stubborn" (@Exodus 7:12).
A.C. Do you think Jacob's position was somewhat akin to that of Moses here? He stood before Pharaoh the king and blessed him.
J.T. Jacob is greater. It is a question of his greatness in the sense of blessing. He represented God in blessing, not for the destruction of the world or its overthrow; Genesis suggests blessing. It is the patriarchal idea, that of father. "The Father judgeth no man" (@John 5:22) the Lord said; but when we come to Exodus, it is ministerial, and that is the test. In this respect we need power to deal with evil in the world in order to
{225}
get the people of God out of the world. Jacob never undertook that; it was not his mission. Here we have a man sent, not yet to destroy the world, but to cause it to release its hold on the people of God. That is the position today.
A.R. In chapter 7 Moses smites the river: is this to break up the source of supply first?
J.T. I think so. Pharaoh says, "My river is mine own", (@Ezekiel 29:3). It represented the resources of the world, and God gives power to the Mediator, that is, to Christ. The gospels, of course, and the Acts are the great evidence of what the Lord did by ministry and by His servants to break up the world, so as to release its hold on His people; not to destroy the world, as yet. In Sodom and Gomorrah the world, typically, is absolutely destroyed, but Egypt is the world of today out of which God would take His people; hence He weakens it so that it releases its hold on us.
A.F.M. The point of verse 15 of chapter 7 which has been brought before us is very important, I think. Jehovah says, "Take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him; and take in thy hand the staff that was turned into a serpent". That would suggest that we must be true to our committals. In taking the serpent in his hand, it became a *staff* in his hand. The thing for us is to be true to that principle. Often we are not; we fail by allowing the flesh and hence fail in our service. Moses¬ action would stimulate us.
J.T. There is nothing we would not do as soon as we release ourselves from control; we may come under the direct power of the devil. Moses is now before Pharaoh with this staff in his hand, so it says in verse 16, "Say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews" (he is identified now with the reproach of Christ) "has sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness; but behold, hitherto thou hast not hearkened. Thus saith Jehovah: In this shalt thou know that I am Jehovah -- behold, I will
{226}
smite with the staff that is in my hand upon the water which is in the river, and it shall be turned into blood" (verses 16,17). That refers to the resources of the world turned into the most gruesome thing -- such as the believer would recoil from. The change really is in the believer, and the world loses all its power over him by this means.
A.F.M. Is this a figure of death as judgment?
J.T. It is blood; you get it enlarged upon in Revelation. The rod is the great power for breaking up the world, not yet destroying it, but weakening it in order to release its hold on the Christian. Sodom is the world no longer viewed as in reconciliation, but Egypt is different. If I go into Sodom, I go of my own volition, because I love the world. I am viewed in Egypt as under the government of God. I have been born in it, and it is a question of getting out of it, that I might serve God in the wilderness; the world thus becomes a wilderness to me.
W.B-w. The gospel is the powerful means to get me out of the world.
J.T. That is right. So you begin in @Exodus 12.
A.N.W. It is interesting in that connection to see that Egypt comes into blessing in a future day, which Sodom and Gomorrah will not do.
J.T. Quite so; the children of Israel were told not to abhor an Egyptian.
C.A.M. It is interesting too that Sodom and Egypt are seen together in the last book of the Bible.
J.T. Quite so; "spiritually Sodom and Egypt" (@Revelation 11:8). I suppose the Egyptian character of the world merges into the Sodom character, so that it comes under unmitigated judgment; the city falls, but Egypt itself will come into blessing, as remarked. The final verse that we read is only to call attention to the fact that the rod dealing with the Red Sea, symbolises God's authority over *death*, and therefore it enters into the death of the Lord Jesus. Jehovah says, "Lift thy staff, and
{227}
stretch out thy hand over the sea, and divide it; and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea", @Exodus 14:16. This movement is for the deliverance of the people of God. Christ was "delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification", (@Romans 4:25). In the death of Christ, God asserts His rights in death; it has to give way, for He took Christ out of it.
C.A.M. That is very striking. When it is applied to the life of the world, the Nile, it was a gruesome sort of death, but here the people of God go right through it in the power of the death and resurrection of Christ.
J.T. Yes. Who shall stand in that war? What shall they do in the swelling of Jordan? What can man do there? God enters into it, in Christ, in the way of right and abolishes it.
C.N. The Lord said as to His life, "No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it again. I have received this commandment of my Father", (@John 10:18). Does that help?
J.T. It does. The commandment implied God's rights; Moses here exercises the power of that right. In laying down His life and taking it again, the Lord makes a way through for us.
A.F.M. I would like to inquire as to the bearing of this scripture upon our subject in these readings. We have been considering the authority of Christ *in the assembly*. How does this scripture bear upon that?
J.T. What is before us enters into God's rights in the assembly. "Shall I come unto you with a rod?" alludes to the power of the apostle in the house of God, so it fits in; but what is more immediately before us is the rights of God asserted in this gospel; that is, the intervention of Christ to weaken the power of the world so that it releases its hold on the Christian, as seen in the earlier chapters of Exodus; and then God
{228}
entering into the domain of death and making a way through. It is a question of His commandment. "I have received this commandment of my Father" (@John 10:18). He entered into death by commandment and took His life up again by commandment.
A.F.M. This commandment was seen first in Christ subjectively, and would work out for the deliverance of man through Christ and the assembly finally.
J.T. Yes, that is how it works out. This same rod goes right through the wilderness -- God's rod.
A.R. Christ went into death as being entirely subject to the will of God. Speaking reverently of the Lord, He was under control, thinking only of the will of God.
J.T. Yes; He says that He had authority to lay it down and to take it again. Of course, in His own right. He could do it as God, but as become Man, He is "under authority". The centurion saw that. He saw the delegated authority vested in Christ. It is a very fine thought. At the Red Sea, it is the Mediator, now entering into the domain of death and opening the way through it for us.
C.A.M. It gives you a great idea of power.
J.T. It shows you what our position is; that we are subject, under control. Thus the Christian has power. So the apostle says, "for obedience of faith among all the nations" (@Romans 1:5); and Peter says, "by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ", (@1 Peter 1:2). That is where the power lies.
A.C. Does not the apostle act on the principle of control right through? @1 Corinthians 9:27 confirms what you say; he speaks of leading his body captive; all is in subjection.
J.T. Yes; he had power to do it; in that chapter he speaks of being "legitimately subject to Christ" (@1 Corinthians 9:21).
A.R. We are apt to think of what is before us as an initial subject, but Saul lost the kingdom because
{229}
he disobeyed. Samuel says, "Obedience is better than sacrifice" (@1 Samuel 15:22).
J.T. Quite so; obedience is a principle. @1 Samuel 15:22,23 contains an oracular pronouncement by Samuel. It is given in poetic form as the New Translation shows. "Obedience is better than sacrifice, attention than the fat of rams ... self will is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of Jehovah, He hath also rejected thee from being king" (@1 Samuel 15:22,23). He was sent to destroy the Amalekites. He did destroy the people, but he spared Agag and the best of the cattle. He said, "I have fulfilled the word of Jehovah" (@1 Samuel 15:13), but he had not done it completely. Samuel then hewed Agag in pieces. You might say that is an extreme thing to do; but he was dealing typically with Satan in the flesh. Then we are told that "Jehovah repented that he had made Saul king over Israel" (@1 Samuel 15:35), but alongside of Jehovah's repenting, Samuel is *mourning* for Saul. He was out of accord with the principle he had so well expressed. Hence Jehovah says, "How long wilt thou mourn for Saul?" (@1 Samuel 16:1) and goes on to say in effect, I have another man. The point for us is to get the other Man. As long as I keep mourning for Saul, I will miss that other Man.
C.A.M. Yes; that making way for the other Man impresses itself upon one. It was really the birthplace of the great power that God was going to wield. Saul was rejected and David came into view.
J.T. Yes; the next chapter shows that as long as we keep mourning for Saul, we will miss David, and will be looking for another man like Saul. Samuel says of Eliab, "Surely Jehovah's anointed is before him",(@1 Samuel 16:6) but David was in the mind of God and He caused him to be anointed.
{230}
THE AUTHORITY OF CHRIST IN THE ASSEMBLY (5)
@Exodus 17:1 - 16; @Numbers 17:1 - 13; @Numbers 20:7 - 13
J.T. The phase of our subject which we are now considering is "the rod of God". At our last reading we referred to @1 Corinthians 4, where the apostle Paul speaks of the rod, asking if he should visit the Corinthians with a rod; then we touched briefly on the rod of iron in the book of Revelation. Then we dwelt on the graphic details given in @Exodus 4:7 - 14, noticing how experience with God enters into the idea, for the word "rod" is properly rendered "staff", which suggests what one might lean upon. We also saw it in its application to Egypt; how God asserted His authority in the world to deliver His people out of it, and then at the Red Sea how He asserted His authority over death, bringing His people through it.
Our scriptures now would show how the authority of God enters into the gift of the Spirit, first in regard to the sufferings of Christ in @Exodus 17, and then in regard to the priesthood of Christ in @Numbers 17 and 20. It is humbling to notice that there is contention or rebellion with the people -- murmurings which bring out the authority of Christ in grace. So that there is doubtless a voice for us in these scriptures, as to the spirit of murmuring. It is said, "And all the assembly of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, according to their journeys, at the command of Jehovah; and they encamped in Rephidim; and there was no water for the people to drink. And the people contended with Moses", @Exodus 17:1,2. So that we have in the names of the place, Massah and Meribah, a constant reminder of the spirit of contention and murmuring amongst the people of God. On the other hand, the name Jehovah-nissi is introduced,
{231}
which means 'Jehovah my banner', and suggests the divine result reached in the experience.
C.A.M. Has the name Rephidim any significance here?
J.T. It is suggestive of a provision of God for the people. The word alludes to support or resting places, so that I suppose at this juncture in their history conditions would be advantageous to them.
C.A.M. There seems to be a pause in their journey here, where they discover the kind of hearts they have.
J.T. Yes; chapter 16 also speaks of that. "The whole assembly of the children of Israel murmured against Moses" (@Exodus 16:2). That was in regard to food. In chapter 17 it is in regard to drink.
A.F.M. In each case the need was met by grace. There were no governmental consequences attaching to their failure.
J.T. That helps us to see how such murmurings are to be met. There is no retributive action on the part of God; no judgment falls on the people, because they had not yet reached the period of law. It is still a provisional condition, a state of things in which grace reigns; God overcoming rebellion in grace.
A.R. God says to Moses, "Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel ... Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock on Horeb" (verses 5,6). Would Horeb suggest grace?
J.T. Well, that is what comes out. Moses and the elders of Israel would suggest the idea of authority amongst the brethren. The rod also symbolises it, but it is seen here typically in the execution of judgment on Christ vicariously. That is, that whilst we deserved it, Christ bore it. Our murmurings must be dealt with, whether in ourselves or in Christ. The sorrowful part here is in regard of ourselves. It is the grace side in regard to God, and the sacrificial side in regard to Christ, so that God stands on the rock, as
{232}
though to say. Aside from Christ, all is hopeless. He takes His stand on Christ.
A.F.M. Is this the scripture that indicates that the Spirit is now formally given? Would the waters flowing from the smitten rock typify Christ smitten and suffering on our behalf, that the Spirit might be communicated?
J.T. That is what is in view, but the circumstances point to what is in our hearts, for as we are tested, rebellion, murmuring, or contention will manifest itself. So the question arises as to what there is in this for us at the present time, and how we must bring in the sacrifice of Christ to meet the present state. It must be met in some way; here the rock meets it. "The rock was the Christ" we are told in @1 Corinthians 10:4, and God takes His stand on the rock, as He says to Moses, "Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock on Horeb".
C.A.M. It has been said that God meets the worst by the best. God meets what He finds in our own hearts by the sacrifice of Christ. It should have a great effect upon us, do you not think?
J.T. Quite so; the rebellion is in our hearts, but God, instead of dealing with it in us, for the moment, deals with it in Christ -- in the Rock -- for it must be dealt with, to meet the exigencies of God's throne; "For the hand is on the throne of Jah" (verse 16).
C.A.M. What is the meaning of the expression, "the hand is on the throne of Jah"?
J.T. I think the Amalekites¬ attack was to expel God from His place with the people; as if Satan would seek to occupy the throne that belonged to God. If that is to be met, the state of our hearts must be met vicariously. So that it is not so much a question of dealing with the people here as of dealing with their guilt, in Christ, that they might get the Spirit, and by the Spirit deal with the state in themselves. It is only by the Spirit we can do that.
{233}
A.F.M. Is the idea that the hand of Amalek defies the rights of God?
J.T. I think so.
A.P. Is the grace side emphasised here because they had not as yet travelled far -- they were still youthful?
J.T. Yes, it refers particularly to young Christians, but by the names given -- Massah and Meribah -- we are ever reminded of the state of our hearts. That is never to be forgotten, but on the other hand, there is "Jehovah-nissi", which means that Jehovah is my banner. The banner is unfurled against Satan, who is working to overthrow God's rights in our hearts.
C.A.M. That is very wonderful, for God takes His stand against the enemy because of what is going on in our souls.
J.T. The throne of our hearts rightly belongs to God, but murmurings give Satan a place, so that the rights of God are denied there.
J.T.Jr. There are two things mentioned -- temptation and contention. In @1 Corinthians 10 both these things come in. Some of them tempted the Christ, we are told, and some of them murmured, and death came upon them as a result.
J.T. Yes; we have the meaning, "because of the contention of the children of Israel, and because they had tempted Jehovah, saying. Is Jehovah amongst us, or not?" (verse 7). It is well to discern that Jehovah is amongst us -- to question it is contention. Here the failure is met in grace, for it is a question of Christ enduring the thing, the Rock being smitten.
F.N.W. Will you tell us what things Christ has suffered for us vicariously?
J.T. Well, He was smitten. It says, "We did regard him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted", (@Isaiah 53:4). He was smitten of God! It was acute suffering -- not what man did to Him, but what *God* did; as if God would say to us, 'Instead of dealing with you according
{234}
to your deserts, I have dealt with My Son'. It makes it very touching. He says to Moses, "Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock". Some of us will have observed in connection with our gospel preachings that in chapter 33, *Moses* was told to stand on the rock. "Behold, there is a place by me: there shalt thou stand on the rock. And it shall come to pass, when my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand" (@Exodus 33:21,22). I suppose in that chapter we have the sinner represented in Moses standing on the rock. That is the ground that God puts you on -- on Christ, but God is standing on the rock in chapter 17; as if to indicate that it was the only way to meet this matter of contention and temptation, for both were directed against Jehovah.
A.F.M. Would @Romans 8:3 be the divine answer to that? "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh". Would God's standing upon the rock be answered to in that verse?
J.T. Quite so; that is the principle; it is God's attitude now, and there is no hope otherwise.
A.J.D. Does God secure the ground in that way for the people -- the people receiving the Spirit, so that the ground is held for others?
J.T. The development of the idea in Romans is to the end that we might deal with the rebellious state in our own hearts.
A.N.W. In @Romans 8 it speaks of the mind of the flesh as being enmity against God. Is it something more than that here?
J.T. Well, it is active here. The carnal mind is essentially at enmity against God, and where it is unjudged, even in the saints, it is against God too. Here it is seen contending against God.
{235}
A.N.W. Is the giving of God stressed here more than the receiving by the people?
J.T. Yes. We noticed previously that it does not say they drank in this chapter. That is to bring out the truth that the Holy Spirit comes in on the principle that Christ has suffered for us. In @Numbers 20 it is recorded that they drank, but it does not say that in this chapter.
A.C. In chapter 16 the people murmured for bread, but in this case they murmured for drink. In the former instance, Jehovah spoke first to Moses, telling him what he should do; but in this instance Moses prayed to Jehovah.
J.T. Yes, the mediator knows what to do. Moses cried to Jehovah; the matter was most urgent. The cry indicated its urgency. Moses was in a strait; it shows the seriousness of murmuring; it is a most unreasonable thing. People when murmuring do not appeal to anything in the truth; it is just an attitude of the mind giving vent to dissatisfaction without any satisfactory reason or explanation for it. They did attempt to give an explanation in chapter 16 when they said "Would that we had died by the hand of Jehovah in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we ate bread to the full" (@Exodus 16:3). What they said was very questionable, for in this chapter they contended with Moses, saying, "Give us water, that we may drink!" It does not appear, however, that they had any hope that he would give it to them; they wanted to make Moses feel that he was responsible for the circumstances in which they were; they were putting the obligation somewhere else save on themselves.
A.C. Moses felt the second occasion of the murmuring more keenly than the first.
J.T. He did; he said they were about to stone him.
A.P. Would you say their motives were selfish? They were thinking of themselves and not of God.
{236}
They say, "Why is it that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us?" (verse 3).
J.T. Yes, and it is a very urgent matter. It is a question of what can be done. Even Moses is in a strait about it, which shows the effect that murmuring may bring about amongst us; even those who are most spiritual may give way. It is a warning to us that this principle of murmuring is most unreasonable and damaging.
R.W.S. The question, "Is Jehovah amongst us, or not?" seems to be singled out from all their murmurings and contentions as particularly reprehensible. He called the names of the places Massah and Meribah "because of the contention ... and because they had tempted Jehovah saying. Is Jehovah among us, or not?"
J.T. So that the testimony stands against us in this matter, as though God would say, 'You shall not escape censure, though I am not pouring out My wrath upon you'. He shows by the names given here, that the thing remains in testimony against us. Then God deals with it -- not in them exactly, yet, but in Christ. So that the gospel enters into it. Jehovah takes His stand upon the rock, and says to Moses, 'I will deal with it there and you are to be there with the rod'.
J.T.Jr. Was it the rod with which he had smitten the river and had dealt with death in the Red Sea? Is it a cumulative thought?
J.T. Quite so. Its power had been proved as in favour of God's people and against their enemies, but now it is against Christ. The rod is to be turned against Christ, and that surely should appeal to our hearts: that He had to suffer for us.
W.B-w. Does the giving of the manna in any way link on with this?
J.T. I think so, because the idea of the sabbath in chapter 16 corresponds, I think, with the name Rephidim. The thought of the sabbath should be carried on into Rephidim, but it is broken in upon by this murmuring.
{237}
Rephidim would be a place of rest; the sabbath came in as giving rest -- that is, in Christ -- but it is disturbed by this murmuring; but instead of turning the rod against the people, God turns it against Christ. It has been against the power of Egypt and against death at the Red Sea, but now it is against Christ; a most touching and solemn thing -- the *Rock* is smitten.
A.F.M. Does the rock being smitten here refer back to the Red Sea? Christ "was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification" (@Romans 4:25), which would result in our receiving the Spirit.
J.T. The resurrection of Christ is not alone the guarantee for the gift of the Spirit; the ascension of Christ is also necessary, which you do not get in @Romans 5, but you do get the action of the Spirit in shedding the love of God abroad in our hearts, for what we really need is the love of God in our hearts, and that will silence murmuring. The settlement of our *state* comes in in @Romans 7, that is Sinai. In our chapter the people have not come to Sinai as yet, but in principle the thing is here, because God meets the murmuring by smiting Christ, It is not the condemnation of sin so much as the actual sufferings that Christ endured.
C.A.M. In @Romans 5, the reference to the Spirit seems to be beyond the person's present state of soul. It is not until chapter 8 that a state of soul is reached commensurate with the gift of the Spirit. Is that right?
J.T. Yes; @Romans 5 may be properly connected with this chapter, because the question of law has not come up as yet. We have not yet come to Sinai. We are at Rephidim, and Massah, which is more @Romans 5, I think, which provides what is needed where murmuring exists in our hearts. God says, 'You have not the thing in yourselves, but I have it', and it is shed abroad by the Spirit -- "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", (@Romans 5:5).
{238}
W.B-w. Would chapter 16 suggest the life of Christ in the manna, and chapter 17 His death in the smiting of the rock?
J.T. Quite so. In chapter 16 it is Christ here on earth as a Man to be fed upon, but chapter 17 typifies His death, not as lifted up to be looked at, but as smitten. The serpent is lifted up later to be looked at by the people for healing.
A.F.M. Would you say the point of this chapter is the sufferings that the Lord Jesus passed through in order that we might receive the Spirit?
J.T. Yes; and intended to touch our hearts when we see that He had to meet all this murmuring by suffering. He was smitten instead of me, so that I might have the means in the Spirit of overcoming this murmuring spirit.
Then we have conflict -- the enemy is attacking, now that the Spirit is, in principle, given. The enemy would rob us of the benefit of the Spirit. God's rights in our souls are being attacked by Amalek, and Moses is told to take the rod and go up. We are now in the presence of Christ's intercession on high, which involves that He is glorified, for it is in heaven that He is interceding for us.
A.F.M. Is Amalek a type of Satan working on the flesh?
J.T. That is the idea, and robbing God of His rights in us. The Spirit here would assert God's rights in our hearts and displace the murmuring spirit. Satan would rob God of His place in our hearts.
A.P. Who does Joshua typify?
J.T. He is a type of Christ, as risen and glorified and as apprehended spiritually by the believer; apprehended as in heaven, but operating through the Spirit here. It is the military side which culminates in the book of Joshua. Moses on the mountain suggests the side of intercession, but Joshua is a type of Christ militant -- operating through the Spirit. The enemy
{239}
would challenge what has happened, that Christ has died, has been smitten, and the Holy Spirit has been given to the saints. He would rob God of His rights in our hearts, but the end of that is Jehovah-nissi; God unfurls His banner and declares that He will have war with Amalek from generation to generation; He will not surrender His rights in His people, but will stand by them and maintain His rights in their hearts.
J.T.Jr. Would the scripture, "sin shall not have dominion over you" (@Romans 6:14), come in here, as God asserts His rights over His people?
J.T. Yes; that would apply, for the people were not under law here, but under grace.
A.R. The rod is referred to here as the staff of *God*, as in chapter 4:20.
J.T. Yes, that is worthy of note -- that it is the staff of *God*, and would show the advanced thought that attaches to our subject; that God is dealing with us in our murmurings, in Christ, and the Spirit is given consequent upon that. God has unfurled His banner; He is determined that He will not surrender His rights in the hearts of His people.
J.H.E. Would that be parallel with the end of @Romans 7? "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law; but with the flesh sin's law" (verse 25).
J.T. Yes. That is the basis of the rights of the throne of God in our hearts.
W.B-w. Joshua broke the power of Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword. How does that work out? Is it something I must do individually?
J.T. It is a question of the word; the sword of the Spirit. It is an inward matter. "The word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", (@Hebrews 4:12). That
{240}
I believe is how the Lord operates in us to defeat the wicked one.
A.J.D. Would that be that I apprehend the mind of God and use it against myself?
J.T. Yes; but it is Joshua who does it; it is a military matter and it is well done. It is Christ operating in our souls by the word, which is the sword of the Spirit.
C.A.M. That is what is going on down here, but it is intimately connected with what is going on up above, is it not?
J.T. Well, that brings us to the point that Moses is told to be on the mountain, but it is still a question of authority. This section stresses the matter of authority typified in the rod. The authority of God was questioned in the murmuring, but God met that in the Rock; now He is supporting the rod on high, so that the conflict goes on and in virtue of the intercession on high, Joshua overcomes.
G.MacP. Whom do Moses, Aaron, and Hur suggest?
J.T. Moses represents Christ as Intercessor. He begins, as you will observe, by lifting up one hand -- the hand in which he held the rod -- speaking of authority, but I think the two hands imply the priesthood of Christ as well. So that it is a combination of authority and priestly grace. It sets forth a weak *state* of things in the people, for the hands became heavy, but this weakness refers to *our* condition, so that Aaron and Hur come in as adjuncts to Moses, and the conflict is carried through. The name Jehovah-nissi shows that the end is reached morally and that God has opened up a way by which He maintains His rights in the hearts of His people.
A.J.D. War with Amalek from generation to generation should show that Amalek would be with us from generation to generation, and that God is against him?
J.T. That is right; one generation after another.
{241}
A.R. This is the first conflict after they crossed the Red Sea. Does it suggest how we learn the service of Christ for us on high?
J.T. That is right. God led them away from war at the outset, but now He allows this battle, for we must learn war, and this first conflict is a very great one; an educational one, too.
A.N.W. While it began by Amalek's attacking, it ended with God's warring, and He had the upper hand.
J.T. That is what the believer comes to. He learns the power of God.
C.A.M. The banner comes in at the end. God has triumphed, for the colours are still flying after the conflict.
J.T. That is right; the colours have not been carried away by the enemy. Jehovah-nissi represents the point reached in the soul of the believer -- that God is working with me against Satan in the flesh.
A.C. Does not the Amalek character of conflict suggest a rear attack, to use a military figure?
J.T. That side is developed in Deuteronomy, but not here. Deuteronomy gives the spirit of the thing, that the weak ones and the stragglers were cut off. He would attack the weak ones amongst the people of God, but in this case we expose ourselves to attack by the allowance of complaints, by unmeaning and unfair murmurings, yet God graciously meets us in calling our attention to the fact that Christ had to suffer for us on account of it.
A.F.M. Do you think the presence of the others with Moses would suggest not only that apostleship was there, but the priestly element also; so that Aaron and Hur would suggest exaltation and purity?
J.T. I think that is right; I suppose the weakness of Moses would indicate the state we are in at this juncture. There would not be any suggestion of weakness in Christ, and as you say, Aaron would stand for exaltation and Hur for purity. They come in here as
{242}
meeting the exigency as it arises, so that the believer finds that God has provided beforehand for him.
J.H.E. On our side, would it be lifting up clean hands?
J.T. That is right; indeed, *holy* hands.
A.R. Would you say that in Exodus it is the overthrow of what is in me; whereas in our passage in Numbers it is the overthrow of assumption against Christ, in asserting right to the priesthood?
J.T. Well, that is what we come to next. @Numbers 17 deals with a condition much later in our histories and, of course, comes in after the great rebellion of Korah. It is worse than murmuring on account of the lack of water. The rebellion of Korah is typical of the rebellion of the clerical system in the history of the assembly, which is the worst of all attacks. So that God speaks more seriously of it, saying, "That thou mayest put an end to their murmurings before me, that they may not die" @Numbers 17:10. He said earlier, "And it shall come to pass, that the man whom I shall choose, his staff shall bud forth; and I will make to cease from before me the murmurings of the children of Israel, that they murmur against you" (verse 5). The preservation of the saints now is thus through the priest, for the rod referred to here is not Moses¬ rod, but Aaron's rod -- the rod from before the Lord -- the one which was laid up before the testimony (chapter 17:4), and was finally "kept" there for a token (verse 10). We have had reference to Moses¬ rod hitherto. Now we have the new rod, which represents Christ in heaven as Priest for it says it "budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and ripened almonds" (verse 8). It is the full thought of priesthood in Christ in heaven -- the full thought of life. "He ever liveth to make intercession for them" (@Hebrews 7:25). There is no possibility of His service terminating; it is in the fulness of life and by virtue of that service the people are preserved -- "that they may not die".
{243}
C.A.M. The truth of the epistle to the Hebrews would be involved in this.
J.T. I think so. It opens up the wonderful subject of the priesthood of Christ as over against the rebellion of Korah, which has its antitype at the present time. This teaching is of immense value, because it is what God has brought out in these last days in the history of the assembly. God brings victory out of all the enemy's attacks, but to meet this great attack He has brought out the truth of what Christ is in heaven.
C.A.M. One feels what an immense thing it is to have the priesthood of Christ opened up to us by the light which has been thrown on it in this day. The great failure of chapter 16 only enhances its greatness. In fact it turns into triumph the crisis of chapter 16, does it not?
J.T. It is an outstanding example of development out of conflict. This is one of the greatest of conflicts in the history of the assembly, and a new state of things develops out of it; so that we have this beautiful description of Aaron's rod, it "budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and ripened almonds". It is the full thought of Christ viewed from the standpoint of life -- a beautiful effect of life in Christ!
C.H.H. Would the priesthood in @Exodus 17 be on man's behalf, and the priesthood in @Numbers 17 be Godward?
J.T. Well, it is for God, but there is the thought of authority in it also, because it is a *rod*, but it is not to be used for smiting. It is too beautiful for that! It is presented to us in the beauty of fully developed life -- ripened almonds. "The Lord spake unto Moses saying, Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock". The rod is to be used now in *speaking* to the rock, not for smiting. God says, "Take the rod", as much as to say there is no other now. It is a question
{244}
of entering into Canaan, and that must be through the support of Christ in heaven, of our great Priest. So that He is able to save completely those who approach by Him to God (@Hebrews 7:25).
A.F.M. To use this rod for smiting would spoil it.
J.T. Hence the great hierarchical system is out of keeping with the moment. It has acquired great power, as seen in Babylon, having power over the kings of the earth, but the divine order now is *priesthood*.
A.R. So that the development of the truth of eternal life in recent times has a bearing on this, has it not?
J.T. It has greatly helped in bringing out the meaning of this type. I think we should view this type historically as coming near the end of the assembly's history -- not that these conditions have not existed right through, or that Christ has not ever been a Priest, but the truth as to it has been accentuated as over against the hierarchical system that has developed. It is really the "gainsaying of Core", @Jude 11.
A.N.W. Would you make a little clearer how the murmuring is made to cease? It says, "I will make to cease from before me the murmurings of the children of Israel, that they murmur against you" (verse 5).
J.T. I think it is in the exercise of grace. God is moving on spiritual lines, and what has come about in the latter history of the assembly has been on spiritual lines. It is not by the use of the rod of Moses -- by discipline; not that discipline is abrogated, but the way to really quell opposition is by the use of Aaron's rod. It is in the exercise of grace, not simply as seen in the manna in @Exodus 16, but as bringing in Christ as known in heaven, in all this beautiful development of life by the ministry of the Spirit. It is the positive thing.
F.N.W. Would there be a parallel to this in the passage, "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession", (@Hebrews 3:1)?
{245}
J.T. Well, that is the theme of the epistle. After that chapter you might say that the apostleship of Christ is regarded as being completed. It is "the Apostle and High Priest of our confession" (@Hebrews 3:1), but the high priesthood of Christ is developed from that point onward in the epistle. Although other things are brought in, the main point is arrived at in chapter 8, "a summary of the things of which we are speaking is. We have such a one high priest": not such a one *Apostle* and High Priest, but such a one *High Priest*  -- "who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens" (@Hebrews 8:1).
C.A.M. That is a great help; and chapter 9 enumerates the articles within the tabernacle, including the rod of Aaron that sprouted.
J.T. Exactly; it is *that* rod -- the rod of Aaron. It is the priesthood of Christ. It is a great triumph, that God has worked this out for us, and especially in the ministry in regard to eternal life, and how the conflict concerning it has been met in grace. Discipline goes on, of course, but we can never have the brethren save on the principle of grace. If we cannot hold them on this wise, we will not hold them at all. We must have each other on the principle of pure grace. So it says, "Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace", @Hebrews 4:16.
W.B-w. Would the rod of Moses be seen in the first epistle to the Corinthians, and the rod of Aaron in the second epistle?
J.T. That is the general thought in the two books, although the apostle had the right to use the rod, he wrote instead of coming amongst them. The first epistle has the character of the rod, that is, discipline; but the second epistle is restorative.
G.MacP. Does @John 17 show how the rod of Aaron budded and brought forth fruit?
J.T. That is very beautiful. It is what Christ is in life, although it is not in exercise towards the disciples
{246}
there. He is interceding for them before the Father. The exercise of Aaron's rod, I think, would enter into the preceding chapters, for He was dealing with them on the principle of Aaron's rod in all those beautiful discourses in chapters 13 to 16, but in chapter 17 He spoke to His Father. It is purely intercession on their behalf, but what an unfolding! what a development of life in man; what beauty of life there is in that chapter!
A.B.P. Agriculturally, sunshine and rain are necessary to produce growth, but here the words used are, *it* "budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and ripened almonds". Would this not emphasise the inherent power of life? Luke tells us that He *grew* and waxed strong (@Luke 2:40).
J.T. It is inherent power. The idea of development of life in Christ comes in early in Luke, but I think John's presentation answers more to the rod or the staff, for outwardly it is a bare rod, and yet it has this inherent nature, this power of life, to develop over night, in perfect order, the buds and blossoms and ripened fruit. It is a very beautiful thought, and emphasises what is inherent in Christ, without any external influence at all, "In him was life", (@John 1:4). I think Luke would give us Christ growing up like a tender plant and a root out of a dry ground, which also suggests what is inherent; He grew up before Jehovah, but this happens over night; it is the power of resurrection, all the beauty of humanity which appeared on the morning of the resurrection now appears in heaven, and all presented to us in this attractive way. That is what God uses now to maintain His people to keep us alive, to keep us from dying, for we are to live in Christ.
A.F.M. Would its application to us be seen in that verse, "For such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens", (@Hebrews 7:26)?
{247}
J.T. Yes, I think so. "Such a high priest became us" (@Hebrews 7:26)? It shows the dignity of the calling of the saints.
R.W.S. It is very beautiful that Jehovah says, "Bring Aaron's staff again before the testimony, to be kept" (verse 10), as though to say, 'The people can see it, but I want it back again for the testimony'.
J.T. Yes; it is laid up before Jehovah.
A.R. Is there any point in Aaron *and his sons* being referred to in the next chapter?
J.T. It is the enlargement of what we have been speaking about -- this beautiful setting forth of inherent life and the development of life in Christ in manhood. Chapter 18 is to open that up to us, and chapter 19 brings in the sacrifice of the red heifer to preserve us in relation to it all; then chapter 20 is as if God would say, 'I would see this working out in this beautiful way continued, as meeting crises amongst the people', but Moses and Aaron reduced the occasion to the low level of smiting. That is the danger of persons prominent amongst us spoiling a thing by smiting instead of speaking. What the saints need now is to be spoken to, and spoken to in relation to this beautiful presentation of the humanity of Christ -- of His priesthood, as depicted in Hebrews.
A.F.M. Would you say that Moses is not regarded as apostle here, or Aaron as priest, but marked rather in brotherly relations?
J.T. Yes, Jehovah said to Moses, "Take the staff, and gather the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock" (verse 8). It is as if God had in mind to demonstrate the working of this new system of things with Christ in heaven; which, instead of being characterised by smiting, was to find expression in speaking. I think God was preparing the way for a beautiful unfolding of the grace of Christ through Moses and Aaron acting according to the meaning of the rod that had sprouted. Instead of that, Moses smote the rock with *his* rod. He separated himself
{248}
from Aaron in that sense, enforcing the side of apostleship, whereas God intended it to be the exercise of priesthood.
W.B-w. Why is it that Moses made this mistake? Could it be lack of development with him?
J.T. I think the point is that the ministers may do this. We may spoil the service through misrepresenting the attitude of God; and yet God in grace caused the people to drink in spite of the failure of the leaders.
T.E.H. The apostle Paul did not use the rod at Corinth in relation to the Supper. He said, "What shall I say to you?" (@1 Corinthians 11:22). He would *speak*, as to intelligent persons.
J.T. He preferred to come in the way of speaking and he told them later that he intended to do so. I believe that this is a word for any of us who minister in any public way. We must not forget that out of every conflict God will bring in something new. If we miss that, we miss the intention before Him. We have to see what God is bringing in now as the fruit of current exercise. The victory here is seen in His bringing in such a rod as this, for God speaks of it as "the rod". Moses might have asked. *Which* rod? But in principle there is only one now; the issue of this conflict is unique. It is now a question of *speaking* to the people.
A.B.P. Would there be a parallel thought in the priestly grace of the Lord in speaking to Peter, saying, "Lovest thou me?" He brought in adjustment by speaking.
J.T. Yes. There was an extensive process of adjustment in Peter's case. The Lord had washed his feet in chapter 13; then He had prayed for him, and had looked at him in the house of the high priest. He also spoke to him as He rose from the dead, and then finally probed him, showing how long it takes when we need to be restored, and showing also the
{249}
wonderful provision made that we should be restored. Think of all this service, as finally He probes him, saying, "Lovest thou me more than these?" (@John 21:15) As much as to say. Peter had thought he had more love than the brethren; for that is what he meant. The Lord does not finish until Peter changes the word "know" to a word which meant virtually that there was now something in him to show objectively that he loved the Lord, and this completed the exercise.
A.B.P. So that Peter began to "sprout"?
J.T. Quite so. The thing is public, not now merely, "thou knowest all things" (@John 21:17), but the fruits of Peter's love are evident; that is what is meant by the last use of the word "know".
A.R. It says in the last verse we read that Jehovah hallowed Himself in them. Do you think that is the great result reached?
J.T. Yes, that is very beautiful. In spite of Moses¬ action, God reaches His end, and this is very comforting; so that the people drink. It says: "And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said to them. Hear now ye rebels" (verse 10). That is what we are apt to say, but we are reminded not to use hard words about the brethren. Even Moses called them rebels, but God resented it. Then Moses says, "Shall we bring forth to you water out of this rock? And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his staff smote the rock twice" (verses 10,11). What a misrepresentation of the moment! He was marring the whole position by this action. But then it says, "Much water came out, and the assembly drank, and their beasts" (verse 11). So that in spite of Moses¬ action the abundance of water was there. That is great and God-like, showing how He rises above the failure of His servants, and causes His people to drink. But He says to Moses and Aaron, "Because ye believed me not, to hallow me before the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the
{250}
land that I have given them. These are the waters of Meribah, where the children of Israel contended with Jehovah, and he hallowed himself in them" (verses 12,13). He was hallowed by the way *He* acted; He has maintained and asserted His own rights and character in spite of the way His servants had acted.
A.F.M. What is the force of speaking to the rock?
J.T. It shows what Christianity is. This is now the time of speaking. All the blessing has come out on that principle. The Lord Jesus said, "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth", (@John 14:16). The Spirit is given on that principle the principle of asking.
J.H.E. "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts", (@Zechariah 4:6).
A.N.W. Moses was to hold the staff while he spoke. Is the staff in that sense intended to maintain priestliness in speaking rather than to be used for smiting?
J.T. Yes, the position is not to be marred. I think that is the lesson to be learned in this. God was looking for a display of the spirit of the moment as connected with this rod. The speaking in grace was to result in the free flow of the waters which would serve for the refreshment of the saints, but instead of that, you have this smiting twice, and that with the wrong rod.
J.H.E. Moses allowed the circumstances to overcome him.
J.T. Quite so, but the great point is that God was not overcome by the circumstances. The water flowed and He was hallowed, and that is what is going on today in spite of our failures.
C.A.M. God fully understood the rebellious state of the people and Moses¬ spirit; it says, "They provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips", (@Psalm 106:33).
J.T. Quite so; the people were not excused.
{251}
N.P. Kindly tell us why it is that Aaron is held responsible with Moses in this case, though it was not Aaron who took part in the smiting of the rock.
J.T. Well, if one is linked up with a brother in what is wrong, or if we stand by him and do not rebuke him, we are not immune from blame. Aaron did not rebuke Moses, as far as the record shows. They therefore were both in the wrong.
E.S. In spite of the failure the people drank the water.
J.T. God is not letting the people off, although He is sanctified in them, and they drink. The Spirit has recorded that they grieved Moses¬ spirit, which shows that He did not let them off. We need to be reminded of the fact that God will never pass over anything to which our attention has to be called.
W.B-w. Does the contention mentioned here refer back to @Exodus 17 or to what transpired in this chapter? Why is it brought in here?
J.T. Because they murmured here, too; after forty years they had not forgotten how to murmur; showing that if we do not judge our state, God will remind us of it.
C.A.M. @Psalm 106 alludes to this very chapter.
J.T. Quite so; God does not let us off.
A.B.P. Does this scripture provide the basis for the apostle Paul to say that the rock followed them?
J.T. I think so "for they drank of a spiritual rock which followed them: (now the rock was the Christ;)", (@1 Corinthians 10:4). That is an allusion, I think, to the lowly attitude that Christ takes up amongst us like a water-carrier serving the saints.
A.P.M. The rock was smitten in @Exodus 17 and it is smitten here. Does the thought of the rock following them apply in both cases, that it went right through?
J.T. I think so. The rock was smitten here wrongly. It is like any of us who serve, slighting or misrepresenting
{252}
Christ, or maybe speaking disrespectfully to the saints, but in spite of that He causes the water to flow.
E.E.H. Would you connect @Acts 2 with what you are saying? The disciples received the Holy Spirit and then Peter speaks, and as it were the water flows.
J.T. Yes; Peter did not smite. He spoke beautifully of Christ. It is one of the finest testimonies you can get in contrast to the failure of Moses here. The leading apostle speaks beautifully about Christ. "Give heed to my words",(@Acts 2:14) he says. This is the time of speaking.
A.P.T. Would you say that Peter with the eleven would be like the ripened almonds?
J.T. I think so. What a reflection of Christ there was in Peter with the eleven standing there, representing the rights of God, but in a priestly way. When those who heard, said, "What shall we do, brethren?" he said, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit", (@Acts 2:38). That is like the drinking; they drank abundantly.
{253}
THE CONFESSION OF WHO CHRIST IS
@Matthew 16:13 - 18
It is imperative that we should have a right apprehension of Christ if we are to have part in the assembly and to become developed in it. The object of the enemy on every hand is to discredit Christ, by inference, if not by direct attack. The denial of His deity or of the reality of His humanity is a discredit to Him in a most subtle way. Men who profess to be His ministers are doing this, and it is well therefore for Christians to say what is true and right about the Lord Jesus, to confess that He is divine and also verily Man; for all kinds of other things are being said in the world. The Lord raises this question with His disciples, "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" Men varied in their thought of Him then as they do today; some said that He was John the baptist, some Elias, others Jeremias or one of the prophets. It does not tell us how each one arrived at his conclusion, but no doubt they did so in a very careless and haphazard way.
You will observe that the Lord does not here enquire as to what is believed, but as to what is *said* . Some of us may say very little about the Lord, we may speak about Him amongst the brethren, and so far so good; but to be content with this is very poor, and not worthy of Him, for He looks for us to confess Him before men, and here it is a question of what we confess. "Who do ye say that I am?" Peter answers immediately and says, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". Earlier, when they were in the boat. Peter and the others had said of Jesus that He was the Son of God, indicating that they had acquired their knowledge of Him and their faith in Him by what they saw; but in this incident the Lord does not refer to that, but to revelation, for He says, "flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens". This
{254}
light as to Him was the outcome of revelation. If we are able to say something about Him, it must be based on this spiritual transaction in our souls with the Father. No man of theological training is ever equal to the knowledge of Christ as presented in this passage; they are not able to compare spiritual things with spiritual, and there can be no right understanding of the Person of Christ apart from revelation.
It is important to understand this matter of confession. You not only believe, but you *say* . The Lord says, "flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens. And *I* also, I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly", that is, by my confession as to Christ, I stand out as material for the structure. The assembly was not intended to be always a hidden vessel, but also to show its worth as militant; and as such it is based upon the confessions of those who are not ashamed to bear testimony to Him as the Christ, the Son of the living God. There is surely no need to fear, for God has by Him a Man by whom He can bring in a world for His pleasure, and also by whom He will effect all things, the "Son of the living God". What He establishes has the divine stamp upon it, it is living.
{255}
THE AUTHORITY OF CHRIST IN THE ASSEMBLY (6)
@Joshua 1:1 - 18; @Joshua 3:11 - 13; @2 Samuel 8:3
J.T. In our more recent meetings we have been considering the rod of God. We began the subject in @Exodus 4 and pursued it to @Numbers 20. We saw that the rights of the Lord, and the staff of Moses, or the staff of God, merged into the rod of Aaron that budded and blossomed and yielded almonds over-night in the sanctuary, and that Moses was directed to take that rod and speak to the rock. It was in view of the water being given as meeting the needs of the people. Having finished with that subdivision of our main subject at our last meeting, it was thought that we might pursue the subject into the book of Joshua, with a view to its conclusion, there being only one more reading left of this series. Our present object is to enquire a little as to the place the rights of God have in the entrance of His people into their inheritance. So that the leading thoughts in the two chapters read would be a consideration of the full extent of the inheritance from the Red Sea to the Euphrates in the book of Joshua, with the law representing God's rights in His new position, as governing us peculiarly; and then unity in the two-and-a-half tribes being pledged to cross the Jordan with the nine-and-a-half tribes to maintain the true principle, and then that the ark is the ark of the Lord of all the earth; His rights over all the earth being in mind.
In David we have that energy which established His rule to the full extent of the territory of the inheritance assigned to Israel. Perhaps the brethren may not see at once what is the position of the book of Joshua in the inspired record, but the rights of God would include the idea of Christ risen, not simply risen as in Romans for our justification, *but as known amongst His people;*
{256}
so that Colossians takes the subject up and presents to us "Christ in you the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1:27), that is, it is Christ characteristically known, by faith, of course, but known in His ways amongst us. That is what is in mind in the ark; it is a tangible thing, so to speak. It is not a mere testimony; it is a concrete thought; it did not appear at the Red Sea, there it was simply the rod of God, but the ark is Christ known characteristically amongst His people, and the consequence is that, as living, He secures the rights of God, for He alone is suitable in whom God asserts His rights; not only in the representation of God, but regarding what He is personally. He is the only One whom God would have in the land, hence what is seen there is Christ characteristically. So that the ark occupies a great place in the early part of this book, and does so right on to David. We may be helped in this connection to see that God has brought in a new order of man Christ in heaven known there as the old corn of the land, but He is also seen, in the ark, in power amongst His people, and He is to occupy the position. The mystery is, "Christ in you" (that is in ourselves) "the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1:27). That is the secret of entering into the land, the ark going before.
C.A.M. This important thought of Christ being in you the hope of glory involves also the matter of "with Christ" in the following part of the epistle.
J.T. Yes; that is the thought. We are risen and quickened with Christ.
C.A.M. Do you look at this as experimentally known in our souls rather than having just the light of it?
J.T. I think so; what we ought to see is how Christ is to be apprehended, of course in heaven, but among us; as known among His people Christ in you, or among you.
J.S. Does Christ represent power as seen in the ark?
{257}
J.T. That is the idea; the ark represents power, and the people were to follow after it, for this leads us on. Nothing else was to be admitted in the passage of the Jordan. "Christ", it says, "in you the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1:27). All else is to be refused. I think if we grasped that thought as presented in Colossians, we would be helped on to what God would have us occupied with.
A.F.M. Are not the priests that carried the ark identified with it, so that when their feet dipped in the edge of the water, the waters which flowed down from above, stood and rose up in a heap, very far, by Adam. Would not that be a great representation of the power of God in connection with the ark?
J.T. I think that is what we may see. At the Red Sea there was power also, but it was connected with the rod of God, the direct authority of God. Here we have the concrete thing, but as symbolical of authority, like the sceptre; but the ark goes further than that, it is representative of a Person in whose heart were certain things; such as fidelity to God, and other features marking Him off amongst us.
R.W.S. Why is this entrance to the land worked out with Joshua and not Moses?
J.T. Well, because he represents that side of the truth, he is that peculiar type of Christ. He was raised up and intended from the outset to lead the people in. He appears for the first time as a military man in @Exodus 17; what was written there in the book was to be rehearsed in the ears of Joshua, for the Lord would have war with Amalek from generation to generation. He would be the leader in that kind of war. Moses led in the other wars, but Joshua is the leader in the wars of Canaan; that is to say, what relates to the inward state of the people of God by which we enter into our inheritance. Joshua is the type of Christ in that relation, and he is seen from the outset as with the people; as Moses dies he comes wholly into evidence in view of his work.
{258}
A.R. With regard to what you were saying about the power of Christ, God says to Joshua, "None shall be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life", Does that correspond?
J.T. Yes; just so. It is irresistible power; and is a question of making room for Christ, which is emphasised in this chapter. Even the two-and-a-half tribes join in saying, "According as we hearkened to Moses in all things, so will we hearken to thee; only may Jehovah thy God be with thee as he was with Moses. Every one that is rebellious against thy commandment and hearkeneth not to thy words in everything that thou commandest us, shall be put to death. Only be strong and courageous" (chapter 1:17,18). So that the most unspiritual, as you might say, these two-and-a-half tribes, are thoroughly with Joshua. That is a great point now as to our position, as entering on our heavenly portion; for this we need unity. It is not the nine-and-a-half tribes only that are necessary; Joshua insists that the two-and-a-half should be there, that is, representatively; it is these who say these things to Joshua, so that obedience to him is ensured, and aside from that you cannot enter on the inheritance. It is a collective matter.
A.F.M. About these two-and-a-half tribes, would the suggestion be of encouragement to some of us who are not very spiritual, to come into line with the nine-and-a-half tribes and go along with them?
J.T. That is the lesson, I think, of the chapter. We may have influences that would divert us from our brethren; there are many things that might hold us on the wilderness side, but the chapter would teach us the imperativeness of unity in regard to entering on our heavenly inheritance.
C.A.M. It is evident in the least matter that comes up amongst us, that whilst appearing to weaken things, in result it is removing everything that would not work for unity, would you say?
{259}
J.T. That is one of the greatest lessons in this scripture, that each one of us is to lay himself out for unity; not, of course, at the expense of truth, but unity as essential to our entrance into our greatest portion.
W.F.K. Would the ark suggest leadership? All the people were to keep the ark in view when passing over Jordan. Would that be the idea?
J.T. When the ark moved, it says, they were to go after it. "When ye see the ark of the covenant o Jehovah your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then remove from your place, and go after it; yet there shall be a distance between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure" (@Joshua 3:3,4). It says, "remove from your place". We might say that is unnecessary; if they were to go after the ark, they must do that, but I think there is point in it. We are all to become detached from what is of the city, or what is local, and move on collectively, but not militarily.
J.H.E. So the prayer of the Lord was, "That they may be one, as we are one" (@John 17:22). How necessary that prayer!
J.T. Well, the idea of unity runs through Scripture. It flows out of what God is; especially as entering on our heavenly portion, it is essential that each should be set for unity by leaving his own place as he sees the ark move.
W.F.K. I was thinking that in keeping our eyes on the ark, a point of unity would be established.
J.T. That is the idea, so that chapter 3, whilst teaching us this great thought of unity, shows that alongside of that lies the immensity of the inheritance; it is not simply what lay between Jordan and the sea, but the Euphrates. You will notice that Jehovah speaks about the *extent* of the inheritance: "Every place whereon the sole of your foot shall tread have I given to you, as I said unto Moses. From the wilderness and this Lebanon to the great river, the river Euphrates, the whole land of the Hittites, to the great sea, toward the
{260}
going down of the sun, shall be your border" (chapter 1:3,4). It is "this Lebanon to the great river"; that is, they are to arrive at this immense position.
A.F.M. It appears that this vast territory was not appropriated until Solomon's time. Is that so?
J.T. Well, the verse read in @2 Samuel 8 shows that David established or recovered his dominion there. @1 Chronicles 18 says he went to establish his dominion by the Euphrates.
A.F.M. Would it show that David had already taken advantage of God's offer?
J.T. Yes; that David had entered into the full thought of God; and would consolidate his dominion.
C.A.M. Would that correspond with the "Lord of all the earth"?
J.T. I thought we should see that as "Lord of all the earth" the universal rights of God come into evidence at this point, and shut out all national claims. "By faith" they are all terminated and abolished; not yet actually, but "by faith". It is a question of how God will dispose of the earth. Already He is disposing of territory for us now. It is a question of His rights in the universe, to dispose of what He will to whom He will.
A.F.M. Do you mean by that, that the heavenly places are available to us?
J.T. That is what is meant. It is the heavenly side of the position, Canaan, but God's universal rights are in evidence.
A.P. Is your thought that the heavenly side is being disputed by Satan's laying claim to that area, by this certain kind of enemies?
J.T. That is what Joshua brings out. When we come to 2 Samuel and 1 Chronicles, it is not extermination of enemies, but rather subjugation; that is, the enemies are not viewed as wicked spirits, but as persons to be subjugated and ruled. This looks on to the millennial day, but in the meantime, it is the heavenly side
{261}
entirely, and so our conflict is not with blood and flesh but with principalities and powers in the heavenlies; that is, God is asserting all His rights in disposing of His territory to whom He will, and to those He loves; this part of the book of Joshua is to show us how that becomes effective.
A.N.W. Why is the need for courage on the part of Joshua so stressed? Repeatedly, he is exhorted to be courageous.
J.T. Have you not felt in your experience the need for courage in laying hold of heavenly things, on account of the terrific opposition of spiritual wickedness?
A.P.M. Was not Joshua a distinct type of Christ?
J.T. Just so. He is that, but also a type to show how stress is laid on courage. It is remarkable that even as coming from the two-and-a-half tribes, the word is, "Only be strong and courageous", as if all the saints are coming in; even the most unspiritual are in it as they see the issue; they want Joshua to go through.
C.A.M. I think it is remarkable that not only should God encourage Joshua more than once in the chapter, but that these two-and-a-half tribes should do so, using the identical words.
Rem. There seems to be moral order in that Moses should precede Joshua; its being mentioned in this way early in Joshua does suggest that the authority side must be recognised before we can be in the gain of leadership as seen in Joshua.
J.T. Yes; I think that is right. Moses¬ authority is asserted, as in the Acts it is the name of Christ; everything is done in His name. The writings of Moses, too, are representative of divine authority, running right through Scripture. God brought in that side at the beginning, as an infallible testimony to His rights. In @John 5 the Lord says, "If ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed me" (@John 5:46). He puts Moses¬ writings before His own words.
{262}
A.F.M. Would that be true of the whole of the Old Testament? The Pentateuch occupies an important place in that way, and the last chapter of the Old Testament says, "Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel", @Malachi 4:4.
J.S. In Moses, is it Christ typically known in the soul, as having broken the power of this world over us?
J.T. Yes, I think so; particularly the power of death; the Lord having broken its power, and asserted His power over it, in His own death and resurrection.
J.S. We must know Christ in that light before we are prepared to go on to the spiritual side.
J.T. That is what I was thinking; so that Moses has a peculiar place here, in that the law of Moses is mentioned; it says, "That thou mayest take heed to do according to all the law that Moses my servant commanded thee. Turn not from it to the right or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest. This book of the law shall not depart from thy mouth; and thou shalt meditate upon it day and night, that thou mayest take heed to do according to all that is written therein; for then shalt thou have good success in thy ways, and then shalt thou prosper" (verses 7,8).
J.S. Would that be in keeping with the place that the tables of the covenant had in the ark?
J.T. It is in keeping with that -- the tables of the covenant would mean that one Man was bringing in that which was of value to God. The Lord said prophetically, "Thy law is within my heart",(@Psalm 40:8).
C.A.M. The whole book of Psalms stresses this matter of Moses¬ law. The Psalms up to @Psalm 119 seem to embody this idea.
J.T. Yes, and therefore the distinction between the book of the law which was to be read, and the ark. The ark is Christ, having the law in His heart, and fits into Colossians; that is Christ characteristically known as cherishing the law. He hid it in His heart. We have
{263}
One amongst us like that, and the more we understand Him, the more rigid we will become as to the rights of God expressed in Moses.
C.A.M. So that really gives great point to the fact that this thing would be in the saints to start with.
J.T. That is the idea. So that although you may be exacting as regards the principles governing the house of God, yet the ark goes beyond that, because it represents the love of Christ, as seen in @Numbers 10, the ark leaves its place of dignity in the camp and goes before the people to seek out a resting place for them. It is the love of Christ protectively that is known in it too; in Gethsemane He said, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away", (@John 18:8). That is the peculiar love of Christ that is known amongst us; so that while you have the law insisted upon by the Lord, He is full of grace and truth.
F.H.L. Is that Joshua coming in as head on the privilege side?
J.T. I think so. He represents Christ in that way, but seen later in headship, where He is magnified amongst us. He himself has to go into the thing so as to be a full type of Christ as in the ark, because Joshua represents one feature and the ark another. The ark really represents what Christ is as known amongst us; that is, in the traits in which He is seen typically; that He had the law in His heart, but still grace was there. In the wilderness the ark went before the people to seek out a resting place for them typically; it was Christ thinking of them.
A.F.M. In this instance, the ark is in the lead in view of the people going over. Would that be a final consideration of Christ for His brethren?
J.T. It is. @Joshua 1 brings us into accord with the brethren, you do not get the ark in that chapter; it is to bring us into accord with it; the third chapter is the ark itself, but the first is to bring us into accord with it, as to subjection and abiding by the commandments of
{264}
the Lord. It is the book here, not the tables, giving the fulness of His mind. It is the enlarged thought; then the spirituality side presented in Rahab in chapter 2. She told the spies to go out another way, on spiritual lines, and that prepares us for chapter 3 where the ark is moving, and we move out of our place. I lose my local setting. There are those who cherish their local setting and think of nothing else, but they are not Canaan men at all. We want to leave our own places and get into the great thoughts of God as to the territory and the inheritance, and so be with the brethren who are the twelve tribes, not nine-and-a-half. They are complete here.
G.MacP. We are made fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light according to Colossians.
J.T. It is the saints in light. So it is love for all saints and love in the Spirit, too, in Colossians.
J.S. Joshua would set forth Christ to the people, as seen in the ark. He himself would give expression to what was set forth in the ark.
J.T. That is right; the ark is to be steadily before our minds in all these wonderful movements, so that it is Christ among us, known in that way, and He thus becomes increasingly attractive and magnified in our eyes.
A.B.P. Although we may not be able to visit our brethren very much, there should be a concern with us to know what is going on throughout the scope of the Lord's work, so as to bear it on our hearts in prayer; would you say?
J.T. Well, that is what both Colossians and Ephesians teach us -- our relation to the universal side of the position; so that it is love for all the saints; Christ among you the hope of glory, and nothing inconsistent with Christ is to be allowed; that is @Colossians 1 and 2, and then the new man is seen in chapter 3, which is after Christ -- the young, fresh, new man.
{265}
W.B-w. We have to make the passage of the Jordan to reach the glory system.
J.T. Quite so; hence these facts are presented, so that Christ becomes attractive, not only Christ as in heaven, but Christ known subjectively amongst us; so you begin to see the beautiful traits of Christ worked out amongst the saints.
W.B-w. But there must be a right state among the saints in order to pass over.
J.T. That is exactly what these early chapters are for; to lead us on, and to show how we go over.
A.P. Do you think Rahab was as far on, possibly, as the people? She says to the spies, "I know that Jehovah has given you the land", in verse 9(@Joshua 2:9). That is the whole thought before us in this section.
J.T. Chapter 2 shows us the *spiritual* side. It is not what we acquire through teaching or ministry, but through the work of God in us. We should not be neglectful of the ministry, and what Rahab presents is to enable us to value ministry. She did not know either Moses or Aaron; had never listened to them, but she had wonderful instincts, indeed, instinctive intelligence.
A.F.M. May we by any means encourage that work of God in us?
J.T. That is the thing to do, to make room for it; it lies in the power that worketh in us.
A.R. Was Rahab representative of a Colossian saint? When the spies came into her house, she hid them, then she told them to go on the mountain and hide three days.
J.T. That is just the idea. The word "hid" is a characteristic word in Colossians.
J.S. Whom does she typify?
J.T. I think the saints viewed as the result of the sovereign work of God. She is not a product of ministry, because she had never sat under Moses or Aaron, or like persons; yet she was possessed of these remarkable instincts. God works in the most unlikely persons,
{266}
so that it astonishes you; the gospels bear witness to this kind of people with whom God works.
G.MacP. It is exemplified in Mary of Magdala.
A.P.T. Chapter 2 gives the account of what *Rahab* did, does it not? It seems that all the spies were doing was hiding.
J.T. It says, "And the two men returned and came down from the mountain, and went over and came to Joshua, the son of Nun, and related to him everything that had happened to them. And they said to Joshua, Of a surety Jehovah has given the whole land into our hands, and even all the inhabitants of the land faint because of us" (@Joshua 2:23,24).
C.A.M. As you said, it is a matter of the sovereign work of God in Rahab, reminding one of the word "new" in Colossians, as if when looking at the thing, it shows itself unexpectedly. Is that how you view it?
J.T. Quite so; tell us more about it.
C.A.M. I was struck with what you said. If we look at Rahab and the flax, a sort of agricultural idea is suggested; the word "new" seems to be embraced in that and worked out; she being herself an exponent of the flax.
J.T. As remarked before, she represents God setting what disrupts in the midst of the enemy's camp, yet it is God's sovereign act. Who would have expected that God would work in a house like that? -- but there it was. What was of God was there in perfect order, too. The flax was on the roof, and the thread of linen in the window -- all denoting progress in the activity of God, in righteousness and holiness.
A.C. Is it not rather interesting and suggestive that Rahab comes to light during Joshua's leadership?
J.T. Well, it is; it emphasises the sovereign work of God, without which the greatest ministry, even that of Moses, must be ineffectual.
A.C. You mentioned that Rahab did not know Moses, but God was especially supporting Joshua in
{267}
this new move, and the product of His work in this woman's soul would encourage him.
J.T. Quite so; it refers, as already stated, to the sovereign work of God in any one of us. There is not a single Christian who has not occasioned surprise as soon as the work of God began to take genuine and manifest effect in the soul. It has surprised people as nothing else has done, to see the direct evidence of the work of God. It does not matter whether such a person is brought up in religious circumstances or in the most worldly ones, as soon as God begins to work, when it is seen, it has its own voice. Without that, all the ministry is in vain; for effectualness, we must have that.
A.P. So there is really a double result; one in the sovereign work of God and the other in the ministry which brings it to light.
J.T. Quite so; nobody knew better than Joshua what Moses had taught. He was a young man constantly near him, as his minister; possibly, he could give you a better account of Moses than anyone. That is one side, but here is a person who had never met Moses. I would not say she had not heard of him, but she had never seen him. Yet it is wonderful to note that she could talk with these men, and leave an impression on their minds. Apparently she is the only Canaanite they had met, and they go back to Joshua greatly affected, bringing this wonderful report.
A.P. The strategy that she used was unusual. She received them by the door, so to say, and sent them away through the window.
J.T. You may be sure where the unusual is not operating in us, and among us, we are governed by other principles; that something is hindering the work of God, and therefore it is dormant. This chapter greatly encourages us as illustrating the sovereign work of God.
{268}
A.F.M. Does that work in us enable us to take in the ministry; while the ministry itself really tells us what we have received in relation to the work of God?
J.T. Well, it does; we cannot be without the ministry, but God would show what His own work is by itself, and that is what she represents.
A.N.W. No one could value the ministry of @John 10 like the blind man of @John 9. The work of God was in the man in chapter 9, and he would value, as none other, the ministry of chapter 10.
J.T. You can understand what a time he would have after that; how ready he was to listen to the Lord, after He raised the question, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" (@John 9:35) What a fine start he had as the Son of God was disclosed to him!
C.N. Does @John 3 support what you have been saying? Nicodemus came with an enquiry to the Lord, but He immediately said to him, "Ye must be born again" (@John 3:7).
J.T. That is the idea exactly, because at the end of chapter 2, as we have often remarked, the Lord did not trust the many, although they had believed on Him because of His miracles. You cannot trust anybody who is not a subject of the work of God. But here is a man, Nicodemus, a different man, and I am sure it was pleasing to the Lord, the way he came to Him.
A.R. Reference was made to @Colossians 3, to what is new. It says in verse 11, "Christ is everything, and in all" @Colossians 3:11. Is that not what the Colossian saints would arrive at -- Christ would be everything, and in everything to them?
J.T. That is the thought; we will see, as we progress in this book, how Joshua is magnified in the eyes of the people. The ark is hardly noticed in the book after chapter 6, because you have the full thought of it brought out in Joshua, and all merged in what Joshua was, so that heaven hearkens to the voice of a man in chapter 10; that is, a Man known amongst us.
{269}
A.F.M. Referring to the authority of Christ in the assembly, would those in Israel bow to that authority as vested in Joshua?
J.T. Well, they did. It is remarkable how subject they are to him; you hardly get a rebellious act towards Joshua throughout the book; they rebelled against Aaron earlier, but not against Joshua. It is striking to see how he stands out as a type of Christ throughout the book, in that way, he answers to "Christ in you", of Colossians; that is, it is Christ, in the whole book, seen amongst us, Christ Himself, of course, in a spiritual way, but characteristically; so that the whole scene becomes attractive, and you say, 'Well, Christ is here, and Christ is all and in everything'.
F.H.L. The suggestion is beautiful as to Joshua and the ark coinciding.
J.T. This book is of immense importance to us as showing how things converge in Christ in the assembly; how He becomes everything, and in all. I think that is the idea, that you come into an order of things where everything is wonderful. It is not a question of this person or that person, but there is someone who controls everything, and is everything; that lays hold of the soul. This book impresses you with Christ magnified. God says, 'I will be magnified in the eyes of the people'; and the most unspiritual, that is, the two-and-a-half tribes are the ones to urge that Joshua is to be obeyed.
A.N.W. I am afraid we put that very much forward to the future -- Christ everything, and in all -- but you are making it present.
J.T. I think that ought to be clear to all. Perhaps we will read those verses in Colossians 3: "Do not lie to one another, having put off the old man with his deeds, and having put on the new, renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him; wherein there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian,
{270}
bondman, freeman; but Christ is everything, and in all" (@Colossians 3:9 - 11). That is, it is what Christ is in the assembly; it is the new man here. The word "new" is young and fresh, and "renewed" is another word; there was nothing like it before. There it is "renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him" (@Colossians 3:10); that is the new man. There is only one, and that is, I think, what we should see, that it is one idea you get among us. The idea is that it is not one or two brothers conspicuous, but it is Christ in this characteristic way, first in freshness among us, the new man, and then renewed in knowledge, a different kind of knowledge is what is meant, but it is after the image of Christ who created him, and that only strengthens what we have in chapter 1; that is, Christ among you, Christ in that characteristic way, and that is how we move on together. There is only one Man; this all works against partisanship, because it is a question of Christ.
A.P.T. In chapter 2 Rahab says, "Jehovah has given you the land" @Joshua 2:9. Is that a collective idea? Not only these two spies, as addressed, but all Israel.
J.T. Quite so; they say to Joshua, "Of a surety Jehovah has given the whole land into our hands" (@Joshua 2:24). The whole land was in their hands; and mark it, they had not struck a blow as yet, but faith says, All is ours; God has given it to us.
A.R. Is that not the way the whole position is really taken on in the assembly, that when Christ comes in as everything, the whole vista of purpose opens up before us?
J.T. That is right. We do not set aside the Person of Christ in heaven, but it is Christ known here, known in character; that is, that He is in such and such a believer -- Christ among *you*.
C.A.M. Regarding this matter of partisanship: it is all very well to speak of it and say we should not be partisan in our feelings, but were we to see our brother
{271}
in this heavenly light, he would look so beautiful that we would be taken out of ourselves; we would have such admiration for him and for all the saints.
J.T. The saints then become clothed in your mind from that point of view -- "Jehovah has given you". Who are the "you"? Every true Christian belongs to them and I want to clothe them in my mind with divine thoughts; however objectionable they may be to me naturally, I must clothe them with spiritual thoughts. Otherwise there is no possibility of unity.
R.W.S. Philemon and Onesimus sat down together in Colosse and broke bread.
J.T. Exactly; if unreleased by Philemon, his master, Onesimus was still the slave, but in the assembly they were one.
C.N. Is your thought that it is this view of Christ amongst us that would enable us to take hold of the heavenly position?
J.T. That is right; so the thing is right before you. The word is "Christ in you", which may be rendered "Christ among you". It is the power of God that has brought us forward to move along on those lines, and you look for those traits in every saint.
N.P. Referring to the clothing, mentioned a little while ago, would it be what you get in verses 12 and 13 of @Colossians 3? "Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of compassion, kindness, lowliness, meekness, longsuffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any should have a complaint against any; even as the Christ has forgiven you, so also do *ye*", @Colossians 3:12,13.
J.T. Quite so. Also go on to love; do not forget that! It is the great point of attractiveness. So that this holy bond in that sense, in Colossians and Ephesians, is to bring about unity before God; therefore it embraces all the saints; it is not only local, but universal in its bearing.
{272}
C.A.M. The Father's making us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light, would show we are an indispensable part of this thing, would it not?
J.T. Quite so, having in view our present translation into the kingdom of the Son of His love.
A.R. You would think that verse 12 of @Colossians 3, applying as it does to bowels of compassion, would help to regulate us in our affections toward one another. Would it be the inward organs working out practically?
J.T. So that this is worked out in our inward affections toward one another as those who are going on towards the inheritance, but as being invested with the inheritance now. It is therefore a final thing, an eternal thought, really. We are going to be for ever with one another; we have been raised up together and made to sit down together in Christ. Love would say we do not want to leave one out; so that as saints, we clothe one another in this way, which is exclusive of partisanship. There are difficult things about some brethren (some are hardly lovable at all), but if you can see something of God in a brother, you are bound to regard him in this heavenly light.
G.MacP. Has Paul the same thought in mind when he speaks of Christ as Head of His body, the fulness of Him who fills all in all?
J.T. That is right. The complete thing is in view, the assembly is His, and for the expression of Himself.
A.N.W. You wonder that the two-and-a-half tribes could go back after such things are presented, as you have suggested.
J.T. It serves to bring out that there are those, alas, who are on such low spiritual ground that they prefer to live on the wilderness side of Jordan, but I think we have to bring in the assembly here and take on what is proper to it. We may go back from it later, as the two-and-a-half tribes did, but I think everyone will see how beautifully they acted toward Joshua. He had said to them, "Your wives, your little ones,
{273}
and your cattle shall abide in the land that Moses gave you on this side of the Jordan, but ye, all the valiant men, shall go over in array before your brethren and help them, until Jehovah give your brethren rest as to you, and they also take possession of the land which Jehovah your God giveth them; then shall ye return into the land of your possession and possess it, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you on this side of the Jordan toward the sun-rising. And they answered Joshua, saying. All that thou hast commanded us will we do, and whither thou shalt send us will we go. According as we hearkened to Moses in all things, so will we hearken to thee; only may Jehovah thy God be with thee as he was with Moses. Every one that is rebellious against thy commandment and hearkeneth not to thy words in everything that thou commandest us, shall be put to death. Only be strong and courageous" (verses 14 - 18). See what they can say here! "Only be strong and courageous". I think that is a fine speech; it really contemplates, with other scriptures, those that are on low ground spiritually, but see how well they speak as coming into the land.
A.F.M. I suppose there was room for the two-and-a-half tribes in Canaan; although the land on the wilderness side would suggest our responsible life here, such as wives, children, cattle, which must be looked after.
J.T. There was room in the land for all Israel, really. They elected to stay on the other side of Jordan, and it is to be noticed here that Joshua does not in any way discredit them or say anything to belittle their position. He puts them on the ground that they were given their inheritance by Moses.
G.MacP. Would that be like God clothing us wit His own thoughts?
J.T. I think so, and that helps to the working out of the great bond among us, clothing each other with divine thoughts; even the youngest amongst us, or the
{274}
most unspiritual, has something if a Christian; he is assigned a place in the inheritance.
A.B.P. We commit ourselves to that when we receive them to break bread.
J.T. We allow them their right rather, because that is what it is. They have a right to the tree of life to enter in by the gates into the city.
A.P.T. The territory of the two-and-a-half tribes is said to be "toward the sun-rising"; that is the positive side, is it not?
J.T. Yes, and that part of the territory is not discredited in Joshua. It is in Numbers, but here the Euphrates is the eastern boundary; hence they are in the territory assigned to them, from this point of view. Hence you say as little as you can to discredit any saint: make the most of him, because in some sense he has part in the inheritance of God.
J.S. East and west is more in view here than north and south.
A.P. The murmuring was missing with the two-and-a-half tribes; they were prepared to go forward and honour Joshua, so that they really can be taken account of in this positive way.
J.T. Quite. That is very striking.
A.N.W. And only enforces your suggestion earlier about unity.
J.T. I think it does. The only way to get on together is to see that God clothes us as possessors of the whole land. 'He has given it to you', says Rahab, and we do well to regard each other as the fruit of such thoughts. In that way, I believe, we are led into unity, and endeavour to keep it in all lowliness and meekness, bearing with one another in love, endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace. There is only one other thought to be added, and that is David's energy in laying hold of the fulness of the territory. As we read in 2 Samuel 8 the question of subjugation
{275}
begins -- not extermination; those subdued are garrisoned, so as to hold the territory in a living way, and then what comes in as spoil after taking the territory is dedicated to Jehovah. You will notice it says, "And Jehovah preserved David whithersoever he went. And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem" (@2 Samuel 8: 6,7). And then again, "He brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of bronze. Them also king David dedicated to Jehovah, with the silver and the gold that he had dedicated of all the nations that he had subdued: of the Syrians, and of the Moabites, and of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of the Amalekites, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah" (@2 Samuel 8:10 - 12). So that this eastern part of the territory which from the standpoint of the book of Numbers they thought little of, now becomes a source of dedicated things. It is the subjugation of saints who may be regarded lightly, forming part of the territory; they begin to yield as soon as we lay hold of the extent of the territory.
C.A.M. This matter of working eastward is a sort of complementary idea of the whole thing, and seems to have in view the whole earth. If David recovered his dominion by the Euphrates, we may take it for granted that all westward had been conquered. Here David and his men were really working eastward so as to include the whole earth.
J.T. That is good; it brings out the position today, that God is endeavouring to lead us on to the whole idea of what He has in His mind, in view of our entrance into the heavenly portion, and presently being translated; He would instruct us as to the whole idea. So I think Euphrates as the eastern boundary is the limit, rather, that God has assigned to us. There are other parts, of course, in view of the millennium, but He has assigned a part to us and He wants us to come into it;
{276}
we are therefore to grasp the immensity of the inheritance.
W.F.K. Are these all subjugated to the rule of Christ, as Head of the assembly?
J.T. That is the idea; it is not a question of extermination as in Joshua, but one of subjugation. That is, the Lord brings us into subjection, and if He does that there will be something for Jerusalem, the house of God, in the way of dedicated things.
A.P. Does it require greater skill to subjugate than to exterminate?
J.T. Subjugation requires skill; you want to save as many as you can whilst overcoming them.
C.A.M. Whatever may come in by and by, yet the comprehensive things that are said about the assembly have the most glorious largeness.
J.T. That is contained in Colossians and Ephesians, do you not think? It is love for all saints, and raised up together; which means that all saints are so raised up.
A.P.T. God uses this wonderful idea of subjugation to Himself in connection with His beloved servant, does He not? He does not annihilate him, but subjugates him in view of the great work he was to accomplish.
J.T. You refer to Paul? What God is now doing is to bring some of us, at least, into the light of the whole territory, because He has so many that are not subjugated. He wants us to reach out to the entire limits of the territory so as to get all He can for Jerusalem and the house.
A.P. This is beyond the gospel but secured through the gospel?
J.T. Well, it is rather getting those for dedication in the territory who are there ostensibly, but God has yet to have them in the way of dedicated elements.
A.B.P. Is the full thought of unity entered into as we apprehend the assembly as Christ's fulness?
J.T. Quite so.
{277}
A.B.P. I suppose it works out locally in companies, where we are tested by the neighbour, but finds its full thought in the universal idea.
J.T. I think that is how we reach up to the greatness of the assembly, as we pass out of the local setting into the universal one. That is what I think this chapter, @2 Samuel 8, would bring before us, and it will be remembered by the brethren that it follows the line of sonship in chapter 7, where David went in and sat before Jehovah. What a grasp of things he got there! So that from all the wars that followed that occasion, David's thought would be to get more from them for God.
A.N.W. It is said that David went to "recover his dominion" -- a very suggestive word.
J.T. Quite so. Showing that he was in keeping with the extent of God's purpose for Israel.
A.B.P. The thought, "from the rising of the sun even unto its setting" (@Malachi 1:11) has greatly helped to bring the vast extent of purpose before our minds, do you not think?
J.T. Quite so; "From the rising of the sun even unto its setting" (@Malachi 1:11), is very suggestive, as showing what God would get from the assembly today -- incense and a pure oblation.
W.B-w. How does this thought of measuring work out in @2 Samuel 8, to keep alive by measurements? Would the measurements work out in the assembly, too?
J.T. I think Romans is suggested in making them lie down on the ground. It says, "And he smote the Moabites, and measured them with a line, making them lie down on the ground; and he measured two lines to put to death, and one full line to keep alive" (@2 Samuel 8:2). The two lines, I think, would answer to the law, perhaps, and the prophets, but the one full line to keep alive would be Christianity.
{278}
G.MacP. The recovery of David's dominion is a very interesting theme; he really occupied a dominical sphere.
J.T. Well, it is that; and he did not allow it to recede from him.
A.N.W. You were speaking of the extension of the sphere; I was enjoying the thought of the recovery of his dominion. It is *his* dominion.
J.T. And, as was said of the Supper, it is the Lord's supper, the dominical supper. The Lord dominates, and we own His rights over us. Then David proceeds to Jerusalem, as it says, "David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem" @2 Samuel 8:7. And then we have the present of Toi, king of Hamath, for David. It says of Toi, "He brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of bronze. Them also king David dedicated to Jehovah, with the silver and the gold that he had dedicated of all the nations that he had subdued: of the Syrians, and of the Moabites, and of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of the Amalekites", @2 Samuel 8:7,10 - 12. It is a dedication of precious things to Jehovah. The result is for Jehovah, and I think that is how the service of God in the assembly works out; the Lord comes in in His dominical way as supreme, but then He works things out as the antitype of David in Jerusalem, for God and for the Father.
G.MacP. Would that be like the book of Acts, where first three thousand, then five thousand believed and formed part of the assembly? They were dedicated in principle.
C.A.M. You get sonship in Jerusalem in the next chapter, too; you referred to sonship in the previous chapter.
J.T. Quite so, in connection with Mephibosheth; this chapter 8 is in the centre of rich thoughts of sonship. You feel how sonship greatly stimulates us to
{279}
lay hold of the whole territory; it is for all the saints, you know.
A.F.M. Do you refer to Jehovah's promises to David and Solomon in @2 Samuel 7 when you speak of the house and sonship?
J.T. Yes; in chapter 7. It is in the light of that chapter David goes in and speaks before Jehovah.
A.R. Would you say the Lord, as David, seeks to secure all of us for God. In verses 1 to 9 he took the things, and then would transfer them to the Father?
J.T. That is right; David secured all his people for Jehovah. We want all the saints, we love them all; but the Lord wants us on His own terms; so the first thought is His dominion and then Jerusalem, and then God as Jehovah, and the dedicated things.
{280}
Pages 280 - 544 -- "Administration in the Assembly", 1937 (Volume 139).
LOCAL ASSEMBLY ADMINISTRATION
@1 Corinthians 1:1 - 3, @1 Corinthians 3:16, @1 Corinthians 12:24 - 27; @Titus 1:5
J.T. God seems to be constantly bringing before us these epistles to Corinth, dealing with the economy set up at Pentecost, but more particularly as ordered under the ministry of Paul, who is said to have had the ministry of the assembly, the mystery. I thought it would be helpful to look a little at this first epistle from that point of view. The saints are first addressed as "the assembly of God which is in Corinth" -- and these other scriptures point to local provision in the Spirit, rendering the local assembly, as it were, self-sufficient within its own boundary, whilst fully owning the general position. We find in chapter 12 that God has set in the assembly -- the assembly as a whole -- the gifts. But these scriptures that speak not of the whole idea but of a characteristic local idea, such as "temple" and "body of Christ", are intended as the furnishing for the local assembly in the city. As to the first, we need never be at a loss to recognise the temple, the Spirit of God being with us; and secondly, the body works in relation to that: our relations to one another in the city are bodywise; in all that is done we recognise each other in this relation in love. The passage read in Titus shows how the government of a local company is provided for in elders. Elders are, however, not mentioned in the epistles to Corinth: the responsibility of government seems to rest in the word "assembly". Authority is there; conditions being low, all are responsible, and clericalism setting in, the idea of eldership (the word at least) is omitted, so as to throw the responsibility of government upon *all*. Even as regards temporal matters, the one least esteemed in the assembly is
{281}
supposed to be able to adjudicate in these. So that all are called into the matter of government in Corinth, and we can see how it is workable because of the presence of the Spirit in the temple and in the body.
A.N. Does the thought of the temple imply that there is light for any question that might arise?
J.T. Yes; the Spirit of God speaks. We have ample testimony to this in Paul's remark that the Holy Spirit testified to him "in every city", that bonds and afflictions awaited him at Jerusalem; the conditions were such in the assemblies referred to that the Spirit could so speak to His servant.
A.N. The thought of the body would be in our relations with one another?
J.T. Yes. It is the delicate, feeling side of the position, and calls for the greatest mutual consideration.
F.M. In what way do we get the gain of the assembly as together?
J.T. The fact is stated, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God ... ?" In spite of the dislocated state at Corinth they were regarded as that -- not 'ye should be', but "ye are". It is the abstract idea. It has great power as we receive it, working out in the way we sit together and make room for the Spirit.
F.M. Would a meeting of *this* character indicate that?
J.T. It works out that way; we should certainly expect it to work, the Spirit of God being owned locally. It is what the saints in the city *are*, and as owned we may expect it to be workable. Light comes in, I think, on any matter. We read how when matters arose of old -- the man who was found gathering sticks, also the man who blasphemed the Name -- Israel did not know what to do, and they made enquiry of Jehovah and He made His mind known. "To enquire in his temple", (@Psalm 27:4) David says. The temple of God is holy, hence the state of the brethren is involved.
{282}
A.N. You mean that light would not be given apart from suitable moral conditions.
J.T. I think in a general way that is how the truth stands. The Lord comes in often and gives a word through a visitor. But the temple of God is holy; the state being right, we may expect the mind of God in all matters.
A.N. It is a remarkable thing that a local company can count upon light whatever the exercise might be -- that is the thought of the temple?
J.T. Yes, and acknowledging the full thought in the city -- the assembly. Not that it may not come into a subdivision, as in our ordinary meetings, but where light is specially needed, the assembly in the place is to be recognised. That is what is in mind. "Ye are the temple of God". They had that character, and it brings out the necessity for the practical working out of the whole assembly in the place. The truth of the body follows upon that; it is one idea in each case. The body of Christ in general is all the saints on earth, but the passage read in chapter 12 is local. All the saints are regarded as in it, and it should be workable. But it can only be workable as we recognise the truth or fact of it and move together accordingly.
A.M.H. Has it not been said that the temple puts man out and the body brings Christ in? So unless every element in the temple is free in operation we shall get human thoughts.
J.T. Quite. Human thoughts are what is interfering in the working of the assembly -- innovations. What seems to be wise and practical is very often proved to be mere human thought. Hence the importance of the temple -- the temple makes very fine distinctions.
J.McB. Is this seen in the care meeting, or in the whole assembly come together?
J.T. The temple contemplates the whole assembly -- brothers and sisters as well -- *ye* . What have you in mind in connection with the care meeting?
{283}
J.McB. One feels that what you have been calling attention to is a very great necessity in the care meeting.
J.T. The Lord would help us, but He would not honour the care meeting as He honours the assembly. He has a great regard for the thought of the assembly. The care meeting has no official status at all, save in the sense that it is tentative, leading to the assembly. "In the multitude of counsellors there is safety" (@Proverbs 11:14) enters into it; also "the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this matter" (@Acts 15:6). It is a tentative thing, leading up to the assembly, as I said. It was to *consider* the matter. It is in the assembly as such that we may expect the Spirit to speak.
J.C-S. You connect "the oracles of God" with the assembly in a city?
J.T. Quite so. "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God" (@1 Peter 4:11). It is not that everything he says is to be accepted as authoritative, but he has that in mind. He speaks in that way, he is not careless. The assembly is not a debating society. As assured that he has a word from God, one speaks with authority. Asking a question is a different matter, but if one has the sense of divine help, he will have moral authority.
H.H-s. Are we to understand that in our divisional meetings we may get a certain amount of light, but when we all come together in one place we should get greater light?
J.T. That is what is in mind. God is stressing in these epistles what He has in *Corinth*. It is like "the hill of God", @1 Samuel 10. Saul was to move on from a certain point to the hill of God, where he would find a company of prophets prophesying. That is a great thought. They would be *doing* it, and he was to do it too. Prophesying works out really in the idea of the assembly, it is the Spirit of God speaking, giving the mind of God. That is when the whole assembly is said to come together in one place. It is not merely the character of the thing, as "when ye come together in
{284}
assembly" (@1 Corinthians 11:18) -- there is no article in that verse.
J.D. In @1 Samuel 10 they were coming down, indicating that they had been up, and had been in the presence of God, emphasising what you were saying as to the state. There was right state there, was there not?
J.T. It is said first that some were going up to the house -- that is the order (@1 Samuel 10:3). Those that are going up to God are caring for souls, so the thought of care enters into it. They asked for Saul's welfare. He needs something, and they give it to him -- with discrimination. They do not give him everything they have; they give what is needed. That is a good thought, bearing on what we are saying.
A.N. You spoke first of some going up to God, and then asking after Saul's welfare. How would you give that a present application?
J.T. If we have God before us -- and this epistle stresses that, it is a question of God's assembly -- we shall certainly care for His people.
A.N. I was thinking of what our brother referred to, its bearing on the care meeting.
J.T. If the care meeting means anything it is *care*, it is a good word, a word used in regard of elders. It means looking after the welfare of the saints and furnishing what they need, nor merely talking over things. Saul would need food, and they gave him two loaves of bread.
A.N. In talking over things in a care meeting it is deliberation, but is it decision? Or does that rest with the assembly?
J.T. I do not understand a decision without the assembly. Of course, as to little matters, confidence covers a great deal that we do. But when it comes to administration in relation to God, carrying spiritual thoughts, you need the whole assembly.
{285}
F.M. Is that why the truth of the temple and the body is so essential to us? The workability of things in a city is seen in the fact that we can come together with one interest.
J.T. Yes. I think the temple, being holy, is especially the spiritual side. The mind of God is there, so that we are intelligent in what we do. The idea of the temple of God is intelligence; the house of God is more affection. The body involves tender sensibilities, Christ is to be expressed in it. Our feelings towards one another are to be in love and intelligence, for we are members one of another. I believe the idea of the body arises from contiguity -- it begins to work not from a distant point, but in relation to the brethren who are nearest to us. There is such delicacy of feeling that we can link together, according to the figure used in chapter 12, the human body. How essential it is thus that contiguity should be recognised! The truth of the body works out in regard to those nearest to me.
J.C-S. So that all the members would work together sympathetically with the same object in view?
J.T. Yes, and beginning with the brethren that are nearest to me in the city. Not that that particular section of the city can represent the full idea, the body of Christ locally. I have the whole in mind, but I must begin with those that are nearest.
A.N. You are to work well with those that are local, Is that your point?
J.T. Yes, the word local, of course, including the whole city.
A.N. I am thinking that where an assembly in a city may be divided into a number of meetings, in your own meeting you work well.
J.T. The idea of the body must include our proximity to each other. We must link on there. The fine, delicate organism of the body requires nearness, and that each part must fit. In chapter 12, "the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee; nor again
{286}
the head to the feet, I have no need of you" (@! Corinthians 12:21). Those members are at a distance from each other, whereas love normally works out to the nearest member.
F.M. I was thinking of how the subdivisions in the city may acquire such a place with us that they overshadow the truth of what the saints are in the city as having temple character and body character.
J.T. The passages that we have read contemplate all the saints in the city. The temple contemplates all, so does the body, and of course the opening verses contemplate all: "the assembly of God which is in Corinth". That is the great basic thought. Any subdivisions that may be needed are for convenience, and God recognises them, but His primary thought is the whole idea, and He would have us maintain it. It is what He has in any given place.
H.H-s. We have to take into account what you expressed in prayer, "I have much people in this city" (@Acts 18:10), when we speak of it as you are touching it now. We may be in the light of the thing, but that is another matter.
J.T. It must be practical. The body is an important thing to keep before us, because of the delicacy of our relations with one another; and unless these delicate ligaments, so to speak, that hold us are recognised, there can be no working out of what we are speaking of now, the assembly of God in the city; and God will be deprived of what He has in this sense.
J.D. Would sectional care meetings contribute to that? In a city where there are several meetings, having a general care meeting once a month, there may be in one of the local meetings a care meeting for that particular gathering.
J.T. Providing they do not work out in dislocation, that they merge into the one thought, the general care meeting and the assembly. Thus they serve to lessen the work of the general care meeting. But they belong to it; they are not to be regarded as separate entities. So far as I see there is only one administrative entity.
{287}
That is why I read from Titus, "ordain elders in every city". Elders must be where the care is going on, they are all for the city. If these local care meetings, as they are called, work out to independency they are of course evil, but if they are just part of the whole, merely to render the working out of the care meeting convenient and not too onerous, good and well. But there can be nothing like decisions, nor can there be decisions really in any so-called care meeting, it is the assembly that decides; all up to this is tentative. So that whatever any local subdivision reaches tentatively it is all for convenience; as carried on in this spirit and understanding, God helps, but it belongs to the whole city.
J.C-S. If a person asks for fellowship, as we speak, in one of the subdivisions, should the brethren there take the matter up first?
J.T. Yes, if this would help the general meeting, but not beyond that. The general care meeting, as taking the place of the elders is the normal channel through which matters should go to the assembly. Elders were appointed not for a section of the city, but for the city.
H.H-s. Would there be a warrant for a subdivision calling the saints together on *assembly* principle to take up a case?
J.T. I do not see how that is workable at all. A local care meeting of brothers is helpful, as we have said. In all such meetings, including the general one, the object should be to obtain facts to be presented to the assembly. We are working up to the assembly all the time. If the subdivision is enquiring abstractly in relation to the whole, good and well, it may help us, so that there is not too much to be done in the general care meeting.
J.McB. Would you say the care meetings, whether in the subdivisions or in the city as a whole, are for investigation?
{288}
J.T. Quite so. The whole matter of care, as we call it, leads to the one thought, that is the assembly of God. No elders are mentioned here, so that all the saints are involved.
F.M. Does the thought of a subdivision really only apply in connection with what you have referred to as love's arrangements in coming together to break bread?
J.T. Yes, it seems to be that. In chapter 11 it is said, "when ye come together in assembly" (@1 Corinthians 11:18) -- it is the character. You may have any number of such companies, according as wisdom may require, if there is a large number of saints, because the breaking of bread is not administration, it is privilege, although set in relation to the assembly. Administration requires all that God has in the place. He would put His best forward; it is "the assembly of God". If He is to be represented in matters of judgment and testimony. He wants all there is.
J.M. What character of meeting would answer to the scripture you have quoted in chapter 14, "the whole assembly come together in one place"?
J.T. A meeting like this -- only there it is individual ministry apparently; prophets are specified, so that it is more the exercise of gift, but it is God's assembly. His concern in this sense is what He has in the place, something that others can be helped by. A man comes in and he is helped by the presence of God. God is greatly concerned about that. You cannot get that in a subdivision as you can get it in the whole assembly.
J.D. Two questions may come before the care meeting -- the question of reception and the question of discipline. Our experience may have been that we never thought of acting in discipline without first being together in the care meeting, the matter coming before the elders, so to speak. But in a question of reception, if the brethren in that part of the city were quite happy they might not wait to bring the matter before the care meeting, but intimate to the others
{289}
that they were quite happy about this case, and commend such a one. Do you not think that is in order?
J.T. Hardly. Wisdom would have the matter go through the regular channel. Unity and confidence are thus maintained. But where do you get the word reception as applying to this?
J.D. I do not know; we use it.
J.T. It is a question of right in the person who wishes to break bread. "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city (@Revelation 22:14)". The gates of course would be of the assembly. Applied to the local position it would be that any Christian in this city who is known to wash his robes, according to all that that means, has a right. That must be established, but for this two witnesses or three are enough, it is established on the principle of testimony. Barnabas brought Paul to the apostles: he introduced him.
J.M. Would you call together the whole assembly in the city for these witnesses to establish the fact?
J.T. No, it is a question of confidence. Stated to the brethren as we say in care, that increases the testimony. The assembly normally accepts this testimony and the person proposed is allowed to break bread. But two or three witnesses are enough for the assembly normally, only the matter coming through the care meeting is all the more established.
A.N. The point would be the responsibility with us, as regards the person desiring, that there should be proof that he had washed his robes?
J.T. If you have ample testimony to that, the matter is settled. They have access and right to the tree of life.
H.H-s. Would you have that witness established before the elders of the city?
J.T. The testimony is brought up in what we call
{290}
the care meeting. If we say the brethren in care have proposed this, because it is a proposal (but a proposal on testimony -- it is a question of confidence), the saints generally would certainly accept that. It is all that is needed.
H.H-s. You would hardly be satisfied with a sub-divisional settlement of these facts. You would want it before the general brothers¬ care meeting?
J.T. Certainly, as those who regularly come together to "consider" such matters. Then "tell it to the assembly" (@Matthew 18:17). That is the authoritative body in the city.
J.D. A question that has weighed with some of us is, we have a care meeting once a month in this city, and sometimes it means considerable delay waiting for a care meeting.
J.T. Well, that is a disadvantage, and it cannot be wisely overcome save by increasing the general care meetings, and in large cities this is difficult, but because of large numbers they are held weekly in several instances, and God helps the brethren.
J.D. Suppose we have, as we do from time to time in the Lord's mercy, a brother or sister desiring to walk with us, say in the company that meets in this room. We are quite happy, it may be, on the testimony of two or three brothers, to receive such a one. Then if we have to bring the matter before the care meeting it may mean considerable delay. Would it be in order to intimate to the other meetings the position in which we find ourselves, that we are happy about this brother or sister?
J.T. Well, it is a doubtful procedure. Not that I would say it was quite wrong, because the less formality there is in these cases the better. No doubt the others would accept what you did, but wisdom would bring into the matter whatever help there may be. "Go in by the gates" (@Revelation 22:14) would imply the whole idea.
{291}
F.M. The person who is seeking to walk with us would recognise the procedure and come by the gates.
J.T. Yes, you want to keep the idea of the gates. The thing is done in an orderly way, recognising the whole idea.
H.H-s. Do you suggest, if a case has been investigated by two or three brethren in whom we have confidence, that we would call together the assembly, the whole of the saints in the city with whom we walk, put the case before them as a proposal and mention it the next Lord's day, and the person break bread the following one? Would that be right?
J.T. The question is whether you need to call the assembly together. "When ye come together in assembly" (@1 Corinthians 11:18) -- that is a dignified thought. The proposal may very readily and intelligibly be put before all the subdivisions when we come together in assembly to break bread, because it is a question of one taking up his established right; we are in that character "in assembly", and we are ready for anything of that kind. But if it be a question of administration, as the exercise of discipline, then it is necessary to call the assembly together; because the epistle says as to this, "when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 5:4). That is a very formal thing. But when it is a question of a person who has established his right on testimony to enter by the gates, normally brethren are ready for that, glad to hear it. If you wait a week for safety's sake, that person should be free to break bread the next Lord's day. Love will make ample provision for that. The matter being mentioned in all the meetings in the city as together in assembly, the whole assembly is recognised.
H.H-s. We could accept the testimony of the three and the name could go forward and the person would break bread the following Lord's day?
J.T. You are obliged to accept the testimony of the three, and as the matter comes as a proposal through
{292}
the care meeting, general confidence enables the assembly to accept it.
F.M. With regard to the question of a person seeking to walk with us, some have said that they wished to break bread on the ground of being members of the body of Christ. But coming to the gates would be where it would be proved as to whether their associations, their garments, were clean.
J.T. That is the way the truth works out. Being members of the body of Christ is a positive thing by the Spirit, but it is established in the moral effects, in the fact that the person *is* washing -- especially now when we have to wash our robes not only from worldliness, but also from religious and ecclesiastical evil. To say that I am a member of the body of Christ may be true, yet I may not have right to enter in, I may not wash my robes. The verse alluded to. @Revelation 22:14, requires not only that I *have* washed, but that I *am doing* it.
A.N. Take the case of the saints in a city seeking to walk in the light of the assembly. Say there are five meetings and an application for fellowship comes at one of these. Brethren local to that meeting investigate and they are satisfied as to the person having washed his robes, that he has a right. To whom do they give their report?
J.T. The report is *in principle* to the assembly. That is the thing to keep in mind, the abstract thought. We come to the concrete when we are together. The assembly is the final thought, the only authoritative thought. Anything else is just tentative, leading up to that, having it in mind. So that reporting it to the local subdivisions, brothers and sisters together, has no meaning at all, that I see. If you have a general care meeting, it goes through that way, and confidence among the saints enables the assembly to accept the proposal. If it is announced formally in all the five meetings on a given Lord's day that the brethren
{293}
together for care propose this, the matter is settled. Save a week, if allowed, for the sake of safety, the matter in principle is settled that way as soon as it is announced in the assembly; there is no question. Confidence covers a lot on that line, but the Lord is jealous about the one idea of the assembly and His rights there.
J.C-S. A subdivision may be quite happy so far as their knowledge of the case may go, but they cannot come to a conclusion.
J.T. No, they have in mind the whole assembly, and they are just working up information or testimony. The testimony must have in mind the assembly; it is the assembly's conscience that is witnessed to.
A.N. What helped me on that line was Mr. Stoney's reference to @Numbers 10. At the blowing of one silver trumpet the princes gathered together to the door of the tabernacle, but when there was a blowing of alarm with the silver trumpet, the assembly was affected: there was movement "forward"; distinguishing between those who had had the care as set forth in the princes, and the assembly. The general thought in the trumpets was "for the calling together of the assembly, and for the journeying of the camps" (@Numbers 10:2).
F.M. Would you say a little about the administrative side in connection with the treasury, and the ministering of the bounty of the saints?
J.T. That comes under what we were saying as to the one assembly in the city. This includes the treasury. The apostle writes of "messengers of assemblies" -- referring to those who carried the bounty of the saints; each assembly furnished money for the need in Jerusalem. Those who bore the money were messengers; each assembly would be represented, they were Christ's glory. There is a great thought behind it. The Lord is very jealous as to the one thought in each local assembly; through them He shines administratively. The money given should be one idea as all else. The box is rightly placed on the table so that the saints
{294}
may have it before them; it is a tangible way of expressing love. Brethren are coming to this thought more and more.
A.M.H. In this matter of funds, I think the brethren have been greatly helped in considering together in care what should be done, notifying the assembly in detail as to it, and carrying it out assembly-wise.
J.T. Do you do that here?
A.N. No. But I see that what is a call upon the sympathies of one meeting is a call upon the sympathies of the whole.
J.D. But we do not have one purse.
J.T. Well, there is a real defect in that.
Rem. The poor of the city should be the interest and care of the whole city, not one section. We should all feel an interest in the poor of the city, whatever part of the city we live in.
J.T. Quite so. And as you look at the box, you think of how the glory of Christ enters into it, as we have been saying. That is not a partial idea, it is the whole idea, "the messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory" (@2 Corinthians 8:23). The actual money that is put into the box in this city may reflect the glory of Christ. If money is now sent to a brother at a distance it usually goes by post, but then it went by hand, and the carrier was reflecting Christ's glory; still the glory of Christ enters into the giving today of the local assembly and we should have this before us.
A.N. That is carried out in spirit, because if money is to be disbursed in any case of need we usually act together. The question still remains as to whether the *whole* of the money should be put together.
J.T. Well, it should be in principle. I can see that perhaps you have in your mind that the brethren in this room pay the rent for it -- there is no need to bring that up. Anything that is fixed in that way can be carried out to meet common righteousness. But when we come to *giving*, that is where Christ's glory is, and
{295}
that involves the assembly; and the general financial position in all the subdivisions in the city should be treated as one and stated regularly.
H.H-s. I think that clears a great deal. The question was whether the whole went in, without our paying our way righteously. But as you express it, this is a matter of common righteousness. If there is a surplus I can see that should go into the one purse.
J.T. And of course all money matters ought to be in the hands of two witnesses at least, as even the payment of ordinary expenses ought to be a matter of assembly administration. The needs may vary from month to month, so it is all held in relation to the Lord and looked into regularly in that holy way. Only simplicity avoids what is cumbersome. Pay the rent, of course; there is no need to bring that up, but still it enters into the whole position.
J.C-S. Each subdivision nominating the amount they would give in case of need is not one treasury?
J.T. It is not Christ's glory in the one assembly. The Lord is concerned about the question of oneness. It used to be said that it did not matter whether there was one cup or four on the table at the Lord's supper, but the Lord is concerned about the *one* thought all the time. He has one idea in the assembly, and He wishes that maintained; His glory is in it.
A.M.H. It has a direct advantage because in large cities it has been found that in poor areas the poor were looked after in a poor way, while in richer areas the poor were provided with more. Whereas the scripture says, "that there may be equality" (@2 Corinthians 8:14). Would not that enter into it where there is one purse?
J.T. It would. Moreover, you have the advantage of all the elders, so to speak. We may not have any, but whatever there is in the city we have the advantage of it, and to deprive ourselves of it is not God's thought. Elders are said to be ordained in cities, that is, where assemblies were. It is also said they are chosen in
{296}
each assembly, so that the elders in an assembly have jurisdiction throughout the whole assembly, and that saves us from *independence* in the subdivisions. Subdivisions are the arrangements of love you might say, getting back to the feast of tabernacles, dwelling in booths, so that we are near together.
A.N. The basic thought is the oneness of the assembly in the city.
J.T. The epistle starts with that and these references to local furnishings are to enable us to carry that out. The temple, by way of light, enables us to carry it out, and the body taxes our love, because I must have love to be in the body, that is the inner working of it.
F.M. Would you say something as to what the financial contributions should cover?
J.T. I suppose the levitical side comes first in Scripture. The need of the poor is greatly stressed in the New Testament, Even when Paul went out with the right hand of fellowship, he was enjoined as to that; and he tells us he was always forward in that, looking after the poor. So that in general it would be a question of the levites and the poor.
J.McB. The one purse that you mention would have these two items in view.
J.T. And in principle all that is given, as already said. Because we cannot think of what is put into the box on Lord's day as anything less than dedicated. It is in the treasury. The Lord looked on to see how money was put into it. Simplicity enables us to say the rent has to be paid, and that sort of thing. The Lord expects us to be simple as to such things. He leaves everything to us that we can do rightly, but He is concerned about His assembly, and His glory in it. Everyone that puts anything into the box is dedicating something; it is a question of love.
J.C-S. From the point of view of giving, it is put on the highest possible elevation.
{297}
F.M. You would not distinguish in your mind what is put in for rent from what is put in for the levites.
J.T. No. Only if the brethren take counsel and say, Let us designate one Lord's day specially for levites and poor, or specially for levites. I think the Lord would bless that too. The brethren know there is a special need; it is known that a certain amount is needed and should be given, and the brethren are told about it -- well, the Lord will be in that. @2 Corinthians 8 and 9 and @1 Corinthians 16 have in view to stimulate giving, and with this in view the apostle suggest sentiment -- the first day of the week -- in the first epistle. Then he tells the Corinthian saints of what the Macedonian saints were doing -- stimulating them in a holy way, not as "got out" of them, but in the way of stimulation.
H.H-s. Two thoughts come out in these chapters, first the willing mind, and then God loving the cheerful giver. That is our answer, is it not, to the bread and the cup?
J.T. With God it is a question of *persons*. The actual amount is secondary, it is the *worshippers*, not the worship, that is mentioned; it is the givers, not what is given. What is given is taken account of as showing the amount of love there was, but the givers are the thought; He loves the givers. Another thing that comes out in the instructions as to giving is the idea of preparation to give. It is not only what you give, it is *how* you do it.
F.M. Laying by at home would indicate that we have concern?
J.T. You are thinking of it in a holy way. You know how to give when the time comes, you are governed by holy sentiment. An unconverted person cannot give according to the divine thought; he cannot be a giver whom God loves. It is one that is exercised in a holy way to be like God in his giving that He loves.
{298}
Ques. Would you think it right that the amount the assembly should give should be stated before the collection is made?
J.T. Yes, what is needed should be made known, so that it should be provided for. The amount should, of course, be reasonable. But brethren in considering and deciding what should be given would know how much could be reasonably expected. The saints as a rule can tell what can be done. It is not a question of what is in the box, it is a question of what the brethren *have*, and what, under the circumstances, they can do.
J.McB. With regard to the administration, is that a matter for the whole care meeting, or is it a matter for some like the seven deacons of @Acts 6?
J.T. Well, you have no more authority for appointing deacons than you have for appointing elders. It is simply that the work has to be done and someone does it. But the apportionments should be made with good counsel -- at the regular care meeting, and a brother or brothers carry them into effect. The deacons were men full of faith and the Holy Spirit.
F.M. Can the assembly appoint in any way? Suppose we speak of appointing a brother for the responsibility of having the gospel preached?
J.T. That is making the assembly responsible for preaching, which is not right at all. Preaching is always put on the principle of gift. How can he preach unless he be sent? It is a false attitude to take up that the assembly has any power to preach or teach; such services are on the principle of gift. It is a question of a brother who can preach taking up the gospel, and the brethren having fellowship with him. But there is no warrant for appointing officially now at all. Particular services are needed, and suitable brothers take them on, where love is active. This is simple.
Ques. In regard to the thought of administration again, if the saints discover that they had arrived at an
{299}
error of judgment in assembly, would it be necessary for them to come together to admit it?
J.T. Surely. @Leviticus 4 covers that. If the assembly hears of it, it has to own it, even though it were ignorant of it at the time.
A.N. I think what you say as to the gospel is important; it is not an assembly responsibility. If a brother has an exercise in regard of it he may ask for the use of the room, but he himself is responsible.
J.T. Quite so. We often quote: "Peter, standing up with the eleven" (@Acts 2:14); not the hundred and twenty. He stood up with the preachers, and those who listened to him recognised they were men that could help them, because they spoke to "Peter and to the rest of the apostles" (@Acts 2:37).
H.H-s. I should like to ask, in regard to the five meetings in this city, do you not think it would be advisable that we should have more contact with each other, say on Lord's day afternoons, for Bible reading, the whole five meetings together, seeing we have subdivisional meetings during the week -- even if we did not have it every Lord's day?
J.T. Well, I believe that this epistle helps us on all these points. "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place" (@1 Corinthians 14:23) -- is written as if it was a thing that *ought* to be; and in a city like this the oftener the brethren get together as we are tonight, the better. Nothing should be more avoided than the idea of a federation of meetings, each acting by itself, only formally recognising the others.
A.N. I think that is right, there should be a point of contact oftener than there is. One point of contact, in what we call the edification meeting once a month, is not enough. The more we come together the more we are built up in the truth of the assembly in the city.
P.D. Do you not think that opportunity is open to us to visit each other in our different meetings throughout the week?
{300}
J.T. That, of course, is good, and should be increased. But this thought of the whole assembly coming together in one place seems to be specially in the mind of God, and He connects His presence with it peculiarly, in connection with the exercise of gift. It helps outsiders -- a man falls down and does homage to God, "reporting that God is indeed amongst you" (@1 Corinthians 14:25). There is testimony by him that God is in His assembly.
F.M. You have mentioned the meeting for ministry. It might be well to say something about it.
J.T. You mean as to the day of the week? I think that is worthy of consideration, not to crowd too much into the Lord's day. Of course, we say it is the most auspicious day for fellowship and mutual affection, which is true, and we thank God for it. But then we have to start out on Monday and face the winds and waves of this world; we need all the help we can get. So if the whole assembly come together in one place on a Tuesday, I believe God blesses it in meeting the need that has arisen. He speaks to us. We speak to Him on Monday in the prayer meeting, and He speaks to us if we give Him the opportunity. He is known as present; something brings out that He is there.
A.N. We began by having it on a week-night, but I think there was a general feeling that the moral conditions necessary for it were absent. The experience was that on the Lord's day afternoon there was more spiritual power.
J.T. That is an acknowledgment of great weakness, and God would enable us to overcome it. As giving way through want of faith we are depriving God of the means of helping the saints when they need it most, that is in mid-week. If you are pressed by business during the day and you come to a meeting where there is spiritual ministry, you revive. I have experienced it many a time.
{301}
F.M. We exchanged a Bible reading for that meeting. There was something surrendered there?
J.T. You gave up one meeting for another. There is no sacrifice in that, and it is sacrifice in such a matter that God honours. In @Numbers 28 the sabbath and other offerings were not to cancel the daily offerings.
Ques. With regard to the felt weakness, would not the keeping before our minds the thought of the temple greatly help us in coming together? God would undertake for saints as acting in that light.
J.T. Quite so; and there is something very attractive, to me at least, in meeting *all* the brethren. If love is at work we want to meet each other, the more the better. There is a sense of unification in all the brethren being together from different parts of the city.
J.C-S. It really develops assembly feelings.
A.N. In connection with this edification meeting, the principle is, "Thy Thummim and thy Urim are for thy godly one" (@Deuteronomy 33:8). You could not have the Urim and Thummim apart from moral conditions.
{302}
PIETY -- PROFITABLE FOR EVERYTHING
@1 Timothy 3:16; @1 Timothy 2:1,2; @1 Timothy 4:8; @1 Timothy 6:3 - 6,11
J.T. The thought of piety is, of course, found elsewhere in Scripture, but this epistle presents it, perhaps, more fully than any other section, there being several direct references to it. Chapter 3:16 is, I suppose, the most important of all scriptures dealing with the matter. The thought of piety is, as no doubt most of us know, God brought in here, whether in Christ -- as in this verse -- or in us, God brought in in character, as compared with spirituality, which is more our entrance into God's realm. Spirituality is, of course, involved in piety, but spirituality enables us to enter into where God is. In piety He is brought in here where contrariety is; so that it seemed to me to be a subject that would be helpful as bearing on us practically. It is worked out from the manifestation of God here -- God "manifested in flesh". What is called the "mystery of piety" is worked out in that connection.
H.H. Is that a kind of standard for piety, Christ having come here?
J.T. I think that is the thought in verse 16 of chapter 3: "God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory". You could hardly get any richer verse than that, referring to God here where evil is; that He has come in, not simply to reveal Himself, but here in human circumstances and, as here in Christ, working out the thought of piety. Of course, it is in Jesus He came in, God manifest in the flesh was there, it was in Man. There could not be the idea of piety, or the standard of it presented, aside from the fact that what came in was in Man. The walk of Christ and His ways here. His
{303}
ministry, all exemplified the thought of piety, whilst, at the same time, manifesting God, for He was God.
A.M.H. Is that the idea of mystery, that it is God there, but yet it is Man?
J.T. Yes. It is not unknowable, but it is mystery; Christians are capable of understanding divine mysteries.
A.M.H. They are instructed. Have you any thought as to its being connected with the house of God?
J.T. That is how piety stands -- "how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3:15). So that behaviour in the house is evidently linked with it, the house being viewed here as the residence of God, where the truth is maintained. So that it is all on the same line that there is something here, in the scene where evil is, that is of God preserved in a most practical way -- piety suggesting what is most practical. In a word, it would be God coming in, conditions being suitable for that, first in Christ and now in the house and in each of us; the pious person brings God into every circumstance. But then spirituality enables us to enter into His realm of things; so that the forty days of the Lord's sojourn here after He rose would be to help us into the spiritual realm.
E.S.H. We could hardly enter into God's side of things apart from piety; could we?
J.T. Well, they hang together. It is incongruous to assume to be able to take part in assembly Godward aside from piety, that is, capability of bringing God in here into one's circumstances.
Ques. "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God (@Matthew 4:4)". Is that piety, seen in Jesus?
J.T. That would be the thought, I am sure. He lived by every word that proceeded out of the mouth of God. It implies intimacy in your practical relations with God, that is, what proceeds out of His *mouth* -- not simply the Scriptures.
{304}
W.C. Would the forty days in the wilderness cover in the main the manifestation of God in a way? You have mentioned the forty days after the Lord rose as connected with spirituality. He was seen of angels in the wilderness.
J.T. Yes, He was with the wild beasts, too. There were the most adverse circumstances, but nevertheless He lived by every word that proceeded out of the mouth of God. What communications there must have been in those terrible circumstances! The temptations of the devil were to the end that the Lord should take Himself out of God's hands; that is what the devil sought; to bring to an end the idea of piety. He would say, 'Do the thing Yourself'. But the Lord maintains the position that all is to be ordered by what comes out of the mouth of God, which would bring God in here. So that the Lord moved in the midst of the wild beasts, and what circumstances could be more terrible! We have the standard of piety in Christ, He was "heard in that he feared" (@Hebrews 5:7).
H.H. The standard being what is seen in Jesus here, there should be exercise with us to maintain right behaviour in the house of God.
J.T. Quite so, that is how the thing works out, and what God is aiming at all the time as to the public side is the local meeting. The forty days after the Lord rose link up with the inner side of the assembly, but the forty days¬ temptation is the public side, and the thought is that there should be some evidence locally that "God is in you of a truth" (@1 Corinthians 14:25). Piety means that I bring God into everything, and if I cannot bring Him into anything, I must give that up. If it be my calling, I remain where I am *with God*, and then it is worked out in the local company, so that the bearing of it is public.
Ques. Does piety involve the knowledge of God?
J.T. It does. The verse in 1 Timothy contemplates that God was manifested in flesh, that all that He is
{305}
characteristically came out in Jesus, and what happened by the Spirit justified it; He was "justified in the Spirit". It is not the creeds, nor even the Bible by itself, it is the Spirit. The Bible, of course, is indited by the Spirit, but it is the Spirit who justifies what comes out. Then, "seen of angels". I suppose they saw Jesus in various ways; who can tell all that transpired in the days of His flesh, which angels saw?
Rem. The thought is seen very largely in the Psalms. In @Psalm 89:18 God is referred to as "the Holy One", and in verses 5 and 7 the same thought is seen in "the saints", or the holy ones.
J.T. That is the idea, the word there in @Psalm 89 for "Holy One" is given to mean that, see footnote in New Translation. It is a very important word in Scripture.
Rem. @Psalm 4:3 says that God has "set apart the pious man for himself".
J.T. That is a very beautiful thought; it is set out in @Psalm 16:8 "I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved", the Lord says. He takes such a lowly attitude that He says His goodness does not extend to God, and right through the psalm that is brought out, how God would come in for Him, not leaving His soul in death, nor suffering His Holy One to see corruption. It is, as you remark, the value God sets on that pious Man.
Ques. "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed", @Isaiah 50:4. Would that be the way God would be allowed to come into the circumstances of every day?
J.T. Yes, and that brings out the importance of our starting the day with our family with the Scripture, the word of God. "Every creature of God is good" (@1 Timothy 4:4), as we get in this epistle. It is "sanctified by the word of God and prayer" (@1 Timothy 4:5), that is, the creature comes in for sanctification. The creatures we use take on sanctification by God's speaking to us -- as was remarked about the
{306}
Lord in the wilderness, the mouth of God -- and our speaking to God, and therefore we are qualified to go forth into our businesses, the children to go to school, and all that, so that we may bring God into those positions. It is a great triumph that one may bring God into the most terrible circumstances; some of us may be obliged to work in peculiarly unholy scenes. The general thought of piety is in the verse read in @1 Timothy 3 -- it is very rich. What the angels saw, and that He was preached among the nations, believed on in the world and received up in glory. So it illustrates Christianity in its widest thought, Christ known among the nations and received up in glory.
In chapter 2 the early verses are to call attention to our prayers and intercessions for all men, how piety is seen in that, as it says, "that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all piety and gravity". That is, our prayers for all men and the authorities have in mind that we may have a quiet and tranquil life in all piety and gravity -- a great matter, for there is such tumult about -- the wicked like a troubled sea, casting up mire and dirt.
A.M.H. Why does the apostle say, "first of all" here? Is it just that it was outstanding as important in his mind?
J.T. I thought that, it is the first exhortation he has, this matter of praying for all men and the authorities. "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men; for kings and all that are in dignity". This would be in keeping with the gospel, and so good and acceptable before our Saviour God; and it would bring in what God had in mind as early as Genesis; that the saints have an intercessory position in regard to all men and particularly those in authority. God said to Abimelech of Abraham, "He is a prophet, and will pray for thee" (@Genesis 20:7). In @Psalm 105 we are told that God reproved kings for the sake of His saints, but they were
{307}
to pray for the kings. He says, Abraham *will* pray for you -- as if it would be his disposition to do it, and I think you have that thought right through the Scriptures. Here in Timothy the "first of all" would mean that this is a great matter, for the epistle is to show us how the testimony is to be honoured in us. How can that be save as God is with us and brought into our circumstances? And what a great favour it is to be brought into an intercessory position before God, as to men! It dignifies our position -- we are morally greater than those we are interceding for.
Ques. Would this work out practically in the preservation of the saints?
J.T. That is how it works out, that we may have a quiet life in the exercise of piety. I think this matter of the authorities is very important; not simply our own immediate ruler, but all rulers and *all* persons who are said to be in dignity. It should enter into our public collective prayers as well as our personal prayers.
Rem. In answer to our prayers God would work through these dignitaries.
J.T. Yes, so that we may have peace. What has marked the world in recent times is upheavals, it is a revolutionary period of the world's history -- never more so.
Rem. It is put on us to effect things for good by prayer.
J.T. And we do; I have no doubt that conditions in this country are largely the outcome of that. In countries where there is not much of it, apostasy and upheavals of all kinds are making more headway. That is the first thing, after the great general thought, this matter of prayer for all men -- the whole race is before us -- then for kings and all that are in dignity.
Ques. Is it that we are brought in line with God's thoughts in regard of all men?
J.T. That is the idea; the passage goes on to say, "There is one God, and one mediator between God and
{308}
men, the man Christ Jesus" (@1 Timothy 2:5). That is the general position in regard of the gospel, and really explains what is said in Romans that the world is in reconciliation. Kings and those in dignity are in positions of influence, and God enjoins that they should be prayed for particularly because they have influence and might represent Him too.
Rem. So you would make room for this in the prayer meeting.
J.T. Yes, because it is a public thing. It bears on what Paul had effected at Ephesus; the conditions in the assembly there would make way for all this.
A.M.H. I was wondering whether "first of all" just refers to this setting. What about the Lord's prayer beginning with something for the Father; do you think that has any indication for us as to the order of the prayer meeting?
J.T. Here the public position of the testimony is in view -- the assembly being the pillar and base of the truth. It was to be evangelical, and its prayers should reflect this. I suppose "first of all" would hint that the saints would be apt to overlook such prayers. Today not more than a tithe of the brethren have on their minds the importance of praying in this general or universal way. Generally our prayers do not go far afield. If we have *church ears* we shall know all that goes on universally that affects the testimony; things will come to you. We read in the Acts that certain things came to "the ears of the assembly" (@Acts 11:22); those ears were listening, and God will use ears like that. We read also of increasing prayer by the assembly to God concerning Peter as imprisoned. -- How is it that we are so peaceful, that we are not living in dens and caves of the earth, as brethren did earlier? God has acted in a governmental way for us through appointed rulers. It is important to recognise them and pray for them. "They are God's ministers, attending continually upon this very thing (@Romans 13:6)".
{309}
Rem. God over-rules in such a way that the powers that be are favourable -- that is our concern.
J.T. Certainly. As we were seeing in Esther, the king, the president, or the like, is swayed this way and that way. The devil will do all he can to make them contrary, but God acts upon them too as Scripture abundantly shows, and hence the great importance of praying for them, as already said. Cyrus is the outstanding example.
A.M.H. It was whilst Daniel was praying that Michael was dealing with the princes of Persia. His concern was to liberate God's people. Daniel in praying was intelligent as to the mind of God, and God acted in answer to his prayer.
J.T. Yes, and he was pleasing to heaven while he was praying; and Gabriel told him exactly what was going to happen. Everything is in God's hands, but we must not sit down with our arms folded; prayer must go on. The idea is that in prayer the saints think as God does. Solomon and Daniel are outstanding in this respect and their prayers are peculiarly owned. Ezra in his prayer recognised that God had given favour to His people before the kings of Persia, @Ezra 9:9.
H.H. Daniel had his windows opened towards Jerusalem.
J.T. Quite so. Think of the delightfulness to heaven of a man like that praying! And then the messenger is sent to him telling him not only what should happen to his people immediately, but the history down to final deliverance at the coming of Christ.
Ques. Do you think the objective of these prayers would be for the furtherance of the dispensation of God, which is in faith?
J.T. Yes, that the saints are in peace, as we are today -- we may thank God for that. In some other countries they cannot come together as we do. We ask Him to help in this way and He does it,
{310}
Rem. In @Acts 4, after Peter and John had been speaking in the council, they were let go and they went to their own company and God came in.
J.T. Yes. They did not have the external liberty that we have, but they prayed and God shook the place, as much as to say, 'All this power is for you'.
The next part of our subject is how men are to pray. Piety stands in relation to the way men pray and the way women dress. These are very practical things. In chapter 2:8 he says, "I will therefore that the men pray in every place, lifting up pious hands, without wrath or reasoning. In like manner also that the women in decent deportment and dress adorn themselves with modesty and discretion, not with plaited hair and gold, or pearls, or costly clothing, but, what becomes women making profession of the fear of God, by good works" (@1 Timothy 2:8 - 10). That is the next thing that the Spirit of God stresses -- that the men should pray everywhere; the idea is wherever prayer is being made, *they* are to do it, not the women; but women are to see to their dress, their externals, and that there are good works instead of showy material things. They are to be as persons who are making "profession of the fear of God" (@1 Timothy 2:10).
Ques. What is the idea of "without wrath"? -- does it mean we are in accord with the dispensation?
J.T. I think that is right. It is what God is according to chapter 3:16 -- God manifesting Himself.
A.J.G. Why does he say "lifting up pious hands" (@1 Timothy 2:8)?
J.T. It is the supplicatory attitude, alluding to what is becoming in public prayer. The allusion would be to what I am *doing*, because the hands refer to what I do, so that it is a question of whether I am doing what is in keeping with piety, that I am not doing anything that is contrary to what God is. It would be the "clean hands" of @Psalm 24.
A.M.H. They would not care to lift them up if they had the mark of the beast on them.
J.T. No, how could I lift up such hands to God?
{311}
E.S.H. In Solomon's prayer at the dedication of the temple he spread forth his hands, and at the end he says, "Let thy priests, O Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness", (@2 Chronicles 6:41).
J.T. That is all very beautiful as to prayer. Solomon represents the great idea, I think. Someone has said his prayer would take about eight minutes to read; comparatively short, and yet it covered the needs of the testimony right down to the end. As he finishes, the glory fills the house, showing what pleasure God may have in our prayer meetings; He makes us joyful in His house of prayer. But this implies not only what we pray for, but also *how* we pray.
Ques. Why are good works connected with the women? Dorcas was full of good works.
J.T. It is needful that they should be well occupied. I think the sisters are not active enough in the things of God. They do not have to take part audibly in the assembly, but there is plenty to do. Their adornment is to be with their good works; there are plenty of them to be taken on. In Ephesians we are told that God Himself has prepared the good works for us to walk in them.
Ques. You referred to Solomon kneeling in prayer, would that be more the attitude that should mark us in private prayer, or should it mark us publicly, do you think? We have references to the Lord kneeling.
J.T. That brings up the question of what is becoming or convenient. Brothers and sisters kneeling for the period of a meeting for prayer is uncomfortable, and hardly induces spiritual liberty. God makes us joyful in His house of prayer (@Isaiah 56:7).
Rem. "When ye stand praying" (@Mark 11:25), we read.
J.T. Yes, it is quite right to stand, and we get kneeling, too, but I doubt if all kneeling for a considerable time is conducive to liberty of soul.
{312}
Ques. Does "without wrath or reasoning" (@1 Timothy 2:8) suggest there are conditions for prayer?
J.T. Yes, it refers to the state you are in, God is looking at your heart while you are praying; we must consider as to what portion God has in our meetings. Chapter 4 brings out another thing. "Bodily exercise is profitable for a little, but piety is profitable for everything, having promise of life, of the present one, and of that to come". Piety being profitable for *everything* is striking. It would be difficult to get anything that is so extensive in its profitableness.
Rem. So we have to set ourselves for it -- "exercise thyself".
J.T. That is the thought, you lay yourself out for it. A man may go out for a walk -- that is bodily exercise, and it may be good, but it may reduce in value as you go on. You may do other things, but "exercise thyself unto piety" (@1 Timothy 4:7) for "piety is profitable for everything". The doctor may say you should play golf, take a walk every morning, and many things like that, and you might take his advice. Others might tell you to smoke; and we are very ready to hide behind what doctors say in that way; but they will never tell you of anything that is profitable for *everything* . And there are those who do not do any of the things they say, and yet they are healthy; *God makes them healthy* . Not that one would say a word against good advice, but to bring out what piety really is, its great value; it is bringing God into your circumstances. Even if you do not get what bodily exercise you or others may think you need, well, you will not suffer.
Rem. Cornelius seems to set forth these features -- it says he was a pious man, "fearing God with all his house, both giving much alms to the people, and supplicating God continually" (@Acts 10:2).
J.T. Quite so; how pleasing he must have been to God! What I would say is, that we make too little of what God finds in these matters, what there is for
{313}
Him in every Christian every day, and how He is ready to come in at all times. That is the idea -- what pleasure He has in it, so that where there is piety, as has been said already, God sets a man apart for Himself, as if He has someone He is pleased with. Enoch walked with God three hundred years, and "before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God" (@Hebrews 11:5). God says, as it were, I like that man; I like his company. We say what a good time we had, but what did God have? We must think of that side.
Rem. So that type of man is "received up in glory".
J.T. In Enoch you see that -- a man that pleased God. You would like to be pleasing to God before He received you, so that He has pleasure in the reception.
Rem. That is the way Luke's gospel ends up in relation to the Lord, He "was carried up into heaven" (@Luke 24:51).
J.T. Yes, His hands stretched out in *blessing* .
E.S.H. God is so infinitely good, and the sense of that would give us the desire not to want anything save what *He* provides and to bring *Him* into every circumstance of life.
J.T. And the sense that He has pleasure in your company, and that any circumstance you are in, God can be in. So that you need not be without Him; it is a moment by moment matter.
E.S.H. This would save a good many business failures, and the like.
J.T. Quite so. I have to see whether God is with me in making my obligations.
Ques. Would you say how the good conscience stands related to this matter; that seems to have a large place with Paul in this epistle.
J.T. "Maintaining faith and a good conscience" (@1 Timothy 1:19); certainly these two items go with piety. Faith brings God in and the conscience says, 'I must have suitable conditions if I would bring Him in'; that is how the matter stands. Therefore I must judge everything unsparingly that God cannot go on with. You see in
{314}
the book of Daniel how crucial our circumstances may become; things seem to hang in the balance. Daniel and his friends sought the God of heaven about this great matter on which their lives hinged; and God puts us to the test in our circumstances. I do not believe there is a single circumstance that I may be in where God would not come in, but then my conscience says, 'Can I dare to ask Him to come into these circumstances?' Faith brings Him in but the conscience looks after the circumstances, whether they are right.
Ques. Will you say a little as to the thought of the creatures of God as in chapter 4, verse 4?
J.T. As to this, "the Spirit speaks expressly" -- there is something very urgent -- "that in latter times" -- that is, our own times -- "some shall apostatise from the faith, giving their mind to deceiving spirits and teachings of demons speaking lies in hypocrisy, cauterised as to their own conscience, forbidding to marry, bidding to abstain from meats, which God has created for receiving with thanksgiving for them who are faithful and know the truth. For every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, being received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by God's word and freely addressing him" (@1 Timothy 4:1 - 5). God's creatures, used in piety, take on dignity. God allowed to speak to us and our being in liberty to speak to God sanctifies them. You cannot include a novel in that! it is not a creature of God, but a product of the devil, and so are all such things as that.
Rem. So that the "promise of life" is in the knowledge of God day by day.
J.T. Quite. That is "the present one"; and "that to come" is eternal life. In chapter 6:12, Timothy is enjoined to lay hold of the latter. Having these things, we are well furnished.
Ques. All this is brought to light in the gospel, is it not? The gospel brings to light life and incorruptibility.
{315}
J.T. Yes. To go on to chapter 6, we have in verse 3, "If any one teach differently, and do not accede to sound words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the teaching which is according to piety, he is puffed up, knowing nothing, but sick about questions and disputes of words, out of which arise envy, strife, injurious words, evil suspicions, constant quarrellings of men corrupted in mind and destitute of the truth, holding gain to be the end of piety. But piety with contentment is great gain". This comes in under the subject of masters and servants, and, of course, bears on the whole question of trade unionism at the present time; and it is a question of the teaching that is according to piety, that we are to be sober in understanding the truth that enters into the relations of master and servant. The question of gain, higher wages, of course, fills the minds of the workers, but then, piety with *contentment* is better than that, better than higher wages -- "piety with contentment *is* great gain". It is to be noticed how much Scripture deals with industrial matters. Paul at Corinth lodged with persons who were of the same trade as himself. Why should that be mentioned were it not that there is a suggestion of those who labour in the truth understanding conditions among workers, among the persons God may be about to call through the gospel? These conditions are important because they bear on the progress of their souls. That is in @Acts 18, and in @Acts 19 we have Demetrius, a silversmith -- he is concerned about this matter, too. He is not a worker, as we say, he is evidently a master man, and he is making gain; through him a tumult comes up, showing how these trade matters affect the world against the testimony.
On the one hand, the servant working for God understands current trade conditions; and, on the other hand, we see how men that are in business making money may turn the world upside down in order to keep their trade going. We have to watch all these things, especially if we are employers, that we are
{316}
concerned not to make money, but to have right conditions, that is, conditions suitable for the testimony, and to suffer, if that seems to cut across our moneymaking. So here the apostle speaks about these masters and servants; he says, "Let as many bondmen as are under yoke count their own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and the teaching be not blasphemed. And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them because they are brethren; but let them the rather serve them with subjection, because they are faithful and beloved" (@1 Timothy 6:1,2).
A.M.H. Teaching according to piety would involve the question as to whether you can bring God into the thing. It would be a terrible thing to link the name of God with these associations, and if we, as being part of the house of God, enter into them, I suppose that is what we are doing.
J.T. Well, it is a great question today, and I believe the brethren will have to face it, and face it as it is, and see whether piety is compatible with it, whether what I hold about these matters is according to piety.
Ques. Would Paul's exhortation to Timothy, "Be a model of the believers" (@1 Timothy 4:12), involve every circle of the sphere in which he would move?
J.T. That is a good suggestion, that there is some brother in the town or district that is a model, so that you are not dependent only on the teaching, but there is a man who represents the thing taught. And of course that comes home to every one of us.
Ques. Do you make any distinction between piety here and when the apostle says, "All indeed who desire to live piously in Christ Jesus will be persecuted", (@2 Timothy 3:12)?
J.T. "In Christ Jesus" I think alludes to status, that I am outside the world in it; that is the attitude of my mind. Piety in Christ Jesus lifts me outside the world.
{317}
Rem. I wondered whether it had any reference to our position in the testimony.
J.T. It clearly has. The point there is that you will suffer persecution, it may be from your wife or your children -- more likely from the nearest to you if such are not spiritually minded, for it is a question of the attitude of your mind. You are living in an out-of-the-world condition of things. Unspiritual people do not like that.
Ques. Was not the apostle Paul a model when he said to the Philippians, "My God shall supply all your need" (@Philippians 4:19)?
J.T. "My God". A touching phrase. Then there is one other thought, that is, the "man of God" (chapter 6:11). "But *thou*, O man of God, flee these things, and pursue righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, meekness of spirit". We touch here a term that is more frequently used in the Old Testament than in the New; it is hardly used in the New at all, except here, although the thought is there of what a man of God is. Here is one called that: *"thou*, O man of God", as if the apostle's feelings are in it.
A.J.G. Do you see in Paul at the end the effect of a man of God having followed piety, when he says he had learned in whatever circumstances he was to be content?
J.T. I think that is as good an expression of the thing as you could get.
A.J.G. In that way piety would be a great support to the testimony, developing the ability to stand in it according to God.
J.T. "But my God shall supply all your need" (@Philippians 4:19). One is restful as in one's circumstances, what one eats and drinks and wears. What has struck one about Philippians is that the greatest servant knew *how* to be hungry; he experienced it, and it was all for good, but he says, "My God shall abundantly supply all your need according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus" (@Philippians 4:19).
{318}
So that at all times you are in the realm of God's riches in glory.
Ques. Would piety, in the main, have the effect of balancing us so that we do not go too far one way or the other?
J.T. I think so. Bringing God in certainly will act as a balance.
{319}
BALANCE IN THE SERVICE OF GOD
@Numbers 15:1 - 21
J.T. We may not all follow this passage as easily as if it were in the New Testament, but bearing in mind that whatever was written aforetime was written for our learning, this passage has direct application at the present time to the service of God. What is in mind is to bring out *balance* in the service. The part taken by each is not only the expression of intelligence, but also of feelings, and affections; a consideration for what God looks for in those who appear before Him. It should be noted that the offerings as mentioned -- a lamb, a ram, a bullock, and the accompanying offerings, the meat-offering, the oil, and the drink-offering -- are to be proportionate; the lamb representing a small measure in a Christian, the ram being a larger and more mature thought, and then the bullock still larger. As offerings professedly are increased in measure the accompanying accessory offerings are to be proportionate.
The foundation of everything in relation to God's recognition of man and his approach to Him is presented first in the voice from heaven at the time of the Lord's baptism, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3:17). The Spirit also comes in the form of a dove upon Him; so that we have man as God wishes to have him in Christ, in perfection, and the Spirit here operates in relation to that. That must be the standard. We have in verses 17 to 21 an offering which is not called an offering by fire; the others in the previous part of the chapter are. As we proceed in our reading, we should come to the idea of an offering not called an offering by fire, but the fruit of the land, a cereal, the flour, the wheat, only not the sheaf or wheat in the blade, but threshed, ground and kneaded so that it is called dough; but still, not called an offering
{320}
by fire. The thought is that when we arrive at the heavenly side of the service of God, fire is not brought forward.
W.H. Does the thought of the death of Christ in that sense have a more prominent part in the offerings, leading on to what we are in relation to Christ, not so much the foundation of our being before God?
J.T. Yes. Then the full idea of the heavenly food is in the dough where the fire is not mentioned. What stands at the beginning for God, we have to recognise; there can be no drawing near aside from the death of the Lord Jesus.
T.T. It is not instruction for the wilderness: it is, "When ye come into the land".
J.T. That is right. Chapters 13 and 14 show how the land was despised. They despised the heavenly land, although there were some who valued it. This chapter goes on immediately to show that God is not diverted from His purpose because some despise His land. Others will value it, and the Spirit proceeds at once to speak of what they are to do. This chapter is by itself in that way, following on the subject of the land as despised. In the next chapter we have rebellion, and following on that the great subject of priesthood in a living way. This chapter finishes up with the idea of the land, how those who value it are to have blue in their clothing to show that they belong to heaven, and all sin is dealt with either sacrificially or by direct judgment. The first thing obviously is that if we are to serve God in the light of the heavenly land, we are to be balanced in our offerings.
F.I. Do you mean in regard of being balanced that the greater thoughts we have in relation to the death of Christ, the greater appreciation we should have of what He was here in perfection as a Man?
J.T. Yes. That is the thought in the flour -- "a tenth part of fine flour mingled with a fourth part of a hin of oil". That alludes to the perfection of humanity
{321}
in Christ. That is God's standard. And then the wine added for a drink-offering -- a stimulating thing which would allude to what Christ was under God's eye here, and as being infinitely pleasing to Him.
J.C-S. Referring to the standard, that is perfect and absolute, but what we have is progressive, that is our side?
J.T. Yes. What is presented in Christ is perfect, there can be no addition to that; so that the doctrine of evolution is false. What is presented in Christ is absolutely perfect. *We* progress in it. So that one brings a lamb -- which is of intrinsic value, although smaller than a ram and less mature. In bringing a lamb the offerer has to see to it that what he is himself is in proportion to that. He does not merely rely on the phraseology of a more developed brother, but speaks according to his own measure.
J.C-S. With the accessories that he presents with his lamb there would be progress. He would progress, and the time will come when he can bring a bigger offering.
J.T. Yes.
G.H.C. There is a variety of things mentioned at the beginning -- "a burnt-offering or a sacrifice for the performance of a vow, or as a voluntary offering, or in your set feasts". This balance that you are referring to should mark us in all approach to God.
J.T. Yes. It is not a sinner drawing near, seeking peace. It is a person in a known relation with God in the land: "When ye come into the land of your dwellings, which I give unto you, and will make an offering by fire to Jehovah, a burnt-offering, or a sacrifice for the performance of a vow, or as a voluntary offering, or in your set feasts, to make a sweet odour to Jehovah". It is therefore worship which is in mind. In @Deuteronomy 26 we have similar instructions, only it says there, the first of *all* the fruit of the ground, and it is put into a basket; here it is an animal, with the accompanying
{322}
things mentioned, and the first of their dough as a cake. That is to say, we are more limited than @Deuteronomy 26. I think it is to help us in our service, each individual. In drawing near, in joining in the assembly service, we are helped to be balanced, not to go beyond our measure.
J.C-S. That is, the person drawing near is not only to have knowledge of Christ in this particular, way, but is to be practically formed in that.
J.T. That is the idea: to have an apprehension of Christ, and formation according to it: for a lamb, "a tenth part of fine flour mingled with a fourth part of a hin of oil; and of wine for a drink-offering shalt thou offer the fourth part of a hin with the burnt-offering". When a brother stands up to take part in the assembly it is not only what he says, but you think of the *person* who is speaking. We are often able to say very good things, and yet saints as knowing us are just wondering why we should say anything; I mean, persons not formed in the thing. At the beginning, in @Acts 1, we are told that "the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty",(@Acts 1:15) meaning that although it was a "crowd" each one is distinguished. Each would be known, and what he said would be valued according to who he was. You value what a person says according to who he is. The words in themselves are not everything; it is who is saying them.
J.W. Do you suggest that one should be instructed in the art of measurement, so as to be able to give right proportions?
J.T. Yes. God is the God of measure and He instructs us as to measure, so that we have in @Romans 12:3, "as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". One has to know his measure.
J.C-S. What would you say about the wine for a drink-offering in this connection?
J.T. I think it is the pleasure, the holy stimulation occasioned by the offering of a brother. God would be
{323}
thus affected by the intelligent spiritual service of a worshipper. The saints would be affected also. It is said that when the Lord came in they were glad when they saw Him. That is the standard.
W.H. Making glad the heart of God and man!
J.T. That is the thought. How delightful the Lord Jesus was! How infinitely delightful He was to God as walking here on earth! The heavens were opened, and the voice said, "In whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3:17). The assembly is to be the reflection of what is in heaven. It is pleased with Christ. "The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord", (@John 20:20). The book of Song of Songs is to bring out what the Lord is to those who love Him. This is what I am to be concerned about when I take part in the assembly. Am I ministering to the pleasure of God and the saints?
A.M.H. I was thinking as to the animal -- is that the objective apprehension I have of Christ which might go considerably beyond my measure or state, which would be corrected by the thought of the meat-offering and the wine?
J.T. I think that is what is meant. The lamb, of course, is a type of Christ offered, that is, entering into death; and as presenting Him in this sense these accompanying things denote my measure. I am qualified to do it; really I am not qualified otherwise.
D.H. Would you say that divine Persons would be affected by the measure of our contribution?
J.T. Yes. We come under the divine eye as Christ did. "In whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3:17) applies directly to Christ, but in measure it extends to the saints. We come in too. That is an important matter to keep before us, and these accompanying things allude to what is for the divine delight in the saints, because they are just Christ in measure.
F.M. @Philippians 2:17 would bear that out: "If also I am poured out as a libation on the sacrifice and ministration of your faith, I rejoice, and rejoice in
{324}
common with you all". In connection with what you were speaking of, that character of joy would be entered into by the saints as one is taking part.
J.T. Yes. I believe it is largely the idea of Philippians to bring out what Christianity is in a practical way. So that "poured out as a libation" (@Philippians 2:17) would be that. A libation is the idea of the drink-offering, what is pleasing to God in Paul's attitude of mind.
A.M.H. Do you think there is the working out of this in the prayer of @Acts 4? They bring what you might call a small offering, and speak of the Lord as God's Christ, and then they speak of Him as His holy servant Jesus whom He anointed. Would that bring in the thought of the oil? Then they are filled with the Spirit, and there is great boldness in the word.
J.T. Just so. It is not the full offering you get in Philippians, but they had a great thought of what Christ is to God as in testimony -- "his Christ", and "thy holy servant Jesus" (@Acts 4:27).
A.M.H. It is that kind of manhood we need to lay hold of. "Holy servant" would suggest a *Man* owned here by God.
J.T. Quite so. And "mingled with oil" here alludes to His humanity. He was mingled with oil, but then anointed as well.
A.M.H. The "mingled" is more intimate, is it not? It enters into the constitution, do you mean?
J.T. Quite so. That would not be true of anyone but Him. Humanity in Him, although real, was unique.
Ques. Would the idea of glory to God in the highest, good pleasure in men, come in?
J.T. Yes; the angels celebrating the birth of Christ were saying that. It is good pleasure in *men*, not Christ only, but the result of His incarnation, involving redemption; and it bears out what we are saying as to the chapter under consideration, that we come in on that line, and we minister pleasure to the heart of God.
{325}
W.H. In @John 4:23, the Lord says, "The Father seeks ... worshippers". It is not only worship but the *persons* who would be thus employed.
J.T. Yes. In our chapter the offerers, in type, "worship ... in spirit and in truth" (@John 4:24). It is not only the words they use, but the spirit which enters into and governs the service. This is implied in the accompanying things of which we have been speaking.
E.G. Would the principle be seen in @Hebrews 11:4? "By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained testimony of being righteous, God bearing testimony to his gifts".
J.T. That is right. Abel *was righteous* . That carries the thought. His gifts represented what he was. They represent Christ, of course, but also that the offerer corresponded.
D.H. With regard to taking part in worship, would you say that our contribution ought to be *definite* as affecting divine Persons and also leaving an impression on the saints? It says here, the "one lamb".
J.T. That is right -- "one"; your mind is definitely on that, and you are thinking as to whether you are really equal to it yourself, whether you are practically in accord with it.
J.C-S. Do you think that the effect of a person having these qualifications and addressing divine Persons would bear upon the hearts and minds of the saints, producing spiritual emotions?
J.T. Exactly. You are representing them, of course, in speaking and you want to carry them. Thus it is a great advantage to know who is speaking, because I am not thinking only of what he is saying, but the person who is saying it.
T.T. There was no hindrance put in the way of anyone bringing an offering, but if he shall bring an offering by fire, he shall bring the meat-offering, etc.
J.T. God is showing here in type that we are to be balanced in His service. Christ is His standard, and
{326}
He is looking out for us to draw near to Him as of Christ, according to Him in constitution, also in spirit and intelligence. Here the priest is not mentioned. We get that in Leviticus where the priest disposes of the offerings brought to Jehovah at the tent of meeting, but here it is the man himself. The priest is not mentioned. The offerer is in the land and he is drawing near, and God is looking for something of Christ in him, not only what he says in his worship, but the man himself.
J.C.L. Would this in a way correspond to @Deuteronomy 16 when the males appear before Jehovah: each was to give as he was able, according to the blessing of the Lord?
J.T. It does correspond with that. As a matter of fact the set feasts are alluded to here in connection with other things. In @Deuteronomy 16:16,17, the point is the males, and not one should appear before God empty, but should have something to offer. @Numbers 15 not only describes the offering, but the accompanying condition. A lamb is very delightful to God, but then a ram is more mature, and we have a progenitive idea in the ram. The bullock is still larger. Thus we have, in verse 8: "When thou offerest a bullock for a burnt-offering, or a sacrifice for the performance of a vow, or for a peace-offering to Jehovah, then shall they present with the bullock as oblation three tenth parts of fine flour mingled with half a hin of oil; and of wine shalt thou present half a hin, for a drink-offering, as an offering by fire, of a sweet odour to Jehovah. Thus shall it be done for one ox, or for one ram, or for a lamb, or for a kid; according to the number that ye offer, so shall ye do to every one according to their number".
E.G. Would you say a little more as to the oil?
J.T. As mingled with fine flour, it alludes to Christ's humanity. He was unique. There was never a man like Him before, nor, as viewed as He was here in the
{327}
flesh, shall there ever be another. We are to be like Him, risen and glorified in heaven, but what He was here in the flesh is absolutely unique. He was alone in that. Humanity, of course, goes on to resurrection and into heaven, but the idea of the mingling with oil would call attention to the peculiar unique humanity that was seen in Him. "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God (@Luke 1:35)". The holy thing! It is *substantial* holiness, not merely external holiness, but substantial. He is also anointed with oil. The anointing was additional; and "God gives not the Spirit by measure",(@John 3:34).
A.M.H. Do you take the measure there as applying to Himself, or do you make it general? "Unto him" is not in J.N.D.¬s translation.
J.T. That is a question. I think the allusion there is to Christ. The Spirit came on Him fully, totally, so to speak. It would look as if in the passage the allusion is to the Son. "God is true; for he whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives not the Spirit by measure (@John 3:33,34)". And then, it goes on to say, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3:35). Of course it would also apply to the assembly, for the Spirit is in it in a complete personal sense.
S.McA. The Spirit in us is called the Comforter. Is it not a new title in connection with His being with us and in us? He would not be known in that way in the Lord Jesus?
J.T. That is right. The Lord having gone up into heaven, begged the Father to send Him, and He is sent as another Comforter. That title is only applied to the Spirit in John's gospel. It alludes to the Spirit as a divine Person here, as Christ has been here -- *another* Comforter.
In order to see the setting of this chapter in Numbers, we should go on a little to verses 17 to 21.
H.B. Why is the first verse repeated in verse 18?
{328}
J.T. Verse 1 is, "When ye come into the land of your dwellings, which I give unto you". It is "the land of your dwellings", given to them by Jehovah. In verse 18 it is, "When ye come into the land whither I bring you". It is another point of view. The first is *gift*, the second is that we are brought into it. @Exodus 15 says that Jehovah would bring the people in; we have to understand how we are brought into the land. God brings us there and He is stressing the idea in this section. It is a separate communication to Moses, and He is stressing our heavenly part, what we are as there. So it is not an offering by fire that is mentioned, but the fruit of the land.
Ques. Would it have any connection with Rahab being found in the land?
J.T. She would represent that. She was there and she represents the saints as subjects of the work of God, not the product of ministry, not formed by the ministry of Moses and Aaron. Rahab did not know either. She is more the product of the work of God. Here we are brought into the land, but before this it is said, "What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23:23) It is the fruit of the land that is in mind, what we are, viewed thus. We must bear in mind that in these types it is the saints -- what they are and what they yield -- that are in view.
H.B. Would it suggest that we are in a sense from, heaven?
J.T. It works out that way. "It shall be, when ye eat of the bread of the land, that ye shall offer a heave-offering to Jehovah". The word "heave-offering" is to be noted: it may read, "when ye heave a heave-offering". It is the heart going upward -- not the wave-offering, but the heart going upward to God; but it contemplates us *eating*, meaning that we have a constitution built up on the fruit of the land. "Ye shall offer a heave-offering to Jehovah; the first of your dough shall ye offer, a cake, for a heave-offering; as the heave-offering of the threshing-floor, so shall ye offer this".
{329}
G.H.C. Would this section suggest more a process of exercise? You are referring to the "dough", and it mentions a "cake" as well. Would that suggest the action of the fire in another way?
J.T. It comes under the action of fire, but it is not called an offering by fire. That is not stressed. "It shall be, when ye eat of the bread of the land, that ye shall offer a heave-offering to Jehovah; the first of your dough shall ye offer, a cake, for a heave-offering; as the heave-offering of the threshing-floor, so shall ye offer this. Of the first of your dough ye shall give to Jehovah a heave-offering throughout your generations". So that it would be experience in the nature of a process, but the idea of fire is not stressed; it is there, because you cannot get a cake without fire, but still the dough is mentioned first and is repeated. It is more that side that is in mind.
C.L. Would there be a suggestion of it in @Genesis 18:6? When Abraham has the visitors, he says, "Knead quickly three seahs of wheaten flour, and make cakes".
J.T. That fits in here. What is in mind is heavenly worshippers who have been built up with heavenly food, the food of the land. We have already eaten of the bread, but now we are offering to God.
J.C-S. How would you apply this to the assembly as distinct from what we have considered in the earlier part of the chapter?
J.T. The earlier part is connected with the Supper in the assembly service. Offerings by fire would connect more with the Lord's supper, but we move on to the heavenly side where the idea of suffering and death is not stressed -- not ignored, of course. It is the fruit of the land, what is heavenly, what you have experienced yourself. You have eaten and now you are offering it. It is more the process by which you reach it. The cake would be *one idea*, but there is the process by which it is reached.
{330}
H.B. "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father (@Ephesians 2:18)". Is that the line?
J.T. Yes; and we are of His order: "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one" (@Hebrews 2:11). That is not exactly the oneness of unity, but *kind* .
J.C-S. Would this suggest that in the assembly we come to the point that the idea of past history is not stressed?
J.T. Yes. It is a process. The sheaf was offered according to @Leviticus 23:10. When they came into the land and reaped the harvest, they were to offer a sheaf of the first-fruits. That did not go through this process. The threshing-floor is not noted there. It is type of the Lord Jesus as first-fruits from among the dead. He is risen now. We are waving Him. It is a wave-offering, but this is a heave-offering; it is a question of our affections going up to God.
Ques. Would you say that the cake is Christ formed in the affections of the saints by these exercises -- the threshing-floor and the dough? It is called "your dough".
J.T. That is right. I think it is Christ in us, but it is our dough. It is the first-fruits; it is ours, what we have, the first-fruits of the land. You cannot have a cake without fire, but it is not stressed. Where you get cakes elsewhere they are an offering by fire. For instance, the shewbread was said to be an offering by fire, and the two wave loaves that they brought from their dwellings were baked and connected with an offering by fire. Here it is not said to be this.
W.H. The thought of the cake being a heave-offering would give spiritual spring to the worship.
J.T. You feel that you are in your own place. Christ said when He was here, "the Son of man who is in heaven" (@John 3:13). He was of and in the place; so are we: "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones" (@1 Corinthians 15:48), We belong to heaven. We have to learn to detach ourselves from our sinful history. We are of Christ:
{331}
"He that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren" (@Hebrews 2:11). For which cause? Because we are of Him.
T.T. The animals for the offerings by fire suggest something different spiritually from the dough.
J.T. Just so. There is a process, as we have been saying, with the dough; it is reached by a process -- kneading. There is the cutting of the harvest. The first-fruits of that applies to Christ. He is offered; He is waved before God. That is Christ out of death. Then we have the two wave-loaves immediately referred to which are brought from the houses of the people, and they were to be baked with leaven. It is stressed that they were baked with leaven, involving, of course, fire. It is historical, as I might say, sin -- "leaven" -- being there, but rendered inactive by fire. It is the assembly offered up to God at Pentecost. That is not quite what we are. There was a further truth to come out; that is, Paul's doctrine. He brings out that we are of Christ's order; we are of the same kind of humanity. Of course, we do not have part in Deity, but we have part in Christ's humanity as risen, and that is what I think enters into the passage before us -- that we belong to heaven. We are of Christ -- I think that enters into this passage.
Ques. Would the thought of the cake here stand in relation to the truth of the covenant which can be entered into before you touch the heavenly side? As touching the heavenly side, do you have the covenant before you?
J.T. No. It is heavenly growth; we grow in it as belonging to it, having a status of that kind. The covenant does not belong to heaven properly.
Ques. Did Paul have that in mind when he said "We, being many, are ... one body" (@1 Corinthians 10:17)?
J.T. That alludes to the saints here on earth: in @1 Corinthians 10 he alludes to us here on earth as in relation to the body of Christ in death. That is not the
{332}
heavenly side. That is what we are down here, sanctified by the will of God; but what we are considering is the heavenly side, what we are as of Christ. The idea of the assembly goes into heaven -- the one idea; but what is stressed here is the dough, what we are as to growth, the fruit of the land, but developed by our exercise, so that it is presented suitable to God in the cake, but the fire is not stressed.
G.D. In @Philippians 3:3 it says, "For we are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God". Would that fit in?
J.T. Yes, it would. At the end of our chapter (verse 37), we have: "Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them tassels on the corners of their garments, throughout their generations, and that they attach to the tassel of the corners a lace of blue; and it shall be unto you for a tassel, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of Jehovah, and do them" (@Numbers 15:37 - 39). That is a remarkable passage, and it is only understood by those who understand the heavenly; it is the blue. That is, we have our part in the assembly on the first day of the week, but what about the Monday when we change over? The *corner* is a change round. We change our circumstances, but we have not to drop the heavenly thought on the days that follow the first; we have to carry it through. It is what we are before men; and we are to look on it and remember all the commandments of Jehovah and do them. The heavenly thought is thus maintained.
J.C-S. You carry forward the idea of balance in that connection?
J.T. The corners are where the difficulties arise, changing over from one circumstance to another.
W.H. We get most of the corners through the week.
J.T. Well, Monday is always a very testing day for the saints. We are to carry into Monday what we have enjoyed on the Lord's day.
{333}
Ques. Would walking well-pleasing to the Lord and increasing in the knowledge of God be connected with the tassels?
J.T. Yes. In @Ephesians 2:6,7,10 we are made to "sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus, that he might display in the coming ages the surpassing riches of his grace in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus ... For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them". It is a heavenly people down here walking in the good works divinely prepared.
{334}
RIGHTEOUSNESS RECKONED AND FULFILLED
@2 Corinthians 13:7; @Matthew 3:15; @Psalm 85:10,11
I wish to speak about *righteousness*, which is one of the widest and most important of all subjects, having in mind especially the working out of righteousness in the believer in relation to the assembly. As regards its imputation, it is said to look down from heaven. That is, it is not a righteousness which is worked up on earth, but which looks down from heaven; having clear scope to come upon all needy, convicted sinners, such as Abraham was, who became the great father of all believers. His faith, we are told, was reckoned to him as righteousness. In @Genesis 15 he is directed to look up into the heavens. They display perfect regularity of movement and entire freedom from rivalry. Those heavenly bodies, ponderous, great, and glorious, typically afford light and guidance to all believers. Thus righteousness, as it were, looks down from heaven. And so to Abraham it was said that his faith was reckoned as righteousness. It looked down from heaven, and came down, as it were, so that he was accounted righteous.
If there is one here who has been convicted of sin at any time, this truth should encourage you to be in a position for righteousness to come upon you. It is as if it had looked upon need here, ready to come down to meet it. It suggests the most wonderful freedom and latitude that it has through redemption, to pick out the needy ones on earth and cover them. It is "unto all and upon all them that believe" (@Romans 3:22). It is a wonderful presentation of this great theme. So that no one should continue to be suffering from conviction of sins. The guilty conscience may be set at perfect ease, for righteousness has such wonderful scope that it looks down and
{335}
comes down. It is through no merit of our own that God's wonderful act of forgiveness is offered: it is all of grace, for we are "justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood", (@Romans 3:24,25). How wonderful the scope of this is! Righteousness can look down, come down, and be effective to myriads.
I would now speak about the working out of righteousness relative to assembly matters. I may say here, that nothing can be greater, in the way of privilege, than that one should have part in the assembly. The Lord Jesus speaks of it as "my assembly", and then we have the expression, "assembly of the living God" (@1 Timothy 3:15) -- a striking designation! Think of God being pleased to take us up and bring us into that! And the first great feature in relation to it is righteousness; hence Matthew's gospel, being the assembly gospel, presents a righteous man, Joseph. He is called here "the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ" (@Matthew 1:16). That is, the identification is complete. Not only had Christ come into the world as a Babe, but He is *known* to be that Person. And Joseph was the husband of Mary, of whom Jesus was born. He is called a righteous man. Now, we should bear that in mind, because it is a voice to us in the introduction of this assembly gospel -- that it is men of that kind who are needed in order to work out the truth of the assembly that it might be here in testimony. The assembly is "the pillar and base of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3:15).
Joseph was confronted with a most delicate position at that time. The enemy knew the preciousness of the Babe, but is Joseph to stand in this position where he may be misunderstood, or will he give way to the enemy? Will he allow his feelings to dominate him? Joseph's circumstances prompted such feelings. Circumstances such as his, in measure, arise constantly. The enemy uses them to promote personal ill-feeling. Will
{336}
Joseph give his ear to a whisperer who points to possible wrong? The circumstances lent themselves to the enemy in that way. Were there whisperers at that time? Doubtless there were. The Spirit of God is not pleased to record all the details, but just what is enough; He tells us that in this apparently vulnerable position the one most responsible in it was a just man. Now, that is what I have in view. The first man that we get in the New Testament, active in spiritual responsibility, is Joseph. It was, as I stated, a most difficult position. Not that heaven was not perfectly cognisant of it. It was. God had foreseen that a man such as Joseph was needed, and had prepared him for the great situation and the service attaching to it.
Matthew tells us much more about Joseph than about Mary, and the divine communications are all to him; whereas Luke tells us much more about Mary than about Joseph, and the angel Gabriel appears to her. Both were select vessels in relation to the birth of Christ, and as such each fulfilled its function perfectly under God. Joseph was a righteous man, and he stands, as it were, a pillar, in the very forefront of the assembly's history. In order to maintain the assembly in its service and testimony, there must be righteous men. When things become cloudy, as they do, particularly in remnant times, it is necessary that we be able to distinguish between right and wrong. Difficult cases come up constantly.
In the beginning of Matthew there was to the natural eye this cloudy position. Not that the position was cloudy on God's part. Far from it! God would display His perfect wisdom in it, and His strength, too, for "the weakness of God is stronger than men", (@1 Corinthians 1:25). The Spirit of God takes the greatest pains to trace the genealogy of Joseph, the reputed father of Him "who is called Christ"; of course, to establish the legality of our Lord's being thus designated. But Joseph was morally worthy of the place he obtains in
{337}
the royal line, because he was righteous. He was a fit link in the genealogical line from Abraham through David to Christ. We may establish our title by tracing our genealogy, but we may not be *worthy* of the title, Joseph was worthy; not only was he the son of David by a careful analysis of the registers, but he was a righteous man. And a righteous man is *morally* of the genealogy of Abraham and of David!
Well, now, I wish to connect @Matthew 3 with verse 7 of @2 Corinthians 13. This verse is near the end of the second of these two epistles, which were written because of unrighteousness amongst the saints in the absence of the apostle, who for eighteen months had laboured so untiringly amongst them, and with two other servants had preached that Jesus was the Son of God. You may be sure that in all his gospel addresses Paul had stressed the idea of righteousness. In his absence unrighteousness lifted up its head. The first thing he noticed was the allowance of partisanship. There were party leaders and their followers -- he particularly refers to their followers. I cannot go into all the things he mentioned, but partisanship is the first thing, and he dealt with that. Also he dealt with gross evil, such "as is not even among the nations" (@1 Corinthians 5:1). How solemn to think that that should find a place in the assembly of God! What a sorrowful thing! But he does not mention it first; whereas we would probably have mentioned the gross evil of incest first, Paul did not. He had learned, evidently from a devoted person, that there were strifes among the Corinthians. That was an unrighteous state. It worked out in displacement of the great servant through whom they had been converted. So much did it affect the saints in this respect that the apostle himself had to say to the Corinthians, "Receive us: we have injured no one" (@2 Corinthians 7:2). Why should he have to say that? Because of an unrighteous spirit that had arisen in Corinth, and had become enlarged in the minds of the saints there, during his absence.
{338}
So he writes on in the letter, which God used; but in the second epistle, chapter 1, he refers to the effect of the testimony upon him in suffering, for he endured great persecution in Asia. It was a terrible attack of the devil. He says: he despaired even of living, but God delivered him. And now, hearing of the return of Titus (@2 Corinthians 7), and of the effect of his first letter, he says in effect, I overabound with joy because of what I heard. Earlier he had said in effect, Let others in Corinth say what they will about me; wherever I go I speak well of you. You are my letter, known and read of all men. And later in this epistle he says, I am living for you, and am ready to die for you: "if even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved" (@2 Corinthians 12:15). But, as I said, such was the effect of the introduction of unrighteousness in the absence of Paul that he has to say to them, "Receive us". They were not sure that they were ready to receive him. I have not a doubt but that some of them would say. We doubt very much whether Paul should be received back. Such, he says, are false apostles. And why should they not limit him if they could, since he was in their way? You see, dear brethren, that is how unrighteousness works amongst us. "Do we need ... commendatory letters ... from you?" (@2 Corinthians 3:1) he says. Why, "*Ye* are our letter";(@2 Corinthians 3:2) I speak of you everywhere I go. I am not talking evil of you, but well of you. I am telling everybody about the work of God in Corinth.
In this second epistle he is greatly encouraged respecting the Corinthians. He abounds in joy on account of their repentance. And he proceeds to establish them, by bringing in one great truth after another -- such as the ministry of the new covenant, of reconciliation, and of new creation, as well as other features of the truth, including "the love of the Christ" (@2 Corinthians 5:14). And he says, "In every way ye have proved yourselves to be pure in the matter" (@2 Corinthians 7:11). That is, the mass of the saints had cleared themselves. They had not *all* done so, and the remainder of the
{339}
letter, from chapter 10 onward, is to deal with those who had *not* cleared themselves. He now confines his attention, in these latter chapters, to specific cases; and God works and brings about further recovery. With this in mind, he says, "Having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled" (@2 Corinthians 10:6).
It is a remarkable thing, that he uses the word "avenge". But he uses it, and credits the Corinthians with vengeance also. "But", he says, "what vengeance" (chapter 7:11). They had put away the wicked person. They were told to do it, you may say -- but they *did* it, and were credited with having done it. So, he says, you have cleared yourselves, and with "what vengeance". How unsparing they were regarding this evil! It called forth holy indignation in the Corinthians as stirred up by Paul's letter, and they judged it according to God. God poured out His wrath on His beloved Son as He bore *our* sins. Is it at all likely that He will condone sin in His people? Hence the apostle says, "having in readiness to avenge all disobedience" (@2 Corinthians 10:6). And why *not* avenge disobedience? It is to be nailed to the cross. No person is to be excused if disobedient. Think of what disobedience has brought upon this world! Think of the terrible state of things here, all due to disobedience! Hence the evil of it, and it should not be palliated; "having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled" (@2 Corinthians 10:6), the apostle says. Not only on one who disobeyed, but *all* disobedience. Whether open or covered, God sees it, and it will come under His judgment.
Now, that leads me to the verse in @2 Corinthians 13. The apostle is gradually coming down to specific cases at Corinth. The end of chapter 12 shows that there were some who were guilty of these sins, but then there were others who were direct rivals of the apostle himself. It is a very remarkable thing that he quotes
{340}
a remark of one of these wretched men: "His letters ... are weighty and strong, but his presence in the body weak, and his speech naught" (@2 Corinthians 10:10). This rival of the great apostle would probably whisper disparaging things about him to the saints; he might bring Peter forward, as being more experienced. That is the kind of thing that often appears -- this whispering of evil against the saints. Fancy one discrediting a great servant because of his bodily presence! What about the spiritual power of the apostle? What about the truth he ministered, even if physical infirmity existed? How much I would like to see Paul! It will be part of one's joy above to meet and know him. And this rival of Paul says of him, "his speech naught". The apostle himself, as I said, quotes the remarks of this man at Corinth, and goes on to speak of him and others there as false apostles. There is no one in Scripture who speaks so much about himself as the apostle Paul does; I think that every time he spoke about himself it caused him suffering. He did not wish to bring himself forward, but was obliged to do it. And so the Spirit of God would say to Paul, 'I know it is hard for you to talk about yourself, but the truth requires that you do it. These Corinthians must understand what a true Christian is'. Paul was God's man, he was the best available example, I might say, both as a Christian and a minister. He was therefore compelled to speak of himself.
In chapter 13 he says, "I say ... to those that have sinned before, and to all the rest, that if I come again I will not spare" (@2 Corinthians 13:2). He did not wish to come with a rod, and indeed had remained away to spare them, but now if he came and found some unrepentant he would not spare. This was to warn them. You can understand that these men would have in Paul one stronger than they to contend with. He was an apostle of Jesus Christ, and above all others, he was an apostle to them, and he now warns them that he would live with Christ in God's power towards them. But he says, "We pray
{341}
to God that ye may do nothing evil; not that *we* may appear approved, but that *ye* may do what is right, and we be as reprobates", @2 Corinthians 13:7.
You can understand how these evil men would talk of Paul, and some might go so far as to say that he was a reprobate. Suppose I *am* a reprobate, Paul would say, even though it be so; whatever others say or think about *me, you* do what is right; whatever you may think about me, you do what is right. Our minds may become darkened so that we begin to excuse ourselves and say, Look at what is reported of Paul; why should not I be excused if I do the same things? The apostle would say. Whatever others do, *you* do what is right. This is obvious, and yet our weak hearts are often ready to hide behind a false report, also to imply that two wrongs make one right.
I proceed now to Matthew. It is simply a matter o "all righteousness": the Lord Jesus is the great standard. He said at the outset of His ministry in Matthew, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". That word stands out as a voice to us in this assembly gospel. Not that I do a *little* in my way, in doing what I do, but that fulfilling "all righteousness" is the divine standard. If I am to be an assembly man, I must grasp that thought. If I *think* a thing is righteous and find out it is unrighteous, I must so regard it and abandon it. The Lord would have us fulfil "all righteousness", nothing less than that. What a great thought it is as expressed in one Man in this world! Heaven never needed to *confer* righteousness on Him. It was not a question of righteousness looking down from heaven on Jesus, but of the Father's eye looking down on an infinitely righteous Man; how delightful it was to God as Jesus said, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". May the thought be enlarged and deepened in our view!
I pass on to the psalm. It is experimental; called a psalm. I want to show how that in a crisis, after we
{342}
have been adjusted, there follows a fixed order of things. We are not to be in fear and suspicion of one another; like birds, when they are feeding, looking round to see if there is an enemy near. We are to be restful in the knowledge of a fixed order of things in Christ. Not that we should be anything but vigilant. The Lord says, "Watch", but then there is the idea of being restful in an immutable order of things, established on the firm foundation of Christ Himself, as being linked up with Him in heaven.
The first thing I call attention to in @Psalm 85 is that the psalmist in verse 8 says, "I will hear what God, Jehovah, will speak; for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his godly ones: but let them not turn again to folly" @Psalm 85:8. Now that is a word that fits many of us at this moment, in regard to various circumstances; let us say, "I will hear what God, Jehovah, will speak" (@Psalm 85:8). What a fitting resolve! When faced with a problem, we may say, I will see what so-and-so has to say; he is a good brother. In a way it is quite right, but be sure of the person from whom you seek help. Can he give it to you? The point here is, "I will hear what God, Jehovah, will speak" (@Psalm 85:8). *He* is ready to speak. Am I ready to hear? What does He say to me about all these happenings? There is something for everyone in them. It is an educational time for us; am I going to miss my part? If I am not, I must revert to the motive that led me into these things, and turn to God as to it. "I will hear what God, Jehovah, will speak" (@Psalm 85:8). He will not spare me, but will let me hear what He has in His mind for me. It goes on to say, "He will speak peace unto his people, and to his godly ones" (@Psalm 85:8). That is, God would say, I recognise these. Thank God for any little way in which God recognises us as His people -- that He has something here below -- a peculiar people, a people for a possession. He visited to take out of the nations a people for His Name, but then the godly ones -- that is another matter. We cannot be His
{343}
people characteristically save as we are *saints* . That means pious people, those set apart -- maintaining separateness.
Then it says, "Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land" (@Psalm 85:9). Let us take hold of that beautiful word -- "our land". Do not turn again to folly. We have seen the result of folly: partisanship, backbitings, and all that sort of thing; will the same thing happen amongst us that has happened before? Let it be a question of the fear of God. We may be baffled and hemmed in on every side, but the fear of God will bring in His salvation (verse 9). Those that fear Him, and thus come into His salvation can say that glory dwells in our land. We want to be occupied with glory dwelling in this fixed order of things, which we may call our own.
Next it says, "Loving-kindness and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other". That is, there is a complete harmonious state of things -- a meeting together and a kissing of each other by these great qualities. It is a perfect state of things. Love enters into it. Mercy and truth are in a perfect blend, they have met together. They are not in each other's way. They are not sundered by man's will, which may make too much of mercy and not enough of truth, and so be out of balance. They represent a fixed order of things in which God is glorified and men's needs are met. Happy it is where these great qualities are thus met together, man's will having ceased to act. Obedience has taken the place of disobedience, and righteousness and peace have kissed each other. Thus you can see that a fixed order of things requires the insistence of righteousness.
Then, truth is to "spring out of the earth"; it is a subjective thought, suggesting effulgence -- the earth and the fulness thereof. Then we are told that righteousness is looking down from heaven; it is dominating. We may look for all this: the combination of mercy and
{344}
truth, righteousness and peace; then the subjective state of things in us, truth springing up, and righteousness free and dominant as looking down from heaven.
May God help us, and bless these thoughts to us!
{345}
HOW UNITY IS REACHED
@2 Samuel 1:1 - 4,11,12; @2 Samuel 2:1; @2 Samuel 5:1 - 10.
J.T. What is in mind is to see how unity according to God is reached when a difficulty arises among the people of God. These chapters relate to collective truth, truth relating to the assembly, and we are always, as before God, reminded of the foundation on which we are in these circumstances; so we are to have foundation truth before us. The soul is to be led on, and built up in what is collective so as to reach unity, to the end that Christ should have His place. Usually if a difficulty arises, affecting the saints collectively, the war is long as we see here between the house of Saul and the house of David; for those who lead are not youthful as a rule; they are persons who have reputation; and there has to be a digging deep, and getting down to the foundations, not only in those who may lead in error, but in all. The history in these chapters shows that much had to be judged and learnt, even in those who in the main were right, who were with David. David is seen at the beginning of the history, that is, in chapters 1, 5, and 6, as leading; but in the intervening chapters we have much sorrowful history in which those who followed him and those who followed Saul had part.
The first point to be noted, therefore, is that David abode at Ziklag two days. This book begins with that, so that we are directed back to Ziklag, teaching us how that where everything is lost, God restores all: "David recovered all", we are told, at Ziklag. We begin there; and in the recovery, a spirit of generosity towards those who might be opposed to us is seen in this chapter in a most striking way. David, as hearing of the death of Saul and Jonathan, "took hold of his garments and rent them; and all the men that were with him did likewise. And they mourned and wept,
{346}
and fasted until even for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of Jehovah, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword".
A.M.H. You mean that that is right spiritual feeling towards persons who had part in the testimony, but who have fallen?
J.T. Yes. We cannot but deplore any loss in that way, even of a Saul, for he was anointed with oil; he had been in God's service as anointed.
J.A.P. Might that kind of spirit help in the way of recovery?
J.T. It does. The point here is a *right lead given in these circumstances* . David is seen as giving a right lead in view of what was to follow. In looking toward recovery, and bringing about the mind of God in His people, a good example is what is so essential.
P.L. "Out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears; not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you", (@2 Corinthians 2:4). Paul wrote the two epistles to the Corinthians thus.
J.T. Very good; and he has to say, "the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved", (@2 Corinthians 12:15). The want of love was amongst them, but he clothed them with divine thoughts; and that is how David regards Saul and Jonathan here: he clothes them with the very best thoughts: "The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen!" (@2 Samuel 1:19) That was what was in mind in the poem. He begins with it in verse 19, and ends with it in verse 25: "How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! Jonathan is slain upon thy high places" (@2 Samuel 1:25). There was a real link with Jonathan, although not with Saul.
A.M.H. David calls Jonathan "my brother": "I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan" (@2 Samuel 1:26).
J.T. We must always go back to whatever links we have had with brethren. David and Jonathan were
{347}
bound together in affection. "Jonathan loved him as his own soul", (@1 Samuel 18:1).
A.M.H. Does the anointing give one a somewhat wider range of recognition of persons, seeing that at least they have outwardly taken some part in the anointed vessel?
J.T. I think that is the thought that should be before us, because these scriptures are written for us. The anointing now extends not only to individuals, but to one great vessel; "so also is the Christ" (@1 Corinthians 12:12); meaning the saints as anointed.
H.L.T. What does verse 2 mean: "a man came out of the camp from Saul with his garments rent", and then in verse 11, "Then David took hold of his garments and rent them; and all the men that were with him did likewise"?
J.T. Is it not to confirm what we are remarking, that where you get a good lead given, others follow it? I believe that is a real difficulty in conflicts amongst us, the want, of a good lead. Its influence spreads; "all the men that were with him did likewise. And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of Jehovah, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword".
S.H.B. Does this indicate that a lesson is learnt through death, distance having come in? You have referred to the necessary lesson of death having to be learnt in view of our moving forward towards recovery.
J.T. Quite so; it says here, "because they were fallen by the sword". The messenger had brought the word. "What has taken place?" David says. "And he said that the people had fled from the battle, and many of the people also had fallen and died, and that Saul and Jonathan his son were dead also" -- a most sorrowful situation; but recovery begins with right feelings about it all, so that all should be affected according to God by what had happened. There might be
{348}
excuse for a sense of revenge, but it is altogether absent. It is a question of feelings of sorrow that Israel and Saul and Jonathan were fallen by the sword.
C.O.B. What are the thoughts conveyed in the expressions, "the people of Jehovah" and "the house of Israel"?
J.T. In such circumstances, although they have been against us, they are our brethren; they are God's people.
P.L. Would calling them "the people of Jehovah" clothe them Corinthian-wise in covenant setting, and "the house of Israel" bring in the feature of dignity?
J.T. The first epistle to the Corinthians begins with God's assembly. What a thought that is! "The assembly of God which is in Corinth" (@1 Corinthians 1:2). Then "the house of Israel" is added here -- a *spiritual* designation. We enter the matter of reaching the mind of God in this sorrowful situation with these exalted terms and feelings such as God can identify Himself with. From chapter 2:8 to the end of chapter 4 we have a sorrowful history, that is, a long war between the house of David and the house of Saul; but we begin here with sentiments and expressions with which God can identify Himself. We have the thought in @Hebrews 11:16: "God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God" -- a word which applies in these circumstances. Is there that with which God can identify Himself? In the sorrowful history of chapters 2, 3, and 4 you feel God can hardly identify Himself with either side; but here we have a spirit with which God would identify Himself; so that at the beginning of chapter 2 David enquires of Jehovah, saying, "Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah?" Well, am I worthy of going up? That is, I think, what is in mind. The first chapter gives the worthiness, or qualification, for going up; and God is ready to answer and to tell us where to go.
P.L. Do we get that in Exodus when Moses says, "And now, if thou wilt forgive their sin ... but if not.
{349}
blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book that thou hast written ... And Jehovah said to Moses, Depart, go up hence, thou and the people that thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, into the land that I swore unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob", (@Exodus 32:32; @Exodus 33:1)?
J.T. You mean that they are qualified to do that?
P.L. Yes; Moses gets light as to all the people of God as taking on such a solicitous and forgiving spirit as before God.
J.T. Then Moses says to Jehovah, 'You must come too'. It is very beautiful that He agrees to go up with them, showing how God is ready to respond to us. Moses says, "How shall it be known then that I have found grace in thine eyes -- I and thy people? Is it not by thy going with us? so shall we be distinguished" (@Exodus 33:16), for notwithstanding the good spirit which may mark us we need God every inch of the way.
J.F.L. How do you understand @2 Samuel 1:25, 26: "How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! Jonathan is slain upon thy high places. I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant wast thou unto me; thy love to me was wonderful"?
J.T. David's feelings, as becoming the circumstances, are thus expressed, as we have seen. Jonathan is the saving element in the house of Saul. There was a real link between David and Jonathan from the very outset; as David slew Goliath, "the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David" (@1 Samuel 18:1).
P.L. Is this spirit vindicated in the grace shown to Jonathan's son Mephibosheth?
J.T. Yes; he comes in here in chapter 4 in a most sorrowful setting. We have the two sons of Rimmon the Beerothite mentioned in the beginning of the chapter; then in verse 4 we have the account of Mephibosheth. He is brought into the history here peculiarly, where we are told how he became lame; and then the sons of Rimmon are mentioned again as the murderers
{350}
of the king of Israel, Ishbosheth; but Mephibosheth is brought in in verse 4 in a singular way, no doubt with a view to what you are remarking. Chapter 9 shows how he comes in for blessing on the ground of David's relations with Jonathan. There is nothing stated as to his earlier history to commend him specially; he comes in as a subject of mercy towards whom David acted most graciously because of his relations with Jonathan. The spirit of grace is brought into action in these cases through recalling the links of love. All must be on that line. Whatever there may be objectionable about a person, the links of love stand good. "Love never fails". So that David's relations with Jonathan are particularly to be noticed; he says, "Thy love to me was wonderful" (@2 Samuel 1:26). We would say that David's love to Jonathan was wonderful, because he wept with Jonathan as they parted, and he exceeded Jonathan in his feelings, but here he says, "Thy love to *me* was wonderful" (@2 Samuel 1:26). So that we can always look back in these cases, and take account of the work of God; how wonderful it appears as seen in the saints in their affections toward one another! Surely no stone must remain unturned that love should exist among the saints.
P.L. Would "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen" (@Revelation 2:5), allude to the relations that had marked the Ephesian saints in love towards God and towards one another?
J.T. Yes; "thou hast left thy first love" (@Revelation 2:4); and we have to remember that their first decline according to 2 Timothy was in relation to Paul -- not that he had done or said anything wrong, but they turned away from *him*, it was personal. The decline, surely, was in them, but the Lord would go back to that which had marked them, and recovery to it would be evidenced in their doing "the first works". He does not say that they are to *love* as before, because no doubt they would say, as is said usually when decline comes in: 'The
{351}
Lord knows my heart, that it is not a bit changed'. He is the only One who does know what is in the heart, and if He were to answer that He might deny it. The test therefore is as to whether the first works are being done: what am I *doing* now?
A.W.G.T. Would you say that the tendency in conflict is for personalities to get an undue place, and for spiritual features to be lost sight of?
J.T. That is the connection in which we are referring to the Ephesian saints turning away from Paul. There was a personal reason for that, whatever it was. He had expended more care on them than on any company of saints; he had remained there three years; and on leaving them, as described in @Acts 20, there was no lack of love; indeed, the chapter is full of love from beginning to end, on his part, and on theirs too. What caused the difference? It was personal, whatever the cause; and I believe it will be found that every decline and difficulty is rooted in some personal feeling.
T.E.W. David had never taken any place of opposition to Saul.
J.T. No; he could have slain him more than once, but he did not do it. He had respect for Saul.
A.W.G.T. Is it not evident that David must have pondered the features of these men in their past history? He was occupied with that rather than with their failures.
J.T. He was occupied with what was commendable; he says: "Saul and Jonathan, beloved and pleasant in their lives, even in their death were not divided" (@2 Samuel 1:23).
P.L. Would the Chronicles thus be attractive to a spiritual mind, as compiled by a spiritual writer, recording such instances as the dedications of Saul, Abner, and Joab?
J.T. Quite so; and the brother who looked after those dedicated things is worthy of note. His name is found in @1 Chronicles 26:24: "And Shebuel the son
{352}
of Gershom, the son of Moses, was overseer of the treasures". Then it says at the end of verse 25, "Shelomith his son" -- that is, the son of this brother "This Shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of the dedicated things, which king David, and the chief fathers, the captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host, had dedicated (from the wars and out of the spoils had they dedicated them, to maintain the house of Jehovah), and all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah had dedicated: all that was dedicated was under the hand of Shelomith and of his brethren", @1 Chronicles 26:25 - 28. I was thinking of the descent from Moses, and the faithfulness that would have such a charge, and the spirit that would bring in Saul in connection with the dedicated things, and Abner and Joab. All that is important in this enquiry, that we might have a right spirit, and remember whatever persons were -- not what they are today, exactly, but whatever they had been; because it is all treasured up according to God, and we do not want to be out of accord with that.
W.B.H. Jeremiah in his day refers to the departure of the people in the same spirit, does he not? He speaks of "the precious sons of Zion", (@Lamentations 4:2).
J.T. That is right; he likens them to fine gold. We are to be bathed in the right thought, the right spirit, as seen here, a magnanimous spirit, towards our brethren. Whatever they may be now, we must remember what they have been, and God has not forgotten that; it is all treasured. That is the basis of the early part of chapter 2. "And it came to pass after this that David enquired of Jehovah, saying. Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah? And Jehovah said to him. Go up. And David said. Whither shall I go up?" We are moving *up* now to reach the mind of God. There may be hesitancy and doubt at this stage, but prayer always brings in the mind of God. When David is anointed by all
{353}
Israel, that is, when we reach unity in regard to Christ in the matter, then it says, "the king and his men went to Jerusalem". David does not ask God about that. The matter is clear now. We are more or less in a fog as a rule until we reach the point of general unity. "Then came all the tribes of Israel to David to Hebron, and spoke, saying. Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. Even aforetime, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel; and Jehovah said to thee. Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over Israel. And all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a covenant with them in Hebron before Jehovah; and they anointed David king over Israel", @2 Samuel 5:1 - 3. We have unity now, unity as to Christ, and there is no asking now as to going to Jerusalem, because Jerusalem is the natural sequence of that. There was inquiry first in relation to Hebron, but not here. "The king and his men went to Jerusalem".
A.M.H. Is the going up to Hebron the introduction to a higher tone of things than that which existed in Saul's day? This is the result of Saul's overthrow, and of the bringing in of David?
J.T. I think that is the way to look at it; it is a higher level. David says, "Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah?" No doubt the "up" has its meaning geographically, but there is a spiritual touch in it; as you get in @Romans 7:4, for instance, "to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead", not simply raised from among the dead.
P.L. "Whither the tribes go up", (@Psalm 122:4).
J.T. Quite so; and Jehovah uses the word; he says, "Go up". David says again, "Whither shall I go up?" The "up" is used three times. What comes to one's mind is the need of elevation in these matters. We are so apt to drop to the level of men where there is antagonism, as with Saul; we need to be with God so that we are on a higher level than mere revenge or personal
{354}
feeling; and I believe that is the ground of David's going *up*, to "thy holy hill", as in @Psalm 15.
P.L. Do you connect David's relation with Abner with this? In chapter 3:20 "David made Abner and the men that were with him a repast" (@2 Samuel 3:20). That seems to affect Abner to gather to David all Israel. Joab has only a sword for Abner in contrast to this grace in David. It is the same spirit under every circumstance, whoever the person may be.
J.T. Wherever David comes in in this sorrowful history in chapters 3 and 4 you have a lead given. It speaks of Christ, and the way He works in our hearts in these circumstances to bring about a magnanimous and a right spirit. So in this sorrowful incident of the slaying of Abner, David is cleared. His attitude maintains the position before God. He judges Joab. It says "whatever the king did pleased all the people" (@2 Samuel 3:36). He is carrying the people with him in what is right. That is one of the finest things you get in these sorrowful matters among us, the ability to carry the saints with a right example.
J.H.B. You referred earlier to chapter 3:1: "And the war was long between the house of Saul and the house of David". Would you say a little as to what the house of Saul and the house of David represent in a spiritual sense?
J.T. I think "the house of Saul" is the flesh in the things of God. It is the flesh owned, too; I mean, it relates to those who are proved to be in the flesh, having had a place in the service of God. It is an element which, I believe, has been in the public body, in the assembly, almost from the outset, but coming in, of course, like a flood later. It is the official side. So it is a long war. If you take it in the history of the assembly, it has continued long; but applying it to specific cases, it refers to that element, the character of the person being deep-rooted. Over against that is the spirit of Christ in those who are on the right side. There may
{355}
be much about them that has to be dealt with, and hence the long war, because of the deep-rooted feelings: these being mainly in the house of Saul, but not altogether; for the chapters 2 to 4 show that a like state of things existed in Joab and his brothers, and hence the length of the war. There can be no doubt that the state of Joab had a great deal to do with the length of the war, but "David waxed stronger and stronger" (@2 Samuel 3:1); that is what in the main prevailed.
W.B.H. Is that the significance of the closing salutation of Paul's epistles: "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit" (@Galatians 6:18) (@Philippians 4:23) (@Philemon 25)?
J.T. Quite so: "with your spirit"; and in 2 Corinthians the apostle indicates that the war will belong; he would wait till they were all brought to subjection, and then he would deal with the evil elements. He says, "having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled" (@2 Corinthians 10:6). The war had to be lengthened out because of the state of the saints.
P.L. Is the dignity of the position marred in that way by Peter's use of the sword in the garden? Yet he is of "the house of David".
J.T. That is a very good illustration of it; and the Lord Jesus has to come in and take charge of the matter. If left to Peter, it would be confusion. The Lord has to heal the servant's ear, and then He goes forward Himself and challenges the captains, as recorded in Luke's gospel. If the Lord does not lead, there will be no satisfactory result reached. In this particular passage in Luke's gospel the Lord goes forward and speaks to the captains, and the whole matter becomes quite clear.
J.H.B. Is it a question of each one of us getting free from the features of the house of Saul, and taking on the features of David?
J.T. That is what it means. If Joab had not interfered in the case of Abner, what a solution there would
{356}
have been! Because Abner was happily falling in with David's *regime*, and had gone away in peace. David's comment upon the incident is that Joab drew the sword of war in peace. It was a time of peace. They were reaching the consummation; because the consummation is in chapter 6, where David offers burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. The offering of the peace-offerings has reference to the felicitous conditions brought about after such difficulties; but Joab interfered, and upset the matter. In truth the war was never over in regard to him till Solomon's day. These are solemn matters. How long a man may go on, even if on the right side, and yet be wrong himself!
W.E.B. Why was Joab not dealt with till Solomon's day?
J.T. He was too hard for David. Very often a man of that type goes on, and some change comes in in the administration of God's ways, and he is dealt with after that, his contemporaries having been unable to deal with him.
H.L.T. David showed long patience. Would the Lord have us to take on the same spirit?
J.T. Yes, but there was weakness with David. The last chapter of this book shows how low was the state of things; because David does not always represent Christ personally; he often represents the state of the saints; and he was unable to deal with Joab. God has to come in and change the administrative side to deal with cases of that kind.
H.L.T. It is well to look in on ourselves as to this.
J.T. Quite so; the question is. Am *I* prolonging the war?
P.L. Without implying that there was any weakness in Paul, would you get that feature in his allusion to Alexander the smith, who, as he says, "did many evil things against me. The Lord will render to him according to his works", (@2 Timothy 4:14)?
{357}
J.T. It looks as though the apostle could not deal with the matter, I suppose, because of the general conditions. He says, "the Lord reward him" (@2 Timothy 4:14). So he say elsewhere, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", (@1 Corinthians 16:22). That is, accursed when the Lord comes. If matters cannot always be dealt with now, evil will not be allowed to escape from the unerring judgment of God.
The passage in @2 Samuel 5 is well known to most of us, but the point is how the mind of God is reached; that is when the tribes of Israel come to David at Hebron, and they tell him what they have learnt. They go back on their history. Earlier chapters go back on Saul's history, and Jonathan's, and Mephibosheth's, and Abner's; but now we have the real man. It is a retrospective view. All the tribes say to him, "Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh". What learning, what spiritual education underlies all this, to reach such a point, to apprehend Christ in this way! And then they say, "Even aforetime, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel; and Jehovah said to thee. Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over Israel". Well, they are condemning themselves, but they are speaking truthfully now. All of us have to come to this way of reaching the mind of God, and tell the truth. Look back over the whole history, and tell the whole truth. Their mind was now directed to what was definitely of God in David in all this history, and he was anointed; they committed themselves to him. Then the place in the mind of God is reached definitely. But in verses 4 and 5 the Spirit of God stops to occupy us with David. We have been occupied with David before, but now it is David as reigning: "David was thirty years old when he began to reign; he reigned forty years. In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months; and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah". He reigned forty years
{358}
and a half, according to the details given, as if the Spirit of God would give us every moment of that man's reign.
P.L. Do we have this thought in 2 Corinthians? Paul accredits the Corinthians in saying: "Behold, this same thing, your being grieved according to God, how much diligence it wrought in *you*, but what excusing of yourselves, but what indignation, but what fear, but what ardent desire, but what zeal, but what vengeance: in every way ye have proved yourselves to be pure in the matter", @2 Corinthians 7:11. Is that what we see working out in 2 Samuel?
J.T. That is exactly what it is. The whole thing is regarded in verses 4 and 5; the positive side is seen there. The Spirit of God just rests on David, how many years he reigned at Hebron, and how many years he reigned at Jerusalem. What a history, what a reign! Compare @1 Chronicles 29:29, 30.
J.H.B. What is represented respectively by Hebron and Jerusalem in this connection?
J.T. To be simple I would say Hebron is Colossians from the doctrinal point of view; that is, we are on the way to something; it is not final, but we are on the sure way. It is, in a way, a halting point, but it is the only way to go; we cannot get to Jerusalem according to God otherwise. Colossians is entering on heavenly territory; you are setting your mind on things above. It is from that point of view. It is an elevation. From thence you go on to Jerusalem; it is setting your mind on things above. Ephesians, which answers to Jerusalem, is that you are there, not only your mind, but you are there: "God ... has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus" (@Ephesians 2:4,6). So that going to Jerusalem here is a normal thing now.
J.H.B. That helps very much. Is that what we should normally reach when unity has been arrived at
{359}
through the judgment in ourselves of the features of Saul and of his house?
J.T. That is it; spiritually you are there. The Lord identifies Himself with us there.
G.R.B. Would this suggest that everything was clear now?
J.T. Yes, there was no disturbing element left. All the tribes of Israel are here anointing David king over Israel, but it is not David and all the tribes of Israel who go to Jerusalem, but "the king and his men". We are viewed in that light: we are now "his men".
W.E.B. Has this always been God's way of bringing the saints into the truth of the Ephesian position?
J.T. There is only one way; it is *via* Hebron. Answering the inquiry of David, God tells him to go up to Hebron. If we know the history of Hebron spiritually we can understand it. It is what was "before the world". We are beginning to see there is another world, another order of things that antedated this world. That is the idea of it, that all the elements of this world are out of place now. We learn that at Hebron.
A.W.G.T. Is that why prayer is made so much of in the epistle to the Colossians, the prayers of both Epaphras and Paul?
J.T. Quite so; I believe the epistle was the outcome of prayer; the information that Epaphras gave Paul, and his constant prayer for the Colossians, led the apostle to write that epistle.
W.E.B. Is the great principle of suffering as seen in the epistle to the Colossians in view of our going on to Ephesians?
J.T. You mean the "combat" of the apostle, the agonies that he had about them?
W.E.B. Yes, and his own filling up of the sufferings of Christ.
J.T. Yes, I believe all that enters into this position at Hebron. It is a passing over, really, from this world and its elements to that world -- what the Lord calls
{360}
"that world, and the resurrection", (@Luke 20:35). Whatever the word means, that is the position Hebron occupies, because the Spirit of God tells us that "Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt", (@Numbers 13:22).
J.H.B. Is there any connection between David and his men going to Jerusalem and the fact that David took the head of Goliath to Jerusalem?
J.T. That brings out just what we were saying as to Colossians, what agonies of soul enter into the interval between David's taking the head of Goliath to Jerusalem and the occasion of his going there as mentioned in this chapter, "the king and his men". This is the consummation of the mind of God; the other is the indication of it. This is the point to be reached, the normal result. Then his taking off the head of the giant is dealing with intelligence on the side of evil, as indicated in hades¬ *gates* . Taking the head to Jerusalem is typically Christ leading captivity captive, and giving gifts to men (@Ephesians 4:8). It is the carrying out of the mind of God in overthrowing Satan's power.
P.L. With reference to chapter 5:2: "Jehovah said to thee. Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over Israel"; does that connect with the beginning of Colossians, "the kingdom of the Son of his love" (@Colossians 1:13)? Is the idea that he now gets his place distinctively among the people according to the delight of Jehovah, and according to His thoughts regarding him?
J.T. I think so. Then this leads on to the thought of the ark being put into its place. The type of Christ passes from David himself to the ark in chapter 6. It says "they brought in the ark of Jehovah, and set it in its place, in the midst of the tent that David had spread for it. And David offered up burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before Jehovah" (@2 Samuel 6:17).
W.P. Would you say a word about taking Zion in reference to this? What is the difference between Zion and Jerusalem?
{361}
J.T. That opens up a wide subject, but it is well to mention that here it is a question of bringing in the ark and making a place for it; "here will I dwell, for I have desired it", the Lord says (@Psalm 132:14). So that David takes the stronghold of Zion and calls it the city of David, and he built inward, meaning, as applying to ourselves, that we now need inward building. It is a question of the thoughts of God, thoughts reaching on to eternity.
{362}
INTERCESSION
@Hebrews 7:25,26; @Romans 8:26,27; @Genesis 18:16 - 33
J.T. It is thought that the subject of intercession will be of service to us. First, it is carried out by Christ, who, it is said, ever lives to make intercession for the saints; and then the Spirit, who is also said to make intercession for the saints; and then finally the service of the saints themselves as seen in Abraham. Indeed, it is the last I have particularly in mind, that we may see that intercession is linked with righteousness, the saints viewed as able to judge who are righteous; and that it may be seen that the world is still in reconciliation in view of the continuance of the gospel, so that intercession is carried on for it.
H.H. Would you say a word as to what you understand by intercession?
J.T. It is our exercises Godward in regard of others, for their welfare according to the will of God, as distinguished from supplications, prayers, and thanksgivings, as seen in @1 Timothy 2:1; but it is intelligent definite service on behalf of others; you are thinking of them and acting on their behalf. J.N.D. has a note on the word in @1 Timothy 2:1: "Personal and confiding intercourse with God on the part of one able to approach Him". Righteousness is particularly the basis. The Lord Himself in John's epistle is spoken of in this connection, that is, as "advocate with the Father", as righteous -- "Jesus Christ the righteous" (@1 John 2:1).
C.G. Does it involve that we have some understanding of the mind of God for those for whom we are interceding?
J.T. I think it is intended to be specific in that way; Abraham clearly had in mind the persons he knew in Sodom. He begins with a number evidently beyond what he believed were righteous in Sodom. We have in 1 Timothy intercession for all men, and, of course,
{363}
we cannot specify each; but generally, I think, it is to be specific. It says here in @Hebrews 7, "Whence also he is able to save completely those who approach by him to God, always living to intercede for them"; so that He has in mind those who draw near to God. What you would expect to be foremost in His mind is God, and what is for God, and therefore our minds are directed to what this epistle teaches, that is, we should draw near to God, knowing that the Lord is ever living to intercede for us in *that* connection.
A.W.R. Is Moses going up to intercede for the people, a good example?
J.T. He is a good example in that connection; but they were not drawing near to God; they were rather turning away from God, having made the golden calf. Still they were God's people, at least in Moses¬ thought of them, and hence he interceded for them.
M.W.B. With regard to the Lord's own intercession for us, what is the divine object of it? Is it to preserve us in keeping with our place before God, or is it to maintain our place before God?
J.T. I think if you connect the matter with the verse just quoted it is drawing near to God that is in mind. @1 John 2 shows that if sin occurs, we have an Advocate with the Father, One who will see to that matter as well, and of course, that may happen in one who characteristically draws near to God; drawing near to God, evidently, is what is in mind in the high priest, for the allusion here is to Jesus ever living to make intercession, as it is said, for those who approach by Him to God, always living to intercede for them. It would be, of course, to maintain *us* before God, but having in mind that we are drawing near to God by Christ.
A.E.M. Would the expression "save completely" bear that thought, in the previous verse?
J.T. Just so, covering a remark in 1 John, though the Advocate there is a somewhat wider thought than
{364}
intercession. It involves intercession, but it involves that any matter arising, including a sin, is thoroughly attended to, and therefore, salvation completely is by Christ. The statement, "he is able to save completely those who approach by him to God" would cover the whole position, but the passage has in mind that we approach by Him. There are those who would approach otherwise, and were trying to at that time; approaching by Him is Christianity and He intercedes for all such.
H.H. Would you connect advocacy with priesthood?
J.T. It is a part of the thought -- another word, as we no doubt know. *Priesthood is a provisional office*, exercised by Christ in view of conditions here, that is, conditions in us and conditions in our environment, so that He is to have compassion on the ignorant and erring. Malachi says "the priest's lips should keep knowledge" (@Malachi 2:7). It is a wide range of service, underlying it is sonship; Christ as Son is Priest.
A.M.H. Is the interceding to preserve us from characteristics which might hinder our approach and to keep us in accord with what is said of the Lord Himself in verse 26, "holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners"?
J.T. I thought that. Verse 26 brings in what the persons are to whom He is priest; He "became us". Such a One as is depicted in the chapter was needed because of the greatness of those to whom He is Priest. As I was remarking, priesthood covers a wide range, but it is *provisional* . The basis of drawing near to God is sonship; as in the primary thought in @Exodus 4:23 "Let my son go, that he may serve me", so in this epistle God is leading many sons, not priests, but sons, to glory; the priesthood therefore is a provisional thought, because of conditions in us and about us in drawing near in our relation with God; hence the priesthood is brought in in @Exodus 28 in view of the service. God said, "Let my son go, that he may serve me",(@Exodus 4:23) and the priesthood is brought in for that purpose, that sons
{365}
may serve Him in the priest's office, or as priest. Aaron and his sons were to serve as priests, not here as sons, but in the capacity of priests, hence the great stress laid on the priesthood, because it is exercised in relation to conditions that will not always exist.
C.G. Is the Lord's own priesthood based on sonship? I was thinking of chapter 5.
J.T. Quite so; it is what is stated; it is the Son. The Son is the Priest; the service is carried on by the Priest because of conditions in us, and the priestly service includes intercession.
A.M.H. I would like to get a little clearer as to this subject of priesthood; as you say, it is a very wide one. There is a distinction, I suppose, between the Lord as Priest, being able to sympathise with our infirmities, and as in relation to God, as Minister of the sanctuary. Are you making intercession something additional to that?
J.T. We need Christ's intercession and priestly sympathy and support in *every* position, but we require it more in our ordinary or wilderness circumstances than as together in assembly, but we need it there also; Christ as Minister of the sanctuary is in charge of the service of God, and the bearing of His ministry is Godward. We need to be sustained there as with Him, so that we should take part in the service, and so must rely on His priestly grace there as elsewhere. "We have such a one high priest ... minister of the holy places", (@Hebrews 8:1,2). As Priest He would relieve us of whatever there might be to hinder us in drawing near to God.
G.L. The Lord said, "Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has demanded to have you, to sift you as wheat; but I have besought for thee that thy faith fail not" (@Luke 22:31); would that come into the category of the service you are speaking of?
J.T. Certainly it would, and very comforting it is; "that thy faith fail not" (@Luke 22:31). Not there that he might not deny Him, but that his faith should not fail.
{366}
H.H. Would advocacy come in there?
J.T. I think advocacy went on in the whole matter. The advocacy of Christ is seen in that particular instance because the Lord took account of the whole matter as One standing by from the beginning to the end. The word denotes that He takes charge as before God of our matters, so that He foresaw what would happen in Peter's case and provided against it in prayer, but advocacy is somewhat wider; His prayer was specific, as to Peter's faith, but He was thinking of the whole matter and in due course He *looked* on Peter; that is advocacy. He is seeing to Peter's repentance.
M.W.B. The word "Advocate" implies that the whole thing is under consideration and in His hand.
J.T. Yes, that one is thought of before one sins is a very touching matter. The Lord is thinking of it before it happens and He may decide to let it happen, but He is watching the matter; it is a process, so that in Peter's case He looked at him as the cock crew. He turned round and looked on Peter, showing that he was in His mind; not a thing was happening without Him, and He is "Jesus Christ the righteous" (@1 John 2:1). He is there on that footing, and "is the propitiation for our sins; but not for ours alone, but also for the whole world" (@1 John 2:2). We are on sure ground, so we can understand why the Lord allows failures to occur. He thinks of them before they occur, and the persons in whom they occur. Could He not prevent it? we may say; but He does not. He has something to work out. The prayer is only an item in the advocacy, the intercession is only an item, He is watching over the whole matter. But we must solemnly notice that in furnishing instruction on this subject, the apostle John says, "These things I write to you in order that ye may not sin" (@1 John 2:1).
H.H. Then it says, "with the Father" in John, and in Hebrews "God". Would you say a word as to that?
J.T. "With the Father", I think, is to maintain the dispensation in our souls; the Father stands for that.
{367}
The Lord is with Him as Advocate; He says, elsewhere, "of righteousness, because I go away to my Father" (@John 16:10). On His own account. He was going to the Father according to @John 16, but as Advocate with the Father He maintains us in the dispensation in view of anything that might overwhelm us; so that grace reigns. God is no different after, than before we sin; He has not altered; it is the Father. The Advocate would thus maintain us before God according to the dispensation.
A.M.H. You get the intercessory condition with Moses when the conflict is on with Amalek and Joshua. When Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
J.T. Yes. It is a remarkable instance. The situation is one whole in @Exodus 17, that is to say, the position of Moses¬ arms or hands reacts in the army below. It is a weak position and yet a strong one: it is a position that calls for faith, and the exigencies bring out what was there. It was not indicated at the outset that there would be such a state of things. Aaron and Hur were there, but the exigency of the moment brought out that there was enough to meet the opposition. It would seem as if Amalek might prevail, but in truth he could not; there was enough to overcome him, but it was a position into which faith peculiarly entered. Hence the Lord says, "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not" (@Luke 22:32). If my faith is not maintained, the position is weakened and it may become serious. I suppose Peter's faith was preserved, and that was the result of the advocacy of Christ.
A.M.H. So that the faith element as indicated in Aaron and Hur coming in, would affect the movement of the army.
J.T. Yes, and the "stone" is brought in. It is one whole, and you can only have that if faith is maintained. Christ remains on high, but we may not consciously be deriving from Him.
{368}
A.M.H. The verses in @Hebrews 7 are to set Christ before us as interceding.
J.T. I think it is to maintain faith. Faith is one great thread running through this epistle.
G.L. Would the service of Moses, Aaron, and Hur represent what is in heaven, but faith would be maintained by what is on earth?
J.T. What was above was connected with what was below; faith must be the link between the two, and that is why the Lord said, "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not" (@Luke 22:32). Many get overpowered by what happens, but faith enables us to overcome; the dispensation is not changed by what I may do, or by what Satan does. Faith maintains this and makes room for God to come in. In a great disaster "David strengthened himself in Jehovah his God" (@1 Samuel 30:6).
G.L. And the result is, as having experienced the service of Christ in this sense, there is greater spiritual capacity for the service of God.
J.T. Exactly. Those who draw near to God by Him are thus helped; we become strengthened and assured and thus more competent in the sanctuary. Christ on high is always thinking of us, able to save us "completely".
E.G. What does the stone suggest?
J.T. I think it is to bring in the solidity of the whole position; stone always suggests permanency. Speaking now of @Exodus 17:9, "Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek". It is a question of the authority of God. "So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill. And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. But Moses¬ hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other
{369}
side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun" (@Exodus 17:10 - 12). Joshua broke the power of Amalek; the exigency was more serious than might have been anticipated, but it was overcome. Moses¬ hands grew heavy, but this difficulty is met in Aaron and Hur, and I think the stone as brought in at the end is to show that the ground is *sure* . It may appear to be weak, but it is firm. What we have been remarking is important, especially as we have to own that sin takes place with each of us; faith maintains the link with God notwithstanding. It maintains us practically in the divine system in which intercession is a great feature. The idea is that what is up there is from the divine side, to sustain what is down here, and what is down here is to be sustained through intelligent faith by what is up there.
C.G. Though I may fail, the concern should be that my faith will not fail.
J.T. While faith is preserved the position will be maintained; restoration, if needed, will be effected.
C.G. The Lord's advocacy comes in and effects it.
J.T. Peter's case is representative as to the advocacy of Christ, how He watches over His own in view of possible failure. He knew Peter and knew what would happen and allowed it to happen, but one thing stressed is that faith was not to fail, and the Lord prays to this end; and in due course He looked on him as the next needed thing, and Peter went out and wept bitterly. Advocacy in Him is that He followed the thing up, so in @John 21 you get the complete thought; restoration is complete.
M.W.B. Is intercession in @Hebrews 7:25 that we may not fail, rather than that we may be recovered?
J.T. That is how the truth stands there; in advocacy the Lord looks after the whole matter, even before the sin occurs, so that "if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father"; the system set up to maintain us in keeping with the dispensation is in mind.
{370}
H.D.T. Does that link with the "full assurance of faith" in chapter 10?
J.T. It is in view of it. The spirit of this epistle is to lead up to faith; to lead up to our drawing near to God according to the requirements of chapter 10, faith being essential in chapter 11. So the writer says, "We are not of them who draw back ... but of them that believe to the saving of the soul" (@Hebrews 10:39). Jesus "is able to save completely", but we *believe* to that end, to the saving of the soul; that is, our side corresponds with His side.
L.C.C. Does faith take account of the resources that are in heaven?
J.T. It does. A great system exists for the maintenance of the dispensation and for the maintenance of believers in relation to it. What has been said of the battle of Rephidim helps as to this. The movement of Moses¬ hands affected the army, and Aaron's service also, indirectly, affected the army.
A.J.G. Would you say that unless all this is effective, there will be no service of God in the sanctuary, alluded to in the next chapter?
J.T. There cannot be. The epistle is to work out these things; the position is one of faith. The Lord is able to save completely those who draw near by Him to God, for He is always living to intercede for them. It is in view of drawing near to God; He is able to save completely all who do. The writer says we are "of them that believe to the saving of the soul" (@Hebrews 10:39). You go the whole length, our faith carries us the whole length, but as in the system in which God has provided the means of support for us.
A.W.R. Would you say a word as to its being in the setting of the Melchisedek priesthood?
J.T. The intercession is not by the Melchisedek priesthood; it is the Aaronic service of Christ. Melchisedek is the *order* of priesthood, the *service* is Aaronic;
{371}
as to this we are to go back to the order of things in Leviticus for typical instruction.
Then, as to our subject, we have the Spirit to consider in @Romans 8:26. This is another side of it, a very precious side because it is the Spirit in us here. Christ is above and the Spirit here, making the system a perfect one. What is here is in entire keeping with what is up there.
Rem. The expression here (verse 27), "according to God", would go along with what we have in Hebrews: "things relating to God".
J.T. Yes, the intercession for the saints is according to God.
A.M.H. "For we do not know what we should pray for as is fitting". Do you understand that to mean we cannot gauge the scope of what we are asking?
J.T. Quite so. It is what "is fitting". The passage brings out the perfection of the system, how the system is maintained in perfection by Christ up there and the Spirit down here. Faith is the link, as we have been speaking of it, but it is not brought in here. It is the Spirit as the link.
M.W.B. In what way does the Holy Spirit make intercession? Is it through the feelings of the hearts of the saints?
J.T. I think it is in that way; all He does Godward and manward is through the saints. He has not become incarnate. He employs, I apprehend, the saints. It is a question here of groanings, not articulated, that are understood in heaven. It is comforting, I think -- our unutterable feelings in regard of God are known, the Spirit producing them.
M.W.B. One sometimes feels doubtful as to what to ask. You see a suffering saint, or a complex set of circumstances; would it be that the Holy Spirit in promoting feelings in us that we cannot express, would make intercession?
{372}
J.T. That is what I understand. You lie awake, perhaps, at night thinking of the interests of Christ and the saints; you feel you cannot express in words the depths of your feelings, but still those feelings are not merely natural feelings, they are spiritual feelings, and groans accompanying them. It seems that that is in mind here. Through the saints, the Spirit operating in us, there is a perfect answer to what is up there. He makes intercession for the saints according to God.
G.L. The subject is the groaning creation, pretty much, in these verses in @Romans 8. Would what you speak of refer to the groaning creation, or would it apply to all prayers?
J.T. I think it enters into the whole system. We are part of the groaning creation, and we groan within ourselves, in spite of having the first-fruits of the Spirit, but when we come to groaning by the Spirit, then we have what fully answers to God. The system is perfect; what is brought out is the perfection of the system, not because we have faith, although that is assumed, but because of the presence of the Spirit. The range covered by the service of the Spirit in this chapter, even as to our family relations with God, is striking. Our knowledge of our family relations is by the Spirit witnessing "with our spirit". So delicate are His services that we can distinguish that He has witnessed to our spirits, not merely to our mind, but to our spirits, that we are children of God.
A.J.G. When they brought to the Lord a deaf man, the Lord groaned and looked up to heaven, and then said, "Be opened". He is not recorded to have said anything to heaven; He groaned heavenward.
J.T. I am glad you mentioned that. It helps as to what heaven understands. It understood *that* groan.
P.L. Would you find it with Paul, "painfully excited" in relation to the idolatry at Athens, and then in regard of Corinth, "pressed in respect of the word" (@Acts 18:5)?
{373}
J.T. I think that all fits. I hope we all are following, because the Lord would stress the perfection of the system into which we are brought. What is here by the Spirit corresponds with what is up there, even although it may not be intelligible to us; it is there, and believers are maintained by it. Household prayers are a very important part in the system and service of God. Wherever the Spirit is, we have what corresponds to what is in heaven.
Ques. As to "the Spirit joins also its help", is it that you become conscious that you are speaking to God?
J.T. I think so. "In like manner the Spirit joins also its help to our weakness; for we do not know what we should pray for as is fitting, but the Spirit itself makes intercession". He is taking on what you are doing; but not doing it without you. The idea is, you begin and He joins His help to you. You start and just wonder what you are going to say, and presently you find help; but the passage goes on to say, "but the Spirit itself makes intercession ... for saints according to God".
H.D.T. Would this section flow out of the thought of suffering with Christ in the earlier verse: "if indeed we suffer with him" (@Romans 8:17)? Then the apostle goes on to say, "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory to be revealed to us(@Romans 8:18)".
J.T. The thought of suffering arising in various ways from the existence of sin in the creation runs through this part of the chapter. As having part in the creation, we are feeling things and the Spirit joins its help to our weakness as seeking to utter our need. You are conscious help is coming in and then the Spirit Himself makes intercession with groaning beyond, perhaps, anything we could make, but it is through us. The groans go up, I apprehend, from the believer's heart.
{374}
M.W.B. Would there be gain in our sympathetically entering into the circumstances of the saints in pressure and illness and so forth, so that the Spirit might work in us and produce this intercession?
J.T. I think so. It is a question of whether we *feel* things according to God. We are conscious how shallow our feelings are, but God would deepen His work in us, and it is through our feeling things. In Ezekiel we have the suggestion of persons who feel things being marked off, "the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that are done" (@Ezekiel 9:4). The deep feelings of the saints afford the Spirit the opportunity; He is ready to help us in our weakness.
A.J.G. Is that why the passage says, "he intercedes for saints according to God"? Not the will of God (which words are not in the original); it is not a question of His will exactly, but rather the Spirit participating in His feelings.
J.T. That is what I was thinking, and the system is thus complete. What is current is according to God.
A.M.H. The Lord in the raising of Lazarus in John's gospel prays, and says, "Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me";(@John 11:41) and it is mentioned that He groaned (verse 38).
J.T. Yes, and if you go on to chapter 12 you get a further thought; it says, "Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. But on account of this have I come to this hour. Father, glorify thy name. There came therefore a voice out of heaven, I both have glorified and will glorify it again" (@John 12:27,28). The writer further says, "The crowd therefore which stood there and heard it, said that it had thundered. Others said. An angel has spoken to him. Jesus answered and said. Not on my account has this voice come, but on yours" (@John 12:29,30). Things happen in this sense for the instruction of the saints.
M W R Are These two features of intercession, in
{375}
Hebrews and then in Romans, to set us free so that we can take up what is seen in @Genesis 18?
J.T. I think we might proceed there to bring out the intercession of *the saints*, as Abraham represents them, and how righteousness is stressed by Jehovah in the matter. We see how the patriarch lingered as if he understood the divine visitation to him, involving more than is seen in the beginning. Sodom was in mind; as it were, Jehovah came *via* Abraham in this matter: that is. He came in relation to the saints as those who intercede for others. It has in mind what He is going to do in the world, and the saints are to be with Him in it. In this connection Abraham is "the friend of God" (@James 2:23). Heaven is looking for sympathy in what it is doing. Jehovah comes to Abraham, and Abraham receives Him beautifully. Then the chapter says "the men rose up thence, and looked toward Sodom". That is a spiritual touch -- "looked toward Sodom". Sodom had been in mind really. They came in this way in relation to Sodom, and Abraham went with them to conduct them. The way of God is in mind at the present time. You might say God is on His way; this dispensation is on that way. It is a wonderful dispensation, although in a sense a parenthesis. God would draw us into what He has in mind, what is about to happen in regard of the nations, so "Abraham went with them to conduct them. And Jehovah said. Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" This suggests that God would draw us into what He is doing. "Since Abraham shall indeed become a great and mighty nation; and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him. For I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him. And Jehovah said. Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great and their sin is very grievous, I
{376}
will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come to me; and if not, I will know it".
Evidently Abraham was to understand the position. God is on the way and He is stressing that Abraham is to be brought into this, and the reason for it. It has a moral reason. Jehovah says, "I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him". Then Abraham refers to Sodom, having in mind that if he is righteous, God is more righteous in regard of His thoughts about Sodom. The whole position is what God is doing and all is based on infinite righteousness, even as to what the cry was. That is certainly very important as to all matters coming under our adjudication; everything is to be seen as it is, nothing is to be taken for granted; everything is to be investigated. "The men rose up thence, and looked toward Sodom" (verse 16). "And the men turned thence and went towards Sodom; and Abraham remained yet standing before Jehovah" (verse 22). That is the position; God draws us into what He is doing, and we should tarry with Him with a view to intercession.
Now the question arises as to the judgment, and how many righteous persons there are, so that Abraham stands out here as one who can judge, and he speaks to Jehovah as "the Judge of all the earth". It is a question of judgment, involving how many righteous persons there are in the city.
M.W.B. I did not get your thought as to Abraham judging. Will you say more about it?
J.T. In the passage we read, God honours him in that way. He says, "I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice" -- a great matter in regard of our care meetings
{377}
and adjudication. Everything is right -- based on righteous judgment. The Lord says, "Judge righteous judgment" (@John 7:24). I think that is what is in mind. I believe Abraham is to be taken to represent the heavenly side, that is, the saints as a heavenly people, and this element is amongst them; we are to do "justice and judgment". God says in effect in this scripture, I draw near to you in this matter and tell you what I am doing. God is ready to listen to all we have to say in our prayer meetings.
Ques. Are you alluding to the assembly as taking up intercession, or individuals?
J.T. I should say both, but I think we are entitled to put a heavenly people into chapter 18. Abraham is the characteristically heavenly man and righteousness comes out in his family. Jehovah is speaking of the history of his family and they would be taught to do, and would do, righteousness and justice. That is what has come out in the history of the assembly, and today the saints are to judge righteous judgment. It is one of the greatest tests amongst us when the Lord gives us matters to adjudicate upon.
M.W.B. Is the thought, there is a man who can rightly intercede?
J.T. Yes, based on gracious yet righteous discrimination. To such a man God listens with the greatest patience.
C.G. It would not only have reference to one's household, but to a local meeting.
J.T. Just so. The point for us is that we can judge aright, and this qualifies us for intercession.
Ques. The cry going up from Sodom -- did it come up from Lot?
J.T. Well, we can understand how "the righteous man", as Peter calls him, would feel the evil and utter his feelings to God. He was distressed with the abandoned conversation of the godless. Peter accredits him with much. God takes account of everything and
{378}
accredits each of His people with whatever there is to accredit them with.
H.H. Love would proceed on that line in regard of the detail of things in local companies.
J.T. I think so; where brothers and sisters in the locality feel things and begin to groan and pray, the Lord comes in for them.
Ques. Would it be right to consider that God found comfort in Abraham in reference to what was before Him in Sodom?
J.T. I think so, and He honoured Abraham in that sense. God is going on to the millennium *via* the assembly.
Ques. Is that what the apostle has in mind in @1 Corinthians 5, where he exhorts them to judge righteous judgment, and then in chapter 6, "Do ye not then know that the saints shall judge the world? ... Do ye not know that we shall judge angels?" (@1 Corinthians 6:2,3)?
J.T. It runs through these epistles. God listens to Abraham starting with fifty and coming down to forty-five, forty, thirty, twenty, and then ten. Abraham does not go lower than that, and it finishes the matter. There were not ten, but really only one righteous man.
A.J.G. Do you regard Abraham's stopping at ten as spiritual instinct? If there were not that measure for God, it was not right the city should be spared?
J.T. Just so. The grace evident is striking. God graciously listens to Abraham, who steadily reduced the possible number, until he stops. He was evidently instinctively right in stopping at ten. The conversation between Jehovah and Abraham continued to completion. It is "when he had ended" the matter. It is said in @Genesis 17:22, "He left off talking with him; and God went up from Abraham". Here it is "when he had ended speaking to Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place". The matter is settled. I am sure Abraham went back to his place in the sense that he had been
{379}
fairly and patiently heard; that all was in the good hands of "the Judge of all the earth".
H.H. He would no doubt have liked to have made up the number from Lot's family, but could not.
P.H. Does intercession take account of the whole position, having regard for what is of God in it?
J.T. That is what came out here. Abraham speaks of the Judge of *all* the earth, an extensive thought. And Jehovah had said, "Abraham shall indeed become a great and mighty nation; and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him. For I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him". We are on *universal* ground here.
P.H. Does it fit in with the thought of intercession being mentioned in 1 Timothy -- "for all men". Then there is something specific in view, "that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life" (@1 Timothy 2:2).
J.T. Yes; the bearing is universal.
C.G. In interceding for Sodom, is it like our prayers in regard to the world?
J.T. Yes; whilst it is in reconciliation. I think Abraham represents the saints in the world now viewed as reconciled, because *all* were to be blessed in him. You can understand how he would look at the nations; he would not invoke judgment on them, but desire that they should be blessed.
P.L. Isaac having been introduced already in God's word to Abraham, the world is viewed in relation to the new Head.
J.T. Quite so.
{380}
A HOLY KISS
@Romans 16:16; @Luke 15:20; @Luke 7:38;@Genesis 27:26,27: @Genesis 45:15
What I have in mind to dwell upon particularly is the exhortation read from the epistle to the Romans, "Salute one another with a holy kiss". This exhortation is found in other epistles, and is therefore the more significant, directing us as to the respect in which we are to regard each other as Christians, and the holiness entering into our salutations one with another.
To bring out the force of this passage, and the power and instruction behind it, I have read the other scriptures. @Luke 15 brings God in, parabolically, as kissing. How He does it we have to discover in a spiritual sense, but He does it, and in that sense furnishes a lead for us in the exercise of this well-known way of conveying love. The more we advance in the knowledge of God, the more spiritual we are, not only in feeling, but in understanding, so that by the Spirit we arrive at meanings and definitions. Meanings are sometimes indefinable, and especially so in what God does. What we hear, of course, takes form in our minds, for the ear tries words, and the mind has power to distinguish their meaning. But there is the *reception* of what is conveyed, apart from which what is heard fails of its object. It is what is received with meekness that bears fruit.
In this instance we have conveyed to us parabolically the idea of God kissing, and we have to learn from Him. It is, I need not say, a holy kiss, and the word implies kissing ardently or caressingly. The father covered him with kisses. The impression is conveyed that it is not a mere matter of formal greeting; it is much more than that. Nor is the thought conveyed of any evident lovableness in the person. Not that he was not lovable, for a repentant sinner is lovable. Repentance is one of the most interesting items on earth
{381}
in the eyes of heaven, and here it goes further. He came to himself and spoke to himself about his father, his father's house. The Father (I speak now of God, which the parable conveys) was perfectly, conversant with the history that lay behind and underneath those garments in which the son appeared. History lay behind those garments, history well known in heaven, chronicled there. We have under David's *regime* both "the chronicler" and "the scribe", pointing to the accuracy of history noted down in the divine system. We may be sure these officials, so to speak, had been employed in regard to this remarkable history. So that the kiss was not merely overcoming evil with good; there was some moral beauty in the one that was kissed. He was not yet fit for the father's house; much had to intervene before the house is mentioned, and the music and the dancing in it. But the kisses were given at once; they were lavished upon him as he was. That he appeared much more lovable later is unquestionable, for in the doctrine entering into this chapter we have sonship, and sons are to be conformed to the image of Christ, and made lovable as He is, relatively. The Song of Songs develops the thought of lovableness, for all the sons of God are not only to be loved in the abstract, but because they are actually lovable, and heaven knows it. Heaven announces its appreciation of the Lord Jesus from this point of view in the well-known words, "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight" (@Mark 1:11). Not a kiss in the sense in which I speak of it, but it was the expression of affection by One in heaven for One upon earth, not because of any abstract greatness only, but because of what heaven *found* in Him. And room is made in the wording for all the sons to come in, for it is not said, 'I have found *all* my delight', but "my delight", and all the sons come under that. In the eternal state of things there can be no doubt that God being all *in* all will revel in this, in the delightfulness under His eye of the Son and the
{382}
sons, the One pre-eminent amongst them, "the firstborn among many brethren" (@Romans 8:29).
Nevertheless we have here a love that expresses itself not exactly because of lovableness, but love as in God. We are to understand that down here, what love is as in God, how He loves although there be no apparent lovableness. He loves according to what He knows divinely, whereas the full thought is, what is *found*. Here He kisses ardently. He covers the returning one, as if the whole person is so under the eye of love that every part of him must feel the embrace of love. Would the prodigal ever forget it? Never! Never would that young man forget the impress so lavishly imparted from the father's lips.
I go on to the next scripture. @Genesis 27, in order to bring out how return is expected. God expresses His love for its objects, even before there may be much that is lovable, as I said. There is potentiality of lovableness, but the external conditions may not correspond. Now the point is return. We have to regard Isaac here as representative of God. A very poor representative, you may say, a deceived old man, how can he be a representative of God? He represents God as having power to bless in the sense in which blessing appears here. We need spiritual understanding to place this thought, but power to bless lies in representation of God. Blessing must emanate from God, hence the representation in the one who blesses; and Isaac says of Jacob, "blessed he shall be". It was irrevocable, it was of God. Hence Isaac says, "Come near, now, and kiss me, my son". Many receive the divine favours and the divine kisses and never think of a return, but God has a return in His mind. So Jacob came near and kissed his father. This is a very important matter for young Christians -- return; and return in this intimate way, coming *near* to God. "Draw nigh to God", we are told, "and he will draw nigh to you" (@James 4:8). He looks for a return, and Jacob was equal to it.
{383}
Then Isaac said, "See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed". This is another thing; a great potentiality is in mind, God as it were recognising the one that draws near to kiss. Have we all thought of drawing so near as that, to share such holy familiarity with God? He encourages it. It has to be understood even as the divine kiss has to be understood, so has the return, the answer, to be understood. I think the divine kiss is the shedding abroad of the love of God in our hearts by the Spirit, that is @Romans 5; and in @Romans 8 the Spirit is on our side that we may use Him -- use Him to draw near to God. Through Christ "we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father", (@Ephesians 2:18). It is by the Spirit subjectively that I draw near in this sense to express my reciprocal affection with a kiss, as it were. God is looking for that. If there is one thing more than another that is actuating God (I speak reverently) at the present time, it is the securing of this return. His people returning to Him in a reciprocal way to express their affections, and to do it properly as understood from Him. It is done from His side by the Spirit, and it is done from our side by the Spirit. God would say of one who does that. That young Christian is going to be very fruitful. "See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed". What potentialities are there! Would Jacob ever forget that? I do not believe he ever forgot it in all his wanderings. He was to be fruitful, and he was. He knew how to return -- if not at the beginning, certainly at the end; as we are told in the New Testament that he "worshipped on the top of his staff" (@Hebrews 11:21). The field was there yielding fruit, dear brethren.
I now go on to @Luke 7 to bring out another thought, namely, how this return qualifies one to have a status, a spiritual identity here below, to be a trusted spiritual entity, if I may so say. It is said in the verse that we have read that the woman kissed the Lord's feet. She
{384}
was *doing* it, as the original conveys. It was not just one act. The Lord Himself says, "*She* from the time I came in has not ceased kissing my feet" (@Luke 7:45). It is misleading and damaging to assume that a thing once done is characteristic. One act is not characteristic, it is what is continuous in these matters. Even in regard to repentance, it is a *repenting* sinner. So in regard to kissing here, it is a kissing one. She "has not ceased kissing". We have to understand that the idea of a fruitful field enters into this too. In Jacob's case there was not at first much trustworthiness, he deflected not a little, after this kiss; but this woman, from the facts recorded by the Spirit of God, represents a trustworthy person. Nothing in a way is more important in regard to assembly matters than trustworthiness. It is foundational really, that God can trust us and that we can trust one another. The real difficulty largely amongst brethren is want of simple confidence in one another. The Lord says of her, "she loved much". It is a love that springs from *grace* . She is a characteristic outcome of the dispensation, I may say; the dispensation is one of grace. She loved much. Why? Because she was forgiven much. She understood grace and she responded to it. The Lord turns to her -- that is a thing to be noticed. Think of the eye of heaven being turned on you or on me in regard of any matter, not rebukingly, but in confidence and complacency! He turned to her to speak *about* her.
I believe, dear brethren, the Lord would speak about us to each other. We do not know each other enough. I would desire for myself that I might really know the brethren. Why should I not know them -- learn their measure and correspondingly confide in them? He turned to the woman and He spoke to Simon. There was nothing in Simon to attract Him, but she is in His mind, and He conveys His mind regarding one like that. Would the Lord not do that for us? I believe He would, and it would settle a lot of matters, were we
{385}
to seek His mind as to each other. Jehovah said to Moses, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also behold, he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart" (@Exodus 4:14). Moses would not have the same regard for Aaron (in spite of his knowledge of him as his brother) were it not for the divine introduction. You may be sure the divine introduction stamped itself on their relations thereafter. "When he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart" (@Exodus 4:14); and when Aaron saw Moses he kissed him -- he justified the divine word exactly. That was at the mount of Jehovah. In other words, Moses had a *provision* in his brother. "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (@Genesis 22:14). And, in a sense, what is more needed than the brethren? We cannot get on without them; every one has to be known, has to be valued. The Lord tells me about myself and he tells me about others. He told Peter about himself -- "Thou art Peter"; and He told Ananias about Saul. The Lord is ready to serve us in this respect.
So I believe this woman that we have so often spoken of in gospel testimony is an entity of the dispensation, she is the kind that is needed. She knew grace, she loved because of grace, and she expressed the love in the continuous kissing of the Lord's feet. She valued what those feet had brought to her, she respected and loved the One who had brought it. And the Lord calls attention to her: "Seest thou this woman?" Suppose she applies, as we say, for fellowship; well, here are the facts relative to her, the Lord would tell us about them. Then He says, "Thy faith hath saved thee, go in peace" (@Luke 7:50). He tells Simon about her love, but He sends her away with the understanding from Himself that she had faith -- such faith that He calls it *her* faith, and it had saved her. You may say. The Lord saved her. True, but in every crisis in that woman's history this would come out -- 'Why should I not exercise faith? It saved me at the beginning, it will save me now'. Of
{386}
course, God saves us, Christ saves us, but the Lord says here, "Thy faith hath saved thee" (@Luke 7:50). She is a striking expression of the dispensation; as I said, a trustworthy person. The Lord's words as to her indicate that anything that might come up in regard of Him, He could trust her as to it, corresponding to another woman of whom He said, "What *she* could she has done", (@Mark 14:8).
I come now to @Genesis 45. Speaking of Joseph and his brethren, it says, he kissed them *all* . I do not deny that we are to discriminate. We are to respect spiritual measure amongst us. Heaven weighs us; we are often reminded that we are weighed as well as counted; but Joseph kissed all his brethren. Before he kissed them he spoke much about his father. The family side is brought in, the kiss is given in the light of the father. He spoke, too, about himself, what he was in Egypt, the glory he had. It was that great personage who kissed them all, as much as to say, You are all my brethren, I make no distinction in regard to this. At the same time, he had already fallen on Benjamin's neck. He loved him specially; there is always that disciple whom Jesus loves. There is what is really lovable, and why should I not afford to Him the right to value and to love what is lovable? I think every one of us is lovable really as the Spirit forms us, and in heaven eternally we shall be so. Because of this there will be the going out of divine affections eternally; that is what is before us, and we are being brought into it now. He kissed them all, and the result was they talked with him. That is the principle, their affections and confidence were released, his kiss drew out from them *speaking* . The Lord says, "Let me hear thy voice" (@Song of Songs 2:14). One hears of brethren here and there who do not say anything in the assembly, it is most distressing. *We* feel it, but how much more the Lord. He wants to hear the voice: "Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice" (@Song of Songs 2:14). He says.
{387}
Now I come back to the first scripture read (@Romans 16). The word *salute is* very frequent in the chapter -- twenty-one times. It is designedly set in this epistle. Nowhere else are there such a number of salutations and such distinctions of brethren mentioned together. It is in the great foundational epistle to the Romans. What does it mean? That at the very foundation of our relations with one another there is to be respect and discerning of our respective qualities, and we are to love one another and salute one another with a holy kiss. A holy kiss is divine, whether in God or in us; I mean it is according to God. We do not use this form of greeting in this country much, although evidently they did so in the early days of Christianity. But whatever the form of salutation, dear brethren, let it be holy, let it be sincere, let it be the expression of confidence, the right hand of fellowship and confidence in one another. We shall never get on in assembly unless we are foundationally right. We speak now of love in its basic principles, that we learn from God first. "We love because *he* has first loved us(@1 John 4:19)". "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life" (@1 John 3:16) -- as though love were not known before. It was not really, it has to be learned from God, and it is learned according to the Scriptures because He first loved. "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us; and *we* ought for the brethren to lay down our lives" (@1 John 3:16).
These passages give us the idea of examples, of a lead given to us in this great matter of love. If I learn it from God and from Christ I love the brethren, and salute them with a holy kiss. "Salute one another" -- not special friends. Special friendships are another baneful element amongst the brethren. The love we extend to each other is to be holy, it is to be apart from personal natural feelings or predilections, it is to be governed entirely by divine love. If a person is not particularly lovable, well, I can fall back on @Luke 15, as to how God loves. If it be a person who is particularly
{388}
lovable, I do not fail to make it known. Of course, we have to avoid flattery, but it is certainly right that lovableness should be acknowledged. But we are *always* to regard each other with respect and with an expression of affection, a holy kiss.
That is what I had in mind, and I commend it to the brethren, that there may be a more easy way with us in our deliberations one with another in administrative matters, that there be amenableness to each other's exercises, that what each has of God may be made the most of; that we may be helpers one of another. May the Lord bless these thoughts to us!
{389}
GOD PRESENT IN PROPHETIC MINISTRY
@1 Samuel 10:5,6; @1 Samuel 19:19 - 24; @1 Corinthians 14:23 - 33
J.T. It is in mind to call attention to prophesying, and how the instruction regarding it in Scripture would enter into @1 Corinthians 14, where the service is peculiarly connected with the assembly, that is, the whole assembly in a place. The "hill of God" points to the assembly, whether viewed in its local or universal setting, suggesting what is specially advantageous as excluding what would hinder. The enemy would always attack the hill of God. The instruction in 1 Samuel is unique as to the subject of prophecy. The idea of a seer is used earlier in relation to the prophet, but had become changed, as if the ministry of prophecy had taken definite form to meet the current position. What is to be noted is that the Philistines¬ outpost is found on the hill of God in chapter 10:5.
Then in chapter 19:20 the prophets are actually prophesying and Samuel is presiding over them. This makes the service effective, co-ordinating and regulating it. We have remarkable power displayed, turning a murderous man -- king Saul -- into a prophet. This nullifies his opposition to David as typical of Christ. Another thing to be noted is that as the service is proceeding, a revelation comes to one sitting by (@1 Corinthians 14:30). We are reminded of the need of the Spirit in the exercise of all gift, but especially in prophesying. @1 Corinthians 14 gathers up all this instruction and places it in the assembly; it is there the service is now to be carried on. We must keep clearly before us the *whole assembly*, because that is the thought of the chapter -- "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place", @1 Corinthians 14:23.
H.H. Would you say how Saul may be regarded here?
{390}
J.T. In chapter 10 we see him being initiated into the service, so the instruction is for any of us who would serve in this way. The hill of God is the place where God is; it is to be fortified and furnished so that the service can go on. The point is that there were those who were carrying on the service; they were prophesying. Those coming in have to learn to fall in with what is already there; there can be no independency.
H.H. In chapter 19 Saul is shamefully exposed.
J.T. You have the proverb that is brought forward there previously mentioned in chapter 10:11, "Is Saul also among the prophets?" (@1 Samuel 10:11) It is mentioned in view of the history of Saul. He is completely exposed in chapter 19, although he is found amongst the prophets, and his evil intent is nullified.
G.A.L. Does the mention of musical instruments in the first passage give the positive bearing of this kind of ministry?
J.T. I suppose they would bring the state of the prophets into accord with their service. Elisha called for a minstrel (@2 Kings 3:15). The state of the meeting enhances the service and draws it out rather than checks it.
A.J.G. Does the meeting of the company of prophets involve the recognition of the body and the need in us to take up the service in the Spirit?
J.T. Connecting it with @1 Corinthians 14, that is how it stands. Chapters 10, 11, 12 and 13 of that epistle all enter into chapter 14. The truth of the body bears on the state of the meeting and enhances the service. "For ye can all prophesy one by one", suggests our being free and sympathetic one with another. The delicacy of our relations together as in the body underlies the service.
P.L. Would drinking all out of the same cup as seen in the prophetic gospel Mark promote this?
{391}
J.T. That is a good reference. In Matthew the Lord told the disciples to do so, but in Mark it says they did it, stressing the unity in what is pleasurable and satisfying. This would check all tendency to make a show in the service, or to any rivalry.
F.S.M. Would you say what it is to prophesy today?
J.T. It is a gift by itself. It is not exactly teaching, though a word given may have that character. It is something from God. We do not look for revelation in the sense of addition to what was revealed in Christ, but @Ephesians 1:17 speaks of "the spirit of wisdom and revelation". It is the spirit of revelation now, and this is still seen in that there is something from God, and He Himself is brought in by the prophetic ministry, as @1 Corinthians 14 says, "God is in you of a truth". This is the result of the prophetic ministry, that God is known to be here in the assembly. That raises the question of the Holy Spirit, and it is to be noted that in the scriptures read in Samuel it is said that the Holy Spirit had come upon the individuals who prophesied. We cannot limit what may come if we make room for the Spirit.
P.L. Right feelings marked the prophets at Antioch in @Acts 13, and the Holy Spirit speaks.
J.T. And it is after they had fasted and prayed.
A.M.H. Would the voice of the Spirit to each of the assemblies in @Revelation 2 and 3 show the character of prophetic ministry? What is needed in each is disclosed, and Christ presented in relation to that, and then the Spirit's voice is referred to.
J.T. What the Spirit says is left open. What Christ says is recorded and in each case would indicate what is needed. What the Spirit says enlarges on that, and would of course be through instruments selected by Him possibly over extended periods. We are therefore enjoined to be attentive to what the Spirit says.
{392}
D.L.H. Would not the prophet in the assembly speak to edification, encouragement, and consolation; I suppose a word might take any of these features?
J.T. Yes. There is the idea, however, of something revealed. One might get up and speak very nicely and edify and comfort, but then the prophetic word goes further; that is, something is revealed to one sitting by We are in touch with the living source of everything, it brings us back to the beginning in a very living way; God Himself comes in, the Source of all enrichment.
H.H. Verse 31 says, "For ye can all prophesy one by one". Is that the mutual side?
J.T. The tongues and the prophesying are limited to three, which brings the thought of mutual consideration. It should be accepted that *prophecy is a gift* . The subject begins in that way in chapter 14:1. "Follow after ... but rather that ye may prophesy (@1 Corinthians 14:1)". If the voice of a young brother is heard as giving a word, you should think of him and pray for him accordingly, for the Lord will use him again. The young brothers are to be brought into this, that is what is in mind in @1 Samuel 10. One is seen being initiated into his service by the environment.
A.J.G. Does the idea of a prophet in our day, as in the Old Testament times, involve that he has a secret understanding with God; that he has that place in relation to His people?
J.T. It says it was known from Dan to Beersheba that Samuel was established a prophet of Jehovah (@1 Samuel 3:20). That is the basis of the matter, he is not seen in active service in chapters 4, 5 and 6, but in chapter 7 he is brought before us. Samuel is the great book for us in this respect -- how the young men and sisters, too, are led on this way by secret relations with God. God reveals Himself to us by His word. Samuel's history is intended to instruct us in this respect and he is ultimately known to be a prophet of Jehovah. Now he is leading another into it. The
{393}
earlier work is supposed to be there, but alas it is hardly in Saul -- hence it is a necessity for the young to make sure that they have secret relations with God.
G.A.L. Is the underlying spiritual state seen in the earlier part of chapter 10?
J.T. There may be the objective knowledge of things in a brother's soul, but the subjective side is in view when he is taken up -- his service must be in the power of the Spirit of God. "Who is their father?" (@1 Samuel 10:12), suggests that we are challenged as to our earlier history. So with Timothy in the New Testament -- we are told who his antecedents were.
Ques. Why is the outpost of the Philistines mentioned in connection with the hill of God?
J.T. The outpost of the Philistines being in the hill of God would show the object of the enemy's attack today. It is specially against the place where God is, "the hill of God". This shows the importance of keeping the local assembly always in view. It is necessary that we should reach the thought of the assembly in a place as often as possible. The hill of God is the place peculiarly furnished for the working out of God's thoughts.
P.L. Is the idea of the locality specially seen in @Amos 3:6,7: "Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, ... Shall there be evil in a city ... But the Lord Jehovah will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets"?
J.T. That is a good scripture and confirms that the Lord has those He can use. So it is not simply that one has an opportunity of saying something; but is it *really prophesying*? If a brother speaks thus we must watch him and regard him in that light, for God would use him again.
D.L.H. Would you say a word as to the difference between the thought of the word of God coming to the assembly at Corinth, and prophetic testimony issuing out from amongst themselves?
{394}
J.T. In @Acts 18:11 it says, "he remained there a year and six months, teaching among them the word of God". The great point was to displace the mind of man by the word of God. That is how the assembly is formed -- the word of God dominates. You see how this predominates in the ministry to the Corinthians. The word of the Lord is more seen at Ephesus, that is the military side. The idea is that the assembly is self-sustaining. After certain assemblies were formed, it says, elders were chosen in each assembly (@Acts 14:23); meaning that there was to be so far self-sustainment. This of course applies to the Corinthians, and these chapters are to regulate them in regard to the use of gifts as necessary to the self-sustainment of the assembly. So prophecy comes in here as the great thing that Paul stresses. God is there, and how can we be preserved save by the presence of God?
Rem. In @Psalm 68 the hill of God is connected with Christ glorified.
J.T. Yes, the gifts came down from an ascended Christ. "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts in Man (@Psalm 68:18)". It is Christ glorified and receiving gifts, and the assembly is endowed, according to the epistle to the Ephesians, in view of its maintenance here. The gifts are for the work of the ministry: for the edifying of the body of Christ.
F.J.H. Would you say that a prophetic word need not necessarily be something distinctive in matter, but should be marked by the unction?
J.T. Well, there should be substance, too. It is noticeable that the Holy Spirit came upon certain ones; it is a question of the Spirit -- the ministry is by the Spirit. The first person called a prophet in the Scriptures is Abraham, and God tells Abimelech that Abraham would pray for him (@Genesis 20:7). In the psalm it is "Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my
{395}
prophets no harm", @Psalm 105:15. What Abraham said in this sense would be in the power of the Spirit.
Ques. Is the gift of prophecy distinct from the gift of preaching?
J.T. It is put very clearly for us in @1 Corinthians 12:28: "First, apostles; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers". *The prophet is a distinct gift*, the teacher deals with what is already known, and his service bears on the Scriptures.
Eu.R. Would the prophetic word involve bringing the mind of God to bear on existing current conditions?
J.T. It is hardly a question of foretelling events now, for this is not necessary. We should have some intuitive sense of what is coming. The scripture in Amos which has been already referred to has an important bearing on this. God can trust us with communications, and besides that there is the ability to give them out, involving the maintenance of close relations with God. It is by the Spirit of God coming upon one that one is conscious of this.
G.A.L. Does God sometimes warn the saints by a prophetic word?
J.T. Yes. The ministry prepares you for what is coming. The minister may not know, but then God knows and He gives the word.
F.I. Is the ministry confined to prophecy?
J.T. What you have in verse 26 of @1 Corinthians 14 is a further thought. But verses 23 - 25 are to call attention to prophesying as bringing out that God is amongst us. If He is not there the hill of God is exposed.
Ques. What is the thought in each one having a psalm, a doctrine, a tongue, a revelation, an interpretation?
J.T. It shows the variety there may be amongst the saints, but in the exercise of prophesying we are assured of the presence of God. If God is with us, what can the enemy do?
Ques. What is the relation of prayer to prophecy?
{396}
J.T. God calls attention in Genesis to what Abraham had. The psalm quoted opens up the thing; the spiritual mind there enlarges on what the Pentateuch says. Moses in @Exodus 12 gets communications from God as to the passover. Then he presents it in a levitical way, reducing it to a smaller compass for the people. He brings it down to them, whereas he might have enlarged upon it. God reminds Abimelech that it was to his advantage to have a man like Abraham in his kingdom, for he would pray for him. God would give rulers to understand that there are men here who are advantageous to them; on our part we are to pray for them; but then God would say. They are Mine. The word *my* is not in Genesis, but you come to the Psalms for that.
H.H. Then would you say, too, the prophets are for the preservation of the saints now? It says, "By a prophet Jehovah brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved", (@Hosea 12:13). Does that still go on?
J.T. Throughout the history of the world from Abraham onwards we have the thought of what God would have. God has the means of communicating through His prophets what men may hear. So the hill of God is seen in @Psalm 68 and God dwells there. The ministry of prophecy brings down our wills more than anything else. At the same time it preserves, as you suggest, in establishing the fact that God is amongst us.
Ques. Would it be correct for a brother to know the scripture and what he had in mind to say before the saints come together?
J.T. Well, it is a question of what he has. If he has a psalm or has a teaching to speak about, then it is for him to decide on the scripture to suit that. But then it is not only what he may bring, but it is what may come out during the meeting. That is one idea of the hill of God. There is such a state of things existing that God
{397}
can speak there. He has His prophets in the assembly for that purpose. Their ministry establishes the fact that He is there.
J.J. How does this agree with what is spoken of previously, regarding being together (chapter 11:18)?
J.T. What is spoken of earlier may work out in subdivisions because the assembly is spoken of there without the article. It is the character of our gathering together. But here in regard to this particular matter it is "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place". So you have God saying, as it were. This is what I have. The hill of God in the city is fortified and furnished in this way, so that His mind is disclosed there. The word revealed at the time is the greatest thought, as the outcome of spiritual conditions that exist.
F.T. Micah says, "As Jehovah liveth, even what Jehovah shall say to me, that will I speak", (@1 Kings 22:14).
J.T. Yes. Balaam says the same thing, but if he could he would speak otherwise. But God compelled him to speak His mind about Israel. But then a subject man characteristically is always available as he sits in the meeting. He is an available vessel for the Spirit of God.
A.M.H. Is there anything in these meetings which makes them more suitable for week-days than Lord's days?
J.T. I think such meetings are more needed through the week. It is a question of the hill of God and how to meet the enemy. As a rule, we are more free in our spirits on the Lord's day. But it is particularly during the week the enemy attacks us, and we need strengthening against his attacks.
Eu.R. Does not the week-day experience fit in more definitely with wilderness exercises rather than the land?
{398}
J.T. It does. There is really a good deal of laziness with us in connection with the meetings. We are not ready to give up natural comfort. But God honours those who make a covenant by sacrifice (@Psalm 50:5). The brethren need particular help on the week-nights as found in the wilderness position. The prophetic word has a military setting in @1 Samuel 10. In chapter 19 we have typically the direct attack of the enemy upon Christ, and that in a man with the reputation of being amongst the prophets. Here Samuel is presiding over the prophets. With a situation like this, all efforts of the enemy fail. Saul is determined to attack, and his messengers come to take David, an this is what they find. "They saw a company of prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as president over them". They are not simply officially prophets, but they are doing it -- prophesying is proceeding. "And the Spirit of God came upon the messengers". So we see that the Spirit of God is ready to come upon the person who is to be affected. In the saints coming together during the week there is protection; it is during the week that we find the world and Satan himself against us, and hence need this provision.
A.M.H. I should like to ask how you regard the whole assembly coming together in large cities. In some places this meeting is taken up in a sectional way because of large numbers. Is that right?
J.T. Properly it is not a sectional matter. It is a question of what God has in the place, that in which He is known in this striking and effective way. Verse 23 is important -- it is "the whole assembly".
C.F.W.B. How should such meetings be described publicly?
J.T. It is safe to say that the meeting has prophetic ministry in view, and we see in what we have read that God will give it. This chapter shows how God uses it and what a place it has publicly. God will make known His mind -- sometimes through unexpected persons.
{399}
A.J.G. The prophetic word exposes any evil existent, so the enemy's power is broken, and a way is made for those who move with God.
J.J. How do you regard the four daughters of Philip who prophesied (@Acts 21)?
J.T. They would not prophesy in the assembly, but they *did* prophesy. Scripture furnishes illustrations of women actually prophesying.
E.J.H. Would not that household provide a good atmosphere for the mind of God to be communicated, so we have Agabus, a prophet, coming down saying, "Thus saith the Holy Spirit" (@Acts 21:11)?
J.T. Just so. In all these instances you see what God had in a public way in this ministry. It fortifies the position and makes all realise that God is there; and what can we do without God?
Ques. Would you say a little as to "let the others judge"?
J.T. The element of judgment is a good principle. Things said are confirmed by being weighed over and tested; this is a safeguard.
Eu.R. If we are to get the gain of all this, is it not necessary to be prepared to be changed into another man as was said to Saul, "And shalt be turned into another man", @1 Samuel 10:6?
J.T. It is, but Saul was not equal to this, as the sequel proved. With regard to the judging, this requires that in thinking of what I should say when the brother who may be speaking sits down, I must pay attention to what *he* is saying. I should not like the younger brothers to miss the value of these scriptures, as to how one is initiated by the environment and what is brought to their attention in others, and that this service is to be in the power of the Spirit of God. Even with Saul it is the Spirit of God which came upon him. We should make room for that great fact and keep it in mind. Thus prophecy is not the outcome of what is mental, for it is a question of the Spirit of
{400}
God coming upon me. The need is pressing, but the Spirit of God comes upon men whom God would use so as to convey His mind, and in this the excellency of the power is of Him and not of us.
Rem. In the rebellion of Adonijah, Nathan the prophet filled an important part. Adonijah raised himself up, but Nathan was available to be used of God to bring about his overthrow.
J.T. That is a good reference. But for Nathan, Satan would have succeeded. Prophecy is an unanswerable thing. God is there, and hence what can the enemy do?
{401}
ADDITIONS TO THE SERVICE OF GOD
@1 Chronicles 22:1 - 19; @Isaiah 38:9 - 20; @Jonah 2:1 - 10; @Habakkuk 3:17 - 19
J.T. I had in mind that, with the Lord's help, we might see in these scriptures how David's thought of *addition* is worked out, that is, with ourselves, how addition, particularly in the service of God, comes about. Rachel at a much earlier date had the thought of addition, Joseph's name signifying that. He was the eleventh son of Jacob and another son was needed, and Rachel expected the addition; and so, although we may come into great wealth, *more* is needed and particularly in the way of service. So whilst David had supplied great abundance for the house, according to our first scripture, he said to Solomon, "Thou shalt add to it". Many other instances might be cited to show how the service of God was added to, particularly under Solomon and Hezekiah, but these three will suffice, first in Hezekiah, then in Jonah, and finally in Habakkuk.
In each case it is through discipline, particularly in Hezekiah and Jonah, the power of composition not acquired by mere mentality, but through discipline, bringing people by the discipline of God to test and experience something of death. One principle of the present dispensation is death working out in this way. In Hezekiah we have a composition which adds to the service of God; he says, "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I this day"; and then, advancing to a higher note, "We will play upon my stringed instruments all the days of our life, in the house of Jehovah". Jonah looks towards God's "holy temple", and Habakkuk hands in his composition "to the chief Musician". In all this we see how additions are made in our time, these scriptures being written for our learning.
W.L. You mean additions to the house of God?
{402}
J.T. Chiefly to the service of God; that in the consciousness of our own souls, we may contribute as in assembly.
Ques. Does the matter of "subjection to the Father of spirits, and live" (@Hebrews 12:9) enter into this?
J.T. Very much so, for the discipline is all under the "Father of spirits". Discipline has our inward beings in mind, not merely external functioning, but inward state; that we should be partakers of God's holiness. No believer is exempted by the Father of spirits, and we are all called upon to endure so that God may conduct Himself toward us as toward sons, and that we may be partakers of *His* holiness.
Ques. So discipline would be with a view to the formation of the work of God in the soul?
J.T. Yes, and especially so in view of His service. We are brought into wealth: Solomon was brought into great wealth supplied by his father. We come into great wealth, but we are to *add*. Contributions in the power of the Spirit are in mind. The principle of addition must mark our services or we shall become stagnant.
W.L. What is the particular addition in @Isaiah 38?
J.T. I think it is *life*. "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I this day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth" (verse 19). I think that is the peculiar touch you get from him as experiencing death, as you might say, in his spirit. He did not enter into the article of death, but he felt it in his spirit, and as coming up in the power of life he contributed after this example.
Rem. The addition at Philippi was not from mental activity, but from chastened spirits.
J.T. Yes. What we are now speaking of is exemplified in the prison, in which Paul and Silas were greatly afflicted. They would take it as discipline and also as sharing in the sufferings of Christ, but in prayer they sang praises to God. The work at Philippi was marked
{403}
by prayer, and it is seen in the sufferers in the prison leading to praise. In prayer they sang praises, and the prisoners were listening. It is the sort of thing we are to look for, as giving character to evangelical testimony. They went to Lydia after they were released from prison. They had been in her house before, now they went there after they had suffered; there was some little touch in that. What happens after, or while, we suffer has a peculiar effect. The Lord presented Himself living "after he had suffered".
J.H.T. As left here are we responsible to bring in addition to the service of God? God says to Hezekiah, "I will add to thy days fifteen years" (@Isaiah 38:5).
J.T. That would not mean that he would simply live that length of time, it would be in view of some result.
W.L. It was after he had been sick and had recovered that he wrote what we have read.
J.T. Quite so. That is in keeping with what we have said as to whether one is gaining by discipline -- what we do *after*.
Ques. Would that come under the heading of the peaceable fruits of righteousness? Hezekiah says, "By these things men live". He had got the gain of the discipline.
J.T. Yes. Not only contributing to the house of God, but furnishing instruction to all of us who are in discipline. "Of which all have been made partakers" (@Hebrews 12:8) is an important word. It is to the end that we should gain, that after the discipline it should appear we are more spiritual than before, and thus can *add* .
Ques. Does Jacob furnish a good example of what you have been suggesting, as to how one gets the gain of discipline? He reached the house of God, and at the end he worshipped, leaning on the top of his staff.
J.T. Quite so. Of the three patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and himself, Jacob specially represents the results of discipline.
{404}
Ques. And David dancing before the ark?
J.T. Yes; more particularly in @1 Chronicles 21 - 29. The greatest results in the Old Testament for the house of God, accruing immediately from discipline, are seen in him. Hezekiah gives his experience as under the discipline, and his "writing" is a contribution to the house of God. Habakkuk also tells of his experience in discipline, and the chapter from which we read is a contribution to the service of God. It is a poetical composition and it begins on an instrument which would denote a certain experience of depression. At our beginnings it is usually so, we are not clear as to why things are so severe. Hezekiah says, "I have cut off like a weaver my life; he separateth me from the thrum: -- from day to night thou wilt make an end of me". It is usual that we do not see things clearly at the outset of God's disciplinary dealings with us. He says, "As a lion, so doth he break all my bones. From day to night thou wilt make an end of me". Then he tells us, "Like a swallow or a crane, so did I chatter; I mourned as a dove; mine eyes failed with looking upward: Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me". He has come now to the point of blessing -- he asks God to act for him. This composition is after he is recovered, so that he sees all things clearly. The end is reached. Hence the definiteness and upward trend in the composition. In going over the history, he touches the points that specially affected him and by which he was formed. He says, "By these things men live" -- that is the *teaching* of the experience.
Ques. Would our compositions be very much clearer and sweeter if an affliction was rightly gone through with God?
J.T. I think that is the point. Hezekiah's contribution is after he had been sick and had recovered. He goes over the ground so that others can read and gain by it.
Rem. Not be discouraged by it. Job reached the end.
{405}
J.T. Yes -- "the end of the Lord" (@James 5:11). The book of Job is, of course, the expansion of all this; "the end of the Lord" (@James 5:11) is in view from the outset.
J.H.T. You get an example of adding in @Acts 11:24 -- "A large crowd ... were added to the Lord"; and then Barnabas "went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul" (@Acts 11:25). In chapter 13 we read that there were in the assembly prophets and teachers "ministering to the Lord and fasting" (@Acts 13:2).
J.T. Exactly. You see how Barnabas¬ unjealous action led up to a great result in Antioch; a contribution to the service of God. What constitutes this incident one of peculiar importance is that Antioch was the starting-off point in the gentile field, the assembly in all its rich significance in the service of God being in view. "Ministering to the Lord and fasting" (@Acts 13:2) was a striking forecast of the great addition, in which, as completed, there will be glory to God unto all generations of the age of ages.
Both Barnabas and Paul came in in a remarkable way on the line of addition. The dispensation begins with the suggestion: there were three thousand *added*, and then we are told what characterised them, that they were in keeping with what they were added to. Then it is said that the Lord Himself added, as if the whole company numbering about three thousand were such as *He* could add to, that is "those that were to be saved" (@Acts 2:47). And we get in Acts 5 that in spite of severe discipline in the case of Ananias and Sapphira, believers, multitudes of men and women, were added. This shows that discipline, being essential to assembly order and holiness, must not be regarded as preventing growth, but promoting addition such as God can own.
J.H.T. What had you in mind as to @Genesis 30, when you said another son is necessary; was it to make up the number twelve?
J.T. Yes; the number twelve was essential to the divine plan, that is, the means of love operating. I
{406}
think that numeral in Scripture refers to what is easily manipulated. As under God's hand. He can manipulate us for Himself; and in the service of God, it is essential that the chief Musician should have us under His hand.
Ques. Have we in Joseph an example how the number twelve is easily manipulated: his brethren sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright and the youngest according to his youth (@Genesis 43)?
J.T. Yes, but when we come to what is ministerial in Exodus, we have a different arrangement. The tribes are set in precious stones on the high priest's breastplate, but evidently according to the sovereignty of love; "according to their names", it is said. This would be the distinction of each in the testimony. "Judgment" would indicate that the arrangement of the names represents the mind of God as to all, and this would correspond with the ordering of the camp in Numbers.
Ques. Is Solomon's addition suggestive of what comes, apart from affliction?
J.T. The thought is principally sonship. Apart from that you cannot have addition, in the sense in which we are speaking of it, according to God. "Let my son go, that he may serve me(@Exodus 4:23)". That is the divine thought, and Solomon represents it, so that it is sonship. But then what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? So that Solomon would partake of discipline. Sonship implies that we are consciously in the position, happy and free in it. Solomon is the counterpart of David; they sat on the throne together at the beginning, according to @1 Chronicles 23, and under both we have the opening up of the service of the Levites and priests in courses so as to get the very best out of them. That is what the Lord is aiming at now, to bring us all under His own influence in sonship and in relation to one another in love and holiness.
Rem. In the opening of 2 Corinthians we have a note that had its spring in affliction.
{407}
J.T. Yes. The whole epistle of 2 Corinthians may be viewed from that standpoint, it is the energy of life working through death. Sweet odour for God is furnished too: "For we are a sweet odour of Christ to God in the saved and in those that perish: to the one an odour from death unto death, but to the others an odour from life unto life" (@2 Corinthians 2:15,16). We see in the epistle the principle Hezekiah sets out; it is life through death -- "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I this day"; and from that he goes on to the higher altitude spiritually: "we will play upon my stringed instruments all the days of our life, in the house of Jehovah". I suppose he *intended* to spend the fifteen years in that way, but he did not, as the records show.
Ques. Does his history show the pains God takes with every instrument individually with a view to the service of praise collectively?
J.T. Yes. He says "we will play upon my stringed instruments", as if he were furnishing the instruments and others joined in. Not only had he gained, but others were gaining from his experience.
Ques. "We who live are always delivered unto death" (@2 Corinthians 4:11): is that the maintenance of this living condition?
J.T. Yes. "We who live", that is God taking an account of us thus and putting us through circumstances that help.
J.H.T. In @2 Kings 20, going to the house of Jehovah the *third* day is stressed. Is it one having faced the article of death?
J.T. Just so. Kings and Chronicles do not give the *contribution* . I think it is a tribute to Isaiah's part in the service of God that he gives us this. The whole book of Isaiah is full of poetic feeling; we can understand what a man he was from this point of view; adding to what was there, not simply content with what had been. No godly Israelite would read Isaiah without being greatly stimulated. One could point out several songs; more even than appear on the surface, and
{408}
characteristically he adds this beautiful contribution by king Hezekiah. Men of this kind are very important among the saints of God, men who add things and make them available for all. "We", Hezekiah says, meaning others besides himself. As spiritual, we cease to think unduly of ourselves individually and merge with the brethren; and whatever I have is also for others.
Rem. "Draw me; we will run after thee!(@Song of Songs 1:4)"
J.H.T. Is it right to say in a general way that Hezekiah's contribution is a psalm, and Jonah's in the nature of a spiritual song, and Habakkuk's a hymn?
J.T. The idea of experience enters into all of them, of course. I should think a hymn is the product of restfulness, that is, those who know how to keep their sabbaths. Habakkuk seems to come near to that. He is perfectly restful in the God of his salvation. He says, "Yet I will rejoice in Jehovah", though discipline may not be removed from him. Hezekiah was out of the difficulty, the sickness was removed. Habakkuk says, "Though the fig-tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines ... yet I will rejoice" (chapter 3:17,18). That is an indication of being in power. The discipline may be there, but he is above it, and he gets on to the highest thought to hand it over to the chief Musician. He is definitely and formatively contributing to the service. Hezekiah is out of suffering and so is Jonah. Jehovah commanded the fish and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. I should think that as writing he had passed through all the experiences that are spoken of, for the book is one. It is one book, and he has gained not only from the extraordinary experiences of chapters 1 and 2, but also what is mentioned in chapter 4. In the latter he tells us of his folly, that he did well to be angry, and then he allows God to have the *last ward*. The book is evidently the production of a man marked by disobedience, but who through discipline submitted to the will of God.
{409}
Ques. What are the thoughts conveyed in the temple and the chief Musician?
J.T. The temple is important in Jonah's composition: "When my soul fainted within me, I remembered Jehovah; and my prayer came in unto thee, into thy holy temple". The element of holiness is there, which is a good addition to Hezekiah. Hezekiah says, "the house of Jehovah". Jonah says, "thy holy temple". These are thoughts that run together.
In Acts, Antioch is of special interest and importance, because we get there a collective product -- "they were ministering to the Lord and fasting" (@Acts 13:2). It is the beginning of the service amongst the gentiles. Much is made of the teaching of Barnabas and Saul: "for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd" (@Acts 11:26), so we get an excellent start there and addition follows, particularly in @Acts 16, where Paul and Silas were in prison and in praying were praising God with singing. Here we get prayer culminating in praise in Hezekiah, Jonah, and Habakkuk, whether in the house, the temple, or to the chief Musician.
Rem. The overcomer in Philadelphia is to be made a pillar in the temple.
J.T. That is a suggestion directly for ourselves because Philadelphia includes the present time. What He promises to the overcomer in any assembly alludes to what the overcomer in that assembly would understand and value, and I think the Lord assumes that the temple of God is understood in Philadelphia.
Ques. Would Habakkuk's rejoicing spirit be the spirit of an overcomer, in the midst of failure?
J.T. In a very striking way. Indeed we may say all three are overcomers -- Hezekiah, Jonah, and Habakkuk. It is the overcomer really that contributes.
Ques. Is such suggested in the stringed instruments?
J.T. I think that is an allusion to spiritual skilfulness; whereas a wind instrument would denote life.
{410}
Hezekiah and Habakkuk reach the stringed instruments; Jonah does not. Stringed instruments imply spiritual intelligence, as I said. "I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding" (@1 Corinthians 14:15). The Father of spirits had been dealing with Hezekiah and Habakkuk. God deals with us in regard of our service to Him. The Spirit is my link with God.
Rem. It is encouraging that God should take up such an one as Jonah; unlikely material, yet he is brought through discipline to this result.
J.T. Do you not think that is the way God takes? Think of working out such glorious results in a family like Jacob's -- a most difficult family. Here is a man who had light and yet is sent to preach and did not go. He says he fled to Tarshish because he knew Jehovah was gracious. He was considering his reputation, as if this would be impaired if God did not judge Nineveh. He was angry because He spared the city. But God spared it on the grounds of repentance. Jonah ignored this and boldly said to Jehovah that he did well to be angry; truly a hard man! But in God's school he comes round and contributes to His service of praise. In writing the book, finishing it with God's unanswerable vindication of Himself, Jonah justifies Him. God intends us as coming into the fellowship to be contributory to it. In @Acts 2 all were contributory, first they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, then in breaking of bread and prayers; and what follows shows they were contributing, everyone as in a community, adding to the community; and then the *Lord* added to *that*.
Ques. Do we find Peter and John adding in @Acts 3?
J.T. Yes. They stand out from the surrounding state of things, saying to the lame man, "Look on us". Peter took hold of the man by his right hand; he did his *best* for him, and the result was contribution: he walked and leaped and *praised God* . He was equal to what he was added to.
{411}
SERVICE GODWARD IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION
@Revelation 1:5,6, @Revelation 4:8 - 11, @Revelation 5:8 - 14; @Revelation 14:2,3; @Revelation 19:1 - 8
J.T. Our subject is rather extensive, but the Lord would help us to touch briefly on the various scriptures read. What is in mind is that the service of God goes on, beginning with the assembly as in our day. The thought in chapter 1 is in relation to this dispensation and proceeds into the coming one. That is, there is a living link between the two dispensations; so that chapter 1 may be viewed as the saints forming the assembly celebrating what is in keeping with this book, able to take on the spirit of the coming dispensation. Whilst great sufferings are involved and the people of God come into them, the service of God goes on. Each product of His work, developed amidst sufferings, brings out the praise of His people and sometimes their worship.
B.O.L. What will mark eternity is secured in the time scene, in the different dispensations -- the praise of God.
J.T. Quite so. One has been struck with the service of God from the time of its introduction in Exodus: the continuous contributions throughout the Old Testament, and the striking link in the book of Revelation with all that preceded; so that the ways and judgments of God are proceeding to the great climax of His thoughts in the coming world. We have constant contributions in the sense of praise and worship to God in Christ. It would seem as if the Lord is helping His people even now to enter into the praise and the service that is proper to our own period, and to anticipate what is proper to the coming period in the ways of God.
W.H. Would the assembly as having the first place in the divine thought be able to give a lead to the praise, as well as enter into what is coming?
{412}
J.T. I think that is how the truth stands. The Lord spoke about the praises of Israel, but as leading in them Himself it is in the midst of the assembly. That thought is carried down to the New Testament, particularly in @Hebrews 2, and there can be no doubt that the twenty-four elders would include it. The Lord is not seen throughout these scriptures as singing in the midst; we do not reach that level in this book, but the twenty-four elders would include those who *understand* what it is to have Christ singing in the midst of the assembly. The note we get from those of the assembly in relation to our own dispensation is in these two verses in chapter 1: "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father: to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages". The book is not directly bearing on them, except the addresses to the assemblies, but they join in to begin with, in the recognition of Christ, not as the Lamb as in chapter 5, but "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins", as noted above. He is spoken of also as "Jesus Christ, the faithful witness". They celebrate the washing from their sins by the Lord, not by themselves. In chapter 7 the great uncounted multitude washed themselves; and so too in chapter 22 the washing is by the persons mentioned -- "they that wash their robes" (@Revelation 22:14). Here it is Christ who washes us because He loves us, and makes us a kingdom; the latter meaning that He sets us up in invulnerableness in view of all the happenings contemplated. Those whom He loves are set up as a kingdom to God, for in this ascription of praise they are alluded to as secured.
J.C.S. Are the notes reached in this chapter somewhat higher than that which other families will reach?
J.T. I think so. The worshippers, as we may call them, speak of the Lord as loving them and making them a kingdom. They look at His death in that light. We speak more generally and fully as at the Lord's
{413}
supper, but His love is owned and appreciated here. His death is viewed as the outcome of His love.
F.I. Would you say that the basis of all the praise is in chapter 1, the verses we are looking at?
J.T. Yes. It is a question of redemption. That must be the basis. We do not get the service of God until we get redemption, as in Exodus.
F.R.B. Is it that the service of God is the object of redemption?
J.T. Redemption is in view of the service of God. "Let my son go, that he may serve me" (@Exodus 4:23), Jehovah says to Pharaoh, and as Israel is let go, the service begins. That is seen in chapter 15, and then God sets up the service formally at Sinai. Manifestly it is of Him and through Him and for Him. *He* is the end in all that He does. The setting of this praise in @Revelation 1 is deity, not simply God historically as in chapter 4 where it is He "who was, and who is, and who is to come". Here it is He "who is, and who was, and who is to come"; that is, God viewed as *God*, as the Lord said, "I am". So that there is great intelligence here. I think the Lord is helping us on that point: it is not simply God known historically, right as that is, but God who is, and was, and is to come -- "who is" first.
J.A.G. Would @Psalm 48:10 enter into this: "According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise"?
J.T. That is good. "According to thy name" -- what has come out in Him. The name always indicates what the person is as made known. "I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" (@Hebrews 2:12).
T.T. Does redemption make manifest what is in the heart of God?
J.T. It is viewed here as resulting from the love of Christ. That is the note here: "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom". We are made that because of the need of stability and protection; in view of all that is coming
{414}
in we are protected and have access to God. It is a great matter now, because the general state of the government of the world is deranged, yet it is still controlled of God and we have access to Him about it, and our prayers will have a great bearing on the course of things while the assembly remains. *The saints* are a kingdom. We are thus in a protected state. It is an order of things, an institution. Then the priesthood -- those who have access to God. That is the foundation of what follows. There are those who have that place, the love of Christ underlying all.
T.T. So that whether in the present, or in the future, praise will really be dependent on the love of Christ known through His death. For the time being all is vested in the assembly.
J.C.S. Do you think of the kingdom as supplying divine fortifications for conditions of rest and peace in the carrying on of the service of God?
J.T. Yes. It is a very encouraging position in view of what is coming in, that there is something stable, for it is a kingdom, we may say, "a kingdom which cannot be moved" (@Hebrews 12:28). Then the priesthood; this is seen in the types in Exodus. God set up a kingdom at Sinai, and a priesthood too. Passing over what is said to the assemblies -- that is in chapters 2 and 3 -- we have the throne standing in heaven (chapter 4) -- there is stability there; and these twenty-four elders and four living creatures now take on the service. What they take on is of course subservient to the throne. God is on the throne and they are round about it and in the midst of it. What is to be noted is the intelligence of the twenty-four elders and the lively interest and unceasing praise of the living creatures -- day and night; and then the ability throughout the book to minister in part. The service is carried on in part, sometimes the living creatures, sometimes the elders, and sometimes both together and then the angels and others, showing that the service of God is diversified,
{415}
each knowing what he is to do and when he is to do it. It is a line of thought that enters into our own service, so that we know how to do things and when to do them.
F.R.B. Is the thought that ability for the service of God is inherent in those who take part in it -- the living creatures?
J.T. Well, they are the first to take it on. It says "they cease not day and night saying. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come". They say "who was" first here. It is the energy that is displayed in them, instinct and energy, and yet their form of praise is perfectly accurate in the light of their position.
F.I. Does that go to show that the service of God can only be taken up as we are formed in spiritual intelligence? -- and in this way there is diversity in relation to it?
J.T. That is what we shall see, how each one knows how to take part according to his position, and how they move from one thing to another, and in chapter 14 how certain ones *learn* -- being capable of learning the heavenly song.
G.H.C. How is this secured in the saints? Is it presented in chapter 1 in order that the saints may be brought into all this?
J.T. Well, I think it is that John gives a spiritual lead in the book. It is he, of course, who says what we read in chapter 1. He turns to the plural as if to bring in the whole assembly. A spiritual lead given is one of the greatest things in the service of God.
A.N. Would that not come in in @Psalm 22, where we get an inner circle coming into view, and then the service of God widening out from that point, but all as the fruit of redemption, in the early part of the psalm?
J.T. That is good. It would agree with what has been remarked, that the service begins in the assembly, although the beginning of that psalm recognises God
{416}
as inhabiting the praises of Israel, as if they had existed. They existed already, but Christ would take them on, and when He takes them on it is "in the midst of the assembly" (@Hebrews 2:12); obviously that is the starting point, because all that preceded is anticipative of this, for all begins with Christ, "who is the beginning". "Let my son go" is anticipative of the service of God in the assembly, because we have not sonship proper until Christ became Man. That is where it begins.
F.R.B. So that scripture, "Out of Egypt have I called my son" (@Matthew 2:15), as applied personally to the Lord, would come in.
J.T. Quite so.
W.H. Do you think that the thought of *part* in service would have a bearing particularly on our worship when we come together on Lord's day?
J.T. I think we might touch on that a little, it is something of which we do not understand very much. Some of us might know something about parts in singing. That is mere music; but how each is to take his part in the service of God is a matter of great importance. In chapter 4 the first thing is *energy* -- the living creatures. The elders do not take part until the living creatures take part. The elders represent the supreme thought of all the work of God. Applying it to assembly service the energy of the Spirit comes first, and then we advance, increasing in intelligence, the greater intelligence waiting on the lesser. We must make provision for every bit of intelligence, and every bit of spiritual energy, and every bit of life in the assembly, although not always controlled by the highest intelligence. The more intelligence we have the more we can wait, so that the lesser may come out. We get thus the best results.
W.H. Do you suggest that the early part of the meeting is marked by youthful energy, and in that way might be simpler than what might follow?
{417}
J.T. Ample room should be made for that. The more spiritual intelligence I have, the more I can wait and make room for others, so that we do not miss anything that may be there. I think the living creatures refer to that. They refer to much more, but the word "living" is a guide. They are marked by unceasing energy, "day and night". They address God as Him "who was" first. The creation is in mind, and thus time and history. It is God known historically. What is of God in the creation knows Him from @Genesis 1 onward. In @Revelation 1 it is He "who is"; He is, the present God, first; that is "our God", but His eternal existence is conveyed.
F.I. Are you inferring that the elders have greater intelligence than the four living creatures, and they wait till energy as seen in the living creatures comes out, and then they come in?
J.T. That is right. I think the passage shows it clearly. And you will notice that it is not simply that they do that, but it says "the twenty-four elders shall fall before him that sits upon the throne, and do homage to him that lives to the ages of ages; and shall cast their crowns before the throne, saying. Thou art worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power". The "shall" indicates that it is going to happen. These elders will not be wanting.
F.I. That is, the intelligence is greater in relation to the elders than in regard of the four living creatures; they can speak of the Lord God Almighty, but the elders say, "Our God".
A.N. I was noticing that the returned remnant in Nehemiah, chapter 9, come back to God as Creator, but in chapter 10 they rise to the appreciation of redemption. They say, "We made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God" (@Nehemiah 10:32). It is "the third part of a shekel", but it is all to be contributed to the service of God.
{418}
J.T. And inclusive of the "sin-offerings to make an atonement for Israel" (@Nehemiah 10:33). I think that the living creatures here are viewing God historically. Of course, it is God, but it is He "who was" first, and then "who is". That is, they are taking account of Him from the outset of His operations, but then the highest note of praise is not that: it is not God in relation to history, nor what He has done in the creation. It is what He *is* . Very few can speak to Him feelingly as to what He is. They can speak to Him as to His work in creation, and in redemption, but that is easier than to speak to Him according to what He is. We rightly speak to the Lord and to God in regard of what happened during the Lord's pathway here and His death; but it takes spiritual power and understanding to speak to God according to what He is.
W.H. Would that take in His great thoughts in connection with the assembly now? God -- what He is!
J.T. It is the basis of our eternal service. It is intelligible that as having left present conditions we shall be less occupied with what is historical, than with God Himself -- what He is. Of course, what He was He is, only "who is" refers to what is abiding.
A.S. Would it be right to suggest that on our side we have to pass through both stages? I mean the thought represented in the living creatures and also the elders.
J.T. Quite so. Young people as a rule are historical -- it is quite right -- as to God, as to Christ, as to the cross; but what He is is a higher note. That is chapter 1.
J.C-S. Do you suggest that the lower note would not be crowded out, even though there was a greater intelligence present?
J.T. Let the young speak, or let the lesser formation express itself, for every item of it is for God. The smallest note is taken account of.
{419}
F.R.B. In the offering of the bird in @Leviticus 1 the priest removes the crop and feathers and offers what is offerable.
J.T. That is the small formation, you mean. The wringing off of the head of the bird would allude to the stiffness of the neck often seen in the young, and God graciously takes account of all that. We must make room for the smallest formation in the assembly. Intelligence will wait for that. But then the "shall" in @Revelation 4:10 shows that it is imperative. There must be ample room for the intelligence side.
J.C-S. Would that make more room for the covenant side at the Supper?
J.T. I am glad you have brought that forward. We are prone to reduce, to our loss, the scope relative to the Lord's supper. We must give scope for all that enters into it, and I believe the living creatures denote that side. That is, the energy of life, and the love of Christ and the love of God in the covenant, and Christ's love for the assembly, and the assembly's love for Christ. All that must have full place. If not, the higher part of the service will be damaged. There will be less wealth in what follows because what relates to the Supper promotes wealth. We need to be affected by the love of Christ for us, the love of Christ for the assembly, and the assembly's reciprocated affections, and the covenant, and the mediatorial service of Christ as to it. His priestly service, and His service as Head necessarily enter into that section also.
A.M.H. If more room were made for that it would save us from the oscillation we have sometimes felt when we go on further to the Father.
J.T. That is right. The Lord's supper yields enrichment; so much attaches to it. We have so many hymns that are useful and that can lend to the richness of it, and scope should be made for them -- covenant hymns, so far as we have them.
{420}
T.T. It would be necessary to have a clear understanding of the central idea in the Supper, leaving room for so much variety of detail; we should have definitely before our hearts Christ giving Himself for the assembly.
J.T. Quite so. You see how the living creatures have their own note and they go on with that. The elders have their part, and their part is that they fall before Him that sits upon the throne and do homage to Him that lives to the ages of ages, saying, "Thou art worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were, and they have been created". The subject is the creation. That is the theme here, but at the Lord's supper, of course, it is another theme.
A.R. Is your thought that our service of praise should be on an ascending scale? Oft times we start high and come down; whereas if what you say were carried out we should be on the ascending line.
J.T. That is what I think we all may see. We see how the elders wait, but they come in in their place. I think if we keep these things before us we shall progress more steadily in the assembly service.
Then in chapter 5 we have another theme. We have to take notice of the theme as well as the persons serving. The next theme is redemption. The elders come second; I mean, as seen together in verse 6, the living creatures are mentioned first. The elders are mentioned first in chapter 4, but in view of the service of song, the living creatures are mentioned first in chapter 5, and then they sing together. There is a blending between them. It is no longer in part: they sing together, and we are told that they have harps That is, musical instruments that are used in heaven. That would allude to qualifications -- that they have the qualifications for this service. As we see a brother stand up, we know what he is capable of. If we are walking together we ought to know each other's measure. You know that
{421}
a certain brother has a harp; he is a heavenly-minded man; if he has a golden bowl full of prayers, he is a sympathetic man taking in all the exercises of the saints.
A.R. You might say a little more about the blending together.
J.T. We certainly ought to blend in our participation in the service of God. We do not leave the less spiritual behind; they are given full place. The living creatures come first here; I think it is in keeping with John as a sympathetic man. He gives us a lead here. John is a feeling man; he *weeps* because of the condition.
W.L. Do we bring in the thought of the Father before we begin to ascend?
J.T. As we go on to the covenant there is liberty to ascend. The covenant brings God in. We can easily move on to God as Father as we apprehend Him in the covenant.
J.C-S. So that the service would be enriched by our reaching in a spiritual way the blessedness of the covenant.
J.T. Quite so. The part that the Lord takes in that as the Mediator of it, as coming in amongst us, as being called to mind in the breaking of bread, is to be discerned in that way. We must make room for that, also for the Lord's priestly service. He may have to assert His will if there be will at work, bad feeling, and the like. As Mediator of the new covenant His service is very great. He is to be *looked* at. @2 Corinthians 3:18 says, "looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face". Room has to be made for that, to discern what He is doing in that way, bringing God to us in the new covenant.
Ques. Do the living creatures and the elders give an intelligent reason for their service and their worship?
J.T. They do as they join together in chapter 5. Chapter 4:8 says the living creatures "cease not day and night saying. Holy, holy, holy. Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come". But in
{422}
chapter 5:9 the living creatures and the elders sing a new song, saying, "Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open its seals; because thou hast been slain". They give a reason together. That is, the living creatures are advancing; they are joining with the elders.
Rem. They have learned God in the experience they have passed through.
J.T. You can understand that. The elders joining with them would imply that a reason for the worship would be given, so that there is advance in the living creatures in what they say here. They are not speaking about what has accrued to themselves, but what has accrued to others through redemption: "Because thou hast been slain, and hast redeemed to God, by thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation, and made them to our God kings and priests; and they shall reign over the earth".
C.L. Would a word of ministry help in this service?
J.T. I think it would. I find it is a great stimulation to the service if the Lord helps in it. Impetus is given and the minds of the saints are set in the right direction at a certain point. You can see this in the elders and the living creatures here: the living creatures are brought on to a higher note than in chapter 4. In chapter 4 they are "saying"; in chapter 5 they "sing a new song", and give a reason for it. In this they are with the elders.
G.H.C. Would the next incident, verses 11 - 14, linking on with the angels around the throne, support the ascending movement you were referring to? They are joining in.
J.T. I think so. It is a tremendous and widening volume you see here. As we proceed in the assembly service it is to the universal aspect. It says, verse 11, "I saw, and I heard the voice of many angels around the throne and the living creatures and the elders". The living creatures and the elders are not actually joining in here. They do not come in until the last verse; but
{423}
they are giving a lead and a wider area is brought in; indeed, the whole universe is brought in. I think the thought for us is the ever-widening, ever-ascending bearing of our praise, as we emerge from what is local. We have angels around the throne and the elders and the living creatures -- they are around; "and their number was ten thousands of ten thousands and thousands of thousands; saying with a loud voice. Worthy is the Lamb that has been slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in the heaven and upon the earth and under the earth, and those that are upon the sea, and all things in them, heard I saying. To him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, blessing, and honour, and glory, and might, to the ages of ages". That is, all these are by themselves. The elders and living creatures are not participating in this; they are in the inner circle, the number celebrating is ever-widening.
W.H. Would there be a suggestion in the "new song" of the Lord giving a fresh touch?
J.T. Applying it to assembly service, I think that is the thought in what is sung by them. They sang a new song. It would mean that they are not stale. It is not the same hymns, and the same giving of thanks. There is freshness, and the elders and the living creatures come in at the end, the living creatures saying Amen, and the elders falling down and doing homage. They are acting in *parts* again, each knowing what to do.
F.R.B. Would the thought of this be that there has been fresh glory to God achieved?
J.T. Quite so. The angels know what to say. They do not *sing* . It is what they are *saying* . In the inner circle we have the new song, and then the ever- widening number, and then the living creatures and the elders come in again: the living creatures say Amen, and the elders go further and they fall down and worship. In what we are saying, the point is not to bring out the
{424}
dispensation in which the things happen, but to make it bear on our service; each knows what to do and he does it. He is seemly in what he does. Joab told Ahimaaz (@2 Samuel 18:22), that the message to be carried was not suitable for him to carry. That is, each is to know what is suitable to him and take his part accordingly.
J.C-S. Taking an unsuitable part would create an obstruction?
J.T. Well, you feel that. A person not having a harp will not attempt to take a part that needs one.
Ques. Is it important to recognise the place the Lord has in this service? I was thinking of the Lamb standing in the midst of the elders (verse 6).
J.T. Quite so. That fits in with what we are saying. We know the position and what governs it, and keep to that. If a man has not a harp or a golden vial filled with prayers, he should bear that in mind in the part he takes. He should be seemly.
R.McA. It says of David he was a cunning player on the harp.
J.T. Yes. The harp is the only musical instrument used in heaven, I think. It is found in this chapter and in chapters 14 and 15.
We shall have to go on to chapter 14. There is much that intervenes. In chapter 7 an innumerable multitude celebrate. They do not say any more than is suitable. It says in chapter 7:9, "After these things I saw, and lo, a great crowd, which no one could number, out of every nation and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palm branches in their hands. And they cry with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God who sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb" (@Revelation 7:9,10). That is all they say. They know what to say and it is suitable. And the passage further says "all the angels stood around the throne, and the elders, and the four living creatures, and fell before the throne upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying. Amen: Blessing,
{425}
and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and strength, to our God, to the ages of ages. Amen" (@Revelation 7:11,12). They also know what to say there. They are occupied with the great result of the gospel as then witnessed -- the immense number from among the gentiles in the time of the great tribulation. The angels know what to say about that. I suppose they would have a good deal to do with the evangelisation of the world; we are told later that an angel flies in mid-heaven with the everlasting gospel, to announce to those settled on the earth. The living creatures and the elders do not join in here, but they are in the inner circle. They are seen in relation to the throne.
Then we have other ascriptions. In chapter 11 we read: "The twenty-four elders, who sit on their thrones before God, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying. We give thee thanks. Lord God Almighty, He who is, and who was, that thou hast taken thy great power and hast reigned" (@Revelation 11:16,17). They are sitting upon their thrones; they know what to say, because they are reigning themselves. And in speaking to God they say, "who is" first, as in chapter 1. It is a question of experience. Then chapter 14 brings out the class that have a special place; those that can *learn* . Even if we cannot take the higher note, if we have not harps, we can *learn* . That is an important matter.
A.M.H. I think that is very good. Waiting for one another would make much more room for the best to come forward. You would follow up the suggestion that one or another gives and that would lead to a higher apprehension of Christ.
J.T. "No one could learn that song save the hundred and forty-four thousand". Applying this to ourselves, you take up the attitude of a learner; you are in a lower grade, so to speak; that is the way of advance in spiritual education, so that we reach a higher level: although on earth, we can learn what is in heaven. They are an earthly people here but they are very near
{426}
to heaven. It is an encouragement to be ever in the attitude of learning.
F.R.B. Does the Lord take that place prophetically? "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed", (@Isaiah 50:4).
J.T. Exactly. Those in youth are apt to think they know all, but they do not. The point is to get into a position where you can learn what is beyond you. There is no short cut. You have to go on by gradation.
A.N. The Lord says in @John 4:23, "The hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth". That is, there will be reality in what they do.
J.T. Quite so. You know your measure, whether in preaching, teaching, or participating in the service of God. One has to know one's measure, and the part he is to take, and to take it in a seemly way; and then to be in the attitude of learning all the time, because while we are down here we are in the position of learners. I apprehend that every earthly position is a position of learning. We do not learn in heaven. But as here, you go on on the principle of education; you reach the point where nobody but those in your grade can learn a certain thing, meaning that you have advanced to that point. So that it is said here, "I heard a voice out of the heaven as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of great thunder. And the voice which I heard was as of harp-singers harping with their harps; and they sing a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders. And no one could learn that song save the hundred and forty-four thousand who were bought from the earth". They advance to the highest grade of learning: they are able to listen to what is going on in heaven and learn what is being sung there. I think you can see the idea of elevation on the principle of education. The Lord began at the age of twelve, "sitting in the midst of the teachers and hearing them and asking them questions" (@Luke 2:46).
{427}
Ques. Would faithfulness to the Lord be seen in that way? "These are they who follow the Lamb wheresoever it goes", @Revelation 14:4.
J.T. That is the point. *Following* here would be, of course, what the apostle says to Timothy (@2 Timothy 3:10), 'hast followed up'(see note in New Translation). That is, you follow the Lord, according to the positions His example and teachings would convey. It is the idea of learning in following Him. Wheresoever He goes, the hundred and forty-four thousand follow Him.
T.T. There is no idea of limitation.
J.T. No; and they reach the highest point on earth. They are not a heavenly company, but they are very near heaven. For us it is a question of education, for the earth is a place of discipline and education. The Lamb is the Sufferer here. It is the suffering Christ, and He is standing on mount Zion, and with Him the hundred and forty-four thousand; He is the link between them and heaven.
F.R.B. Do you see the Lord in incarnation taking that place? Though He were Son He learned obedience by the things which He suffered.
J.T. Quite so. It was not that He did not know it *Morally*, but He went through the thing as *learning* it; as God He had always *commanded* .
The final thought in mind is the overthrow of what is corrupting, to make way for the heavenly city, the Lamb's wife. The overthrow of the great corruptress -- that is, the false church -- is seen in the close of chapter 18. Then in chapter 19:1 - 5, we have the celebration of that; and then in verses 6 to 8: "I heard as a voice of a great crowd, and as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of strong thunders, saying. Hallelujah, for the Lord our God the Almighty has taken to himself kingly power. Let us rejoice and exult, and give him glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready. And it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and
{428}
pure; for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". We see that the intelligence of the elders is finally brought in here -- we do not get them after this, after verse 4: "the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and did homage to God who sits upon the throne, saying. Amen, Hallelujah". That is, they are celebrating that the corruptress of the earth is destroyed; as if to remind us that there must be no corruption in the service. "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy" (@1 Corinthians 3:17). God abominates the idea of corruption in His service, and in His things generally.
Rem. The living creatures maintain the holiness of God in their service.
J.T. They do. And the elders and they have known the history well. They have known the history of corruption in relation to the service and testimony of God, and they exult now that God has destroyed the great corruptress of the earth. The great multitude in heaven say, "Hallelujah: the salvation and the glory and the power of our God: for true and righteous are his judgments; for he has judged the great harlot which corrupted the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his bondmen at her hand. And a second time they said. Hallelujah. And her smoke goes up to the ages of ages". It would seem there is a testimony to the judgment of God against evil running right through to the end in the history of His ways, and eternally in the lake of fire there will be testimony to His judgment of evil.
A.N. In the 'Hallelujahs' they have learned the praise of God through varied experiences; but in the last psalm it becomes universal; "Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord" (@Psalm 150:6). This assumes the final overthrow of all evil.
J.C-S. Would you suggest here that the assembly anticipates this judgment in regard of corruption; the
{429}
whole system is superseded morally in the service of God by those who carry it on now in the light of the assembly?
J.T. Yes; and this shows how these scriptures bear on our service; so that we may not allow corruption in our hymns or giving of thanks. All is to be pure and holy.
Rem. The apostle ends his letter to the Ephesians, "Grace with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption" (@Ephesians 6:24).
J.T. That applies very forcibly; also @1 Corinthians 3:17, "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy".
Ques. What would you say is the highest note we reach in relation to the contribution to the service of God?
J.T. I think that here it is the heavenly song -- the harping. The elders and living creatures are said to have harps in chapter 5, but in chapter 14 it is actually "harp-singers harping with their harps". That is heavenly. It is not the assembly there, because the singers are before the throne, the four living creatures and the elders. It is another company clearly, for there is a wide variety of results from the work of God, but the singers are heavenly, and this company on mount Zion is near enough to learn it.
F.I. In all this we reach God Himself. I was thinking of the apostle, in Ephesians, speaking of *all* the saints. "That ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God(@Ephesians 3:18,19)". The outcome is glory to God in the assembly.
J.T. Quite so. That is the assembly's place and function. Here we have harping. The living creatures and elders have harps (chapter 5); and they sing a new song in chapter 14 -- the singers are harping with their harps; and they also sing a new song. That is, we have
{430}
*another* new song. It is distinctly a heavenly song and a new one, but learned by a company on earth. What has come before us implies a wonderful vista of glory opened up to us, and how God will be praised in all the families mentioned. We can understand how the family mentioned as singing in chapter 14 will learn something from the assembly, and so from the highest point down to the earth: "I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, and the new wine, and the oil" (@Hosea 2:21,22).
{431}
LEADER AND SAVIOUR
@Acts 5:31,32; @Judges 5:1 - 3,9
These scriptures, as you will observe, link the thoughts of leader and saviour together; they present them in Christ personally and also in others who participated in His Spirit in Old Testament times. It is the divine thought, that whether in those who participated in His Spirit before His incarnation, or in those who receive the Spirit from Him, redemption being accomplished, there should be in all services a correspondence to Christ. This is the divine standard, and where the Spirit has His place this will be attained.
We find that both Peter and Paul, assuming that the epistle to the Hebrews was written by the latter, laid stress on these two thoughts. It will be noticed that the word "leader" comes first in @Acts 5; the word "prince" being properly "leader". This word is used four times in the New Testament, and only by Peter and Paul. Both Peter and Paul use the word twice. Peter uses it in @Acts 5 and also in chapter 3 of this book; Paul uses it once in @Hebrews 2 and once in chapter 12. In each of these cases, save the one in the passage read, the use is specific. The first mention of the word in the New Testament is in @Acts 3:15, where it stands in relation to *life* . In that passage the New Translation renders it "originator"; that is to say, Christ is the Originator of life, but then, the word means more than is ordinarily understood by that term. It means that He set the thing out, exemplified it; a most important matter, especially in leadership, that one should be the thing. The word, as seen in these passages, could apply to Christ only. So that we have, as I said, in the first reference, the Originator, or Leader of life. Life according to God is seen in Christ; in Him was life, we are told, and He has expressed it; and thus we understand it from Him.
{432}
In @Hebrews 2 Christ is said to be the Leader of *salvation* . No one could be that but He. In chapter 12, He is the Leader *of faith* , and the Completer of it too; but in @Acts 5 He is Leader and *Saviour*. He is introduced as Leader and Saviour in connection with repentance and remission of sins, so that we have a combination here that is peculiarly needed at the present time; that is, an apprehension of the leadership and saviourship of Christ. His leadership is more of a general thought here, although the effect of it, through Him as Saviour, is repentance and remission of sins.
In this passage, Israel is in view, but of course repentance and remission have a universal bearing. What a need there is for them! The idea of repentance must be kept before us, for we are apt to think of it as a historical matter only, once effected, with a result that is final, but Scripture regards repentance as continuous, and the need for the Leader and Saviour to give it, continues. The need of this combined service to unconverted people is obvious, but it is necessary for Christians, too, since in our case also there can be no remission without repentance; hence the necessity of the combined service of Christ for repentance and remission of sins.
The Spirit of God tells us that Peter and the apostles said these things, showing that the ground is very firm testimonially. God is pleased at times to furnish an excess of testimony in order to enforce what is in His mind. Then Peter adds that the apostles were witnesses -- qualified persons, who were not only called upon to testify as to the truth, but were called upon by the Lord to "be my witnesses", as He said (@Acts 1:8). Earlier He had said, *"ye* are witnesses",(@Luke 24:48). To be a valid witness, one has to be a witness by experience or observation, and that was so of the apostles; these men were qualified witnesses, because of having seen or heard the things they testified to. They were qualified as trustworthy witnesses. Witnesses may fail
{433}
us; our minds, too, are treacherous and we may fail to witness correctly, but these men were competent as witnesses. One of the most important things to learn is how to keep divine things in our minds; to have the ability to recall them as learnt; and so the Lord said to the apostles that the Holy Spirit whom the Father would send in His name, would bring to their remembrance all things whatever Christ had said to them. It lies in the power of the Spirit to do this, so that there should be accurate testimony; so that what we say is accurate, and we know it to be so. In truth, we speak so lightly and so superficially, that it is necessary that we be reminded that to witness really and truly we need the Spirit of God.
So the apostle says, "we are his witnesses ... and the Holy Spirit also". And then, so as to make the position clear, he says, "which God has given to those that obey him". We may say no testimony is reliable, save in those who are obedient, who obey God. If I have something selfish to establish through my testimony, I cannot be relied upon. In the very nature of things I am not reliable. It is the Spirit given to those who obey Him -- that is, those who obey God. The Spirit is here thus; not in any theoretic way, but in persons, in those who *obey God* . It is in that sense that the Spirit is here in testimony; He has obedient persons, available persons, who can testify. God gives Him to those who obey Him. Let no one speak of having the Spirit aside from the element of obedience. So that Peter says, God has exalted Jesus "as leader and saviour, to give repentance ... and remission of sins. And *we* are his witnesses ... and the Holy Spirit also, which God has given to those that obey him". What a witness to Christ in heaven! Thus we see the testimony coming through vessels that are qualified, first by appointment and then by possession of the Spirit whom God gives to those who obey Him. That is the position in this passage.
{434}
Now I want to enlarge on this as reflected in the Old Testament, and I have selected the book of Judges; a peculiar book in the sense that it was written by the Spirit of God to depict conditions at a time of departure from God; but of great energy on God's part to meet the departure, and to save all possible. It is a salvaging book in a sense, and it shows that the greater the effort of the enemy in turning souls away from God, the greater the energy of God to recover and preserve all possible. As the apostle Paul says, "if by any means I ... might save some" (@1 Corinthians 9:22). We cannot afford to lose one of the saints, and the leadership and saviourship of Christ is available and effective through repentance and remission of sins to this end, and there is no other way. If sin is at work in departure from God, the enemy has scope, which he uses to lead the saints captive. Think of being thus affected -- one once regarded as a lover of Christ now against Christ! Why? Because Satan has captivated him for his will. And so this book shows the power of God, that by His operation, through chosen vessels, the tide of evil might be stemmed, as the apostle said, "that I might by all means save some" (@1 Corinthians 9:22).
Well now, I wish to dwell first on leadership, and the gist of what I have in mind is *that leaders led* . A saviour is raised up, too; and he *saves* . He is not a mere titled man, but one that does the thing. So Deborah says the leaders led; and then in chapter 3, a saviour saved. That is a principle set forth in this book. No one has a right to any title of this kind, save as he can produce the result. It is the result that tells, and so it was with Othniel -- he *saved* Israel. God raised up a saviour to the children of Israel, who saved them.
Now in regard of leadership, we have in chapter 5, which is one of the finest sections of the book, that the thing done is celebrated with a song. I have thought lately, that we do not sing enough; that singing in assembly service is curtailed amongst us to our loss, and that God loses through it, too. Indeed, it is my
{435}
feeling that the service of God is largely in song. And so this chapter stands out prominently in the book as consolidating what was achieved in chapter 4. The word *consolidated* is a good one, and I believe the spiritual singing is very important as tending to consolidate the things that we have received or acquired. The apostle Paul in referring to the truth of the gospel, says to the Corinthians, "which also ye received" (@1 Corinthians 15:1), but they failed to consolidate it. He says, "which I announced to you, which also ye received" (@1 Corinthians 15:1), but then adds, "unless indeed ye have believed in vain" (@1 Corinthians 15:2). What is received in the way of testimony from God in our minds must be consolidated, and that is very largely through singing. I do not overlook other things, of course, but I stress this thought, dear brethren, that we may look into it and see if we are neglecting the thought of singing, and disregarding its value in the service of God. I am not now thinking of singing as a pastime, but "speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and chanting with your heart to the Lord" (@Ephesians 5:19). The soul thus becomes filled and carried along as with a current; under those conditions Christianity becomes a reality to us, Christ being our theme.
Now Deborah, who speaks of herself very soberly and humbly in chapter 4, refuses to take the lead, but puts Barak forward -- a fine example for sisters. She did all she could to make a poor leader a good one, and she succeeded. It is within the province of the sisters to do this, to so compass the brothers, to so move, as to convey to them the place which is theirs as head and to take up that place. "I will by all means go with thee" (@Judges 4:9), she said, but he was to take the lead. She put him forward and he went forward. "Up", she says, and Barak went forward, and there went up at his feet ten thousand men. And Deborah went with him. She had said to Barak, "I will by all means go with thee, only that it will not be to thine honour upon the way which thou goest" (@Judges 4:9). Hundreds of years afterwards he
{436}
gets credit, for it says in @Hebrews 11 that Barak had faith. But Deborah said, "Jehovah will sell Sisera into the hand of a woman" (@Judges 4:9). Barak later pursues Sisera, and is shown into the tent of Jael. She says, "Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest, ... and behold, Sisera lay dead, and the pin was in his temples" (@Judges 4:22). Spiritually it is one of the finest of exploits, but it was Jael's, not Barak's. Sisera, the enemy's great leader, is nailed through his head to the ground, for it is a question of evil headship, and hence the way is now cleared for the opening up of headship and leadership according to God. We can thus understand how fitting it was that this remarkable saint, Deborah, should lead in song.
Can we not picture this triumphant scene? There is Barak, Deborah, possibly Jael, and others, devoted servants of God, joining in this *collective* singing. Deborah and Barak sang; not that they merely composed a song, but they *sang* it. It was a singing matter. No doubt they composed it, the hymn or the song, or Deborah did; but the point is that they sang it, and the first thing they mention in the song is that leaders *led* . The Authorised Version is at fault in verse 2 of @Judges 5. The thought is that leaders *led*, that is to say, there is a class called leaders, and the book of Judges emphasises that if one is a leader in name, he is to be one in reality. "For that leaders led in Israel", sings Deborah, "Bless Jehovah!" It is a beautiful tribute to God. The theme of the song is to show that divine power enables the people of God to come through conflict to victory, and what fills the mind of the singers at the outset is that leaders *led* . It was a triumphant thought to Deborah; not that she considered herself to be the leader, and yet she was. But there was Barak; through her skill, grace, influence, and prophetic power, she had put him forward; showing that the saints can under God accomplish such things. It is within our province to encourage those who are leaders, that they might truly lead. There is thus in these verses an
{437}
exemplification beforehand of the great thought of leadership, of which Peter speaks to the council, saying that God has exalted Jesus "as leader and saviour", in view of doing something; to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins.
One is loath to leave this beautiful setting of Scripture in relation to the service of God, because it is so attractive; the service of God in which we have part is a growth. It is not a paper service, dear brethren, I need hardly say that to you; and yet perhaps it is needful to say it. It is a service in life, so that our Leader is the Originator of life; hence the increase of hymns, or songs. What we should look for is an increase of hymns, according to the development of the truth. It is a remarkable thing that we have only one or two hymns that directly refer to the new covenant. We have a remarkable collection of hymns and spiritual songs today -- thank God for them! But as you look into them you find that there are very few which relate to the new covenant, and yet God is leading us on in that line; He is enlarging the thought of His love to us. The apostle Paul in 1 Corinthians just mentions the covenant in connection with the cup -- "in my blood" (chapter 11:25); but he devotes a whole chapter to it in the second letter, and it is one of the richest chapters we have, in which he unfolds, in a parenthesis particularly, the wonderful richness of the ministry of the new covenant; showing that the ministry of the Spirit *subsists* in glory. Well, if we take the truth of it into our souls and enjoy it, and serve God in the assembly in the power of it, we shall need suitable hymns to express our thoughts and our affections; and, as I said, there is a lack of such hymns; although there are some among the older ones that are of that character, but are much neglected. What I mean to convey is that I believe the *Lord* would have us make the most of what is in our
{438}
hymn-book with the thought before us that there should be more, and as we feel the need, God will supply it.
In @Judges 5 we have singers: they have just emerged from a conflict; they are now triumphant! And is not Jehovah to have His part in it? Yes, He must have His part! They become priests, they say, "Bless Jehovah!" and, as if Deborah herself were deficient in expression, she says, "Awake, awake, Deborah! ... Arise, Barak ... thou son of Abinoam!" (@Judges 5:12). The principle is, she is calling upon all that is within her to serve God; she brings the result of this great victory into the service of God. In this sense there is to be the development of life amongst His people, and we are to express it in our song. Spiritual songs as sung in the Spirit are delightful to the ear of God.
The first thing Deborah has in her mind is that "leaders led", and her song ends with the lovers of God. What are the lovers of God to be? They are to be as the rising of the sun in its might. Hence, dear brethren, what an opportunity there is for us! Who are the leaders? You may think a leader is some distinguished person; he is in a way, but a leader is one that goes before. We read of a little child leading; he is one that goes before, and if I go before the people of God at the present time, I have to be prepared for suffering. That is the way; even as the song here reproves those who remained in ships and failed to go forth in the great day of conflict, and take their part in the conflict. But she says, "leaders led". That is to say, the great point in the chapter is what is *done* . If I am a leader, I lead; if a saviour, I save; if a brother, I love -- for we have to love too. At the outset, this book introduces Judah and Simeon, in brotherly relationship; they loved; Judah makes room for Simeon in his territory; they are brothers who *are* brothers, as there are saviours who *are* saviours, and leaders who *are* leaders. That is the great idea of the book; otherwise they are only such in name and nothing more.
{439}
Well, that was what I had before me to present, dear brethren, and I think you will conclude that God is giving us great opportunities at the present time; in fact, I have not been more impressed in recent years than I am now, that what God is doing requires to be carried on. The book of Judges shows that we are to go on, and that what God has in mind is to go on; and if it is to go on, we must be as brothers who love, who make room for one another, just as Judah made room for Simeon. Simeon went out with his brother Judah and fought with him; the Spirit presents this to us as we open the book. If this work is to go on, we must have brothers who make room for one another; we must have saviours who save; warriors who go to war; and leaders who lead. That is the great principle and one is assured that those required are here. This song of Deborah also includes in it her thought of the governors. You will find that word governor several times; it is another word found in the divine vocabulary; so that the Scriptures are indeed a divine treasury. Zerubbabel was governor of Judah, according to Haggai, in a day of small things. How great the need today for men who can govern. I have been speaking of leaders who lead, but then governing is a question of moral influence. The governors of Israel are those who can rule in the house of God. The apostle gives the qualifications in the epistles to Timothy and Titus, and the need for it exists today, not the official thing, of course, but those who have weight and who can say what is to be done, so that what should *not* be done is exposed and set aside.
God will help us in all this, dear brethren. Christ is leading, giving us the example, as in everything, and the book of Judges shows how these things work out in detail, with the result that there are to be leaders who lead and saviours who save, and hence a song of praise to God, a contribution to the service of God, in which Jehovah is blessed. Then finally we have those who love Him; for, dear brethren, everything in the
{440}
long run must lead to that. From our side it must *be* a question of loving God. If there are no lovers of God there are no inhabitants for heaven. Love is the life of heaven, and the song ends with that; "Let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might", @Judges 5:31.
May God bless the word!
{441}
CHRIST KNOWN IN THE ASSEMBLY
@Acts 1:1 - 5, @Hebrews 2:10 - 12
J.T. This paragraph in Acts takes up and epitomises what we have in the endings of the gospels, only in direct view of the assembly. In the endings of the gospels the remnant of Israel is also in view, but here we have the assembly in mind, so that we have the Lord assembling with them. The passage will help us, I believe, to understand the wealth that enters into our position as assembled, as gathered together in assembly. The presentation of the Lord here, of Himself as *living*, is one thought, and then secondly, "being seen by them during forty days", is another thought; spirituality enters into that. "Being assembled with them" (verse 4), is a further important thought: He is to be known amongst His own in this sense. "To await the promise of the Father" implies another great feature, that is, the Spirit present with the disciples.
The passage in Hebrews fits in here as bringing out the perfection of the Lord; being made "perfect" through sufferings, and what the saints are as one with Himself, so that He is not ashamed to call us brethren; and then the service of God in singing: "in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". These thoughts should help us at this time, so that we might have a clearer view, under the Lord's hand, of the wealth that there is available to us as with Him as Minister of the sanctuary.
C.G. Have you in mind the wealth that David collected in view of the building of the house of God?
J.T. That enters into this scripture, and it opens up the subject in 1 Chronicles. David having determined the site of the house, saying, "This is the house of Jehovah Elohim",(@1 Chronicles 22:1) he prepares for it, so that there is an abundance of wealth. I think we need help on these lines, because our services, it will be admitted, are somewhat poor, although having light and assembly
{442}
order, we need spiritual wealth and freshness. The Colossians had the order. The apostle speaks of "rejoicing and seeing your order",(@Colossians 2:5) but there was defect there, a danger of slipping into ceremonial ways and philosophy.
Ques. Which assembly represents the wealth you speak of?
J.T. I think Ephesians. In view of the way the apostle speaks of the work at Ephesus, we may regard it as the full result of his labours; hence he speaks of more divine wealth there than anywhere; I mean in his epistle to that assembly; so that we have there an advanced thought on what we have in this passage, that is, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ ... having marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself ... wherein he has taken us into favour in the Beloved" (@Ephesians 1:3,5,6). But even those terms may be employed and yet we may be wanting in the riches; so that the Lord here says, "Await the promise of the Father, which said he ye have heard of me. For John indeed baptised with water, but *ye* shall be baptised with the Holy Spirit after now not many days". Of course, the Spirit has now come.
L.C.C. Does the fact that we have the sufferings of Christ introduced here, suggest to us the way in which that wealth has been liberated?
J.T. Yes. It is through sufferings the wealth has been secured. It was there with God, the unsearchable riches of Christ were there, but to share them with us was the intent, and in order that the wealth should be shared with us sufferings had to take place, so that "it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings". That word "perfect" would imply having gone through the sufferings. He is now in a condition in which we
{443}
can have part, and in which He shares the wealth with us. We have to understand the word "perfect" there; the same thought is implied in Acts 1, because He presented Himself to them *living* . He had said on the first day of the forty days, according to John's account, that He was ascending to His Father and their Father, His God and their God, and that they were His brethren. That gives the bearing of the word "perfect", implying that He has entered upon a condition in which we can have part, in which He calls us brethren, and shares with us the wealth He has: the Holy Spirit is the subjective power here, so that the Lord stresses that they were to wait for Him. It is important that we understand the word "perfect" -- perfect through sufferings. It refers to Christ's present condition. He presented Himself living after He suffered here. Of course He was living before. He said to Martha that He was "the resurrection and the life"; (@John 11:25) in His own Person He was immune from death; He was the eternal life, but then He could not share it with us aside from His sufferings; He was not perfect in that sense. He was always perfect in His own Person, but the word "perfect" in our scripture refers to a condition that God has in mind; a condition which Christ could share with us.
L.C.C. Is it characteristic of the way in which Christ would present Himself to us, and there is always the stamp of suffering?
J.T. That is the thought. The whole scene is permeated and anointed with the oil or ointment that was compounded in the types, of which a large part was myrrh, alluding to the Spirit of the suffering Christ. The assembly is marked by that as down here; it is not the eternal condition, but what is here now; the tabernacle was anointed with the holy ointment.
Ques. Does the fact that the temple was not anointed imply that the thought of suffering will be absent in the eternal state?
{444}
J.T. I do not think it will be prominent; as you say, the temple was not anointed, and that is important to note; the tabernacle was. The Lord in instituting the Supper said, "before I suffer", but in this passage it is *after* He suffered. He has entered on a new condition and in that condition we share, and in it He shares with us the wealth that He has. The Spirit is the power of all this.
C.G. "When he the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth" (@John 16:13).
Ques. Does the wealth come in amongst the saints when the Lord appears living?
J.T. I think that is the way the truth stands; in the assembly we ought to be prepared for personality, and personal movements both in Christ and ourselves, so it is not a mere theoretic thing, or formal ceremonialism; the Lord's personality enters into it, so He begins here with presenting *Himself* living, as if He would present Himself so as to attract, not to relieve or minister to us yet, but to attract us to Himself.
A.W.R. Would there be anything in the reference to "Jehovah Elohim" being mentioned immediately after the reference to the house (@1 Chronicles 22:1)? Would it introduce the personal touch?
J.T. I suppose that is so, as in @Genesis 2, Jehovah prefixed to Elohim would indicate the personal side, and all that takes form in Christ, it is in Christ that divine personality is visible. "Seen of angels;" He has come into visibility and in *presenting* Himself He would attract us to Himself. It is a remarkable expression; it is foreshadowed in David, who "was ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance and beautiful appearance", (@1 Samuel 16:12).
Rem. There is much connected with being able to discern when the Lord as living does come in amongst us.
J.T. That is what is so needed to have before us in the Lord's supper, it means a real incoming of Christ,
{445}
so that He is to be discerned. "It is the Lord" (@John 21:7): that is the idea. The most spiritual man among the twelve, perhaps, was John, and as the Lord appeared in a new way, he says, "It is the Lord" (@John 21:7). Peter did not discern Him, but Peter was moved by what John said. This illustrates how, as one in the assembly discerns the Lord, others are affected.
Ques. You are not speaking of His coming in as Head and taking up things?
J.T. No, it is more *Himself* first. This is a normal presentation; the order here is the presentation, and then that He was "seen by them during forty days" -- they saw Him. Notice it is not the same word as in @1 Corinthians 15, where it says, "He appeared". It is a different word. He appeared to Cephas, and the twelve, and five hundred brethren at once; that is from His side, here they saw Him. That is what we ought to see, not simply that He appears from His side, but we see Him. The Lord might come in and appear, but then who sees Him? In the scene of @John 21, Peter saw the Lord on the shore, but did not discern Him. John said, "It is the Lord",(@John 21:7) and Peter moved to Him.
Rem. In connection with what you were saying about the Lord coming in, we commence as come together to partake of the Lord's supper, with the thought of the Lord's absence.
J.T. That is right; that fact is before us as we sit down together in assembly; He is in heaven and we are here, but then He comes in. I will come to you, He says, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you" (@John 14:18). And the point is, do we discern Him? If He comes in it is that we might discern Him. If we discern the Lord there is wealth in that. It moves you. @Song of Songs 2:9 helps there, showing how He is discerned; it says, "shewing himself through the lattice". 'Flourishing' seems to be the thought; it is that you may notice Him, the lattice being between the loved one and Him.
{446}
Ques. Is it right to think the Lord has made an appointment, and if conditions are right the Lord will appear?
J.T. I think you might go that far. The attitude of His mind is to come and you would expect Him to do so.
Rem. He made an appointment with His disciples and He appeared (@Matthew 28:16,17).
J.T. That is in keeping with Matthew. Matthew is assembly order and authority, not exactly the privilege side. John is the great gospel for that, but in Matthew He makes an appointment, and comes to them. He says, "There they shall see me" (@Matthew 28:10). He is a dignified Person; and it is for us to be where He directs us to be, and as we are there we see Him. "Some doubted", but He went on; that is Matthew's side. Some of the brethren may doubt and question, but we must not be held up by that; that is the way Matthew presented the truth. It is the authoritative gospel and would stress that we *must* go on with the truth: the discipline or administration or whatever it may be. The Lord did not stop to remonstrate with those who did not believe. He went on and says to the apostles, "Make disciples of all the nations" (@Matthew 28:19). That is a big order, but He says, "*I* am with you" (@Matthew 28:20). John tells that the Lord said, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you" (@John 14:18), and, moreover, "I will see you again" (@John 16:22). Matthew would quote Him saying, "There they shall see me" (@Matthew 28:10), but in John the Lord says, "I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one takes from you" (@John 16:22).
C.G. When we discern the Lord coming in, are not our affections moved?
J.T. Yes. He flourishes Himself, as it were, and there is movement on our side.
Rem. "Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord(@John 20:20)".
C.G. This "lattice" is perhaps something in the mind which would prevent my full appreciation of Him.
{447}
J.T. Yes, some domestic matter, it may be. The loved one is inside the house and He outside. He says to her, "Rise up, ... my fair one, and come away" (@Song of Songs 2:10).
Rem. It would greatly help us if we came together in faith, as to this being real to us every Lord's day morning.
J.T. That is the point, God's dispensation which is in faith. So that we come together in assembly with the expectation that the Lord will come. He says, 'This do for a calling of Me to mind'. It is a question of your state. It is a strong word for remembrance. It is only used four times and two of those are in @1 Corinthians 11, so it is our side first. The state of our souls is in accord with calling Him to mind. You would expect Him to move *then* . His move is next, and we reckon on that, and then it is the Lord. He shows Himself, normally, He presents Himself living.
R.T. Would you say a little more as to His presenting Himself and appearing.
J.T. I think the word *presenting* has its own meaning. If you want to present something, it is not merely that it is there, but there in a certain way. So the Lord presented Himself *living*, and the assembly is to be living -- a living order of things -- and I think David helps, as a type, because what is stressed about him is the evidence of life; he was ruddy and of a beautiful countenance. Of Abigail it is said, "the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance" (@1 Samuel 25:3). In this she corresponded with David. When the female in Song of Songs speaks of the Lord she says, "My beloved is white and ruddy" (@Song of Songs 5:10).
Ques. Would you say a word about the memorial and the breaking of bread?
J.T. The memorial is in the breaking of bread, not in the eating. "This do" refers to what the Lord did; He did not partake of His supper. He partook of the passover. That is what is in mind in @Acts 20:7; "We being assembled to break bread". That is the memorial.
{448}
It has often been pointed out that neither Matthew nor Mark mention the memorial; but it is in *what the Lord did* that He is recalled; His coming in is a further thought. He shows Himself. It is a real presence. The Roman Catholics use that phrase, meaning that the loaf is absolutely changed; it is the body *and* blood of the Lord, they say. A terrible thing! But the presence of the Lord in the true spiritual sense they cannot have; it belongs to the assembly -- today, to those who love Christ and partake of His supper as together in assembly. To these He comes according to His promise; He honours their remembrance of Him in this way.
C.G. We want to hold to that and not let them have it.
J.T. We do. They claim to have everything, but morally their claims are nullified as the truth is maintained, in however few, by the power of the Spirit. The real way of overthrowing what exists in Christendom is by maintaining the truth in a positive way.
Rem. The two when going to Emmaus did not discern the Lord. That is often, alas! the experience in coming together. We need to come together in faith as to Himself, and then we are able to say, "It is the Lord" (@John 21:7).
J.T. Exactly. He has promised to come, and faith expects Him, but our part in the assembly comes first. We assemble together to break bread. That is what they came together at Troas to do (@Acts 20). They did not do it for a considerable time after assembling, however; but that is not the model for procedure, it is rather to remind us that we shall never get the right thought of the Supper except as we listen to Paul.
R.T. In His presenting Himself living, would He link them on with Him?
J.T. It is that He is now "perfect", according to @Hebrews 2:10; that is, it is not a flesh and blood condition, but a condition which divine counsel requires. He reached that through suffering and we can have
{449}
part in it. He presented Himself *after* He suffered. It is that which is in mind. He says, "A spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having" (@Luke 24:39). It is flesh and *bones*, a new condition. Then He says, "Have ye anything here to eat? And they gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb" (@Luke 24:41,42), as if He could have *part* with them and they with Him, and He partook of it.
L.C.C. Is the thought that the Lord would have us to participate in that new scene into which He has entered?
J.T. That is what is in mind here. We have the basic thoughts first, that is, the presentation of Himself living. He having charged them by the Spirit. Not that they had the Spirit yet, but He did things by the Spirit; it is to remind us that we are entering on the period of the assembly where operations are by the Spirit. Everything is to be in the power of the Spirit. This is followed by His presentation of Himself living, that is. He is "perfect", as already remarked. He has reached the state in which we can have part. He is living after He suffered. What we get after the presentation is "being seen by them"; that is what He intended. We are speaking of basic thoughts one after another, and what is meant by, "being seen by them during forty days", is *spirituality* . Seeing Him implies spirituality.
C.G. You do not see Him physically, but He is seen in a spiritual way.
J.T. It is "during forty days". We are to grasp that thought, the significance is to teach spirituality. Why did He stay forty days? He did not need to. He could have gone into heaven from the grave. It is on our account.
Ques. Is that connected with a private history before we come together for the Supper?
J.T. Spirituality is built up in the school of God, particularly in seeing Him. The forty days allude to
{450}
the full period in which spirituality is developed. We should have something corresponding to that -- what we see. So that you might ask any Christian, 'What do you see in the assembly? Give an account of it'. We have it in the prophets -- "What seest thou?"
A.W.R. Would the eating and drinking in @Acts 10:41 have any bearing on this?
J.T. Yes. Peter is bringing out there a proof that He is really risen.
Rem. Would it be right to dwell on the sufferings of the Lord before the breaking of bread?
J.T. I think so, as testimony to His love, but that is not the point here. It is *after* He suffered; this *new condition* He entered on.
Rem. So that the gospels would help us to continue on that line. The Supper is the beginning for us; it sets us on these spiritual lines.
J.T. You see the Lord. As He is discerned in the breaking of bread there is some change in the saints; there is movement, and you are conscious of it. Then the next thing is, His assembling with us (verse 4). What is He going to do? *He* assembled with them.
Ques. Would that be @Hebrews 2?
J.T. It touches it; He sings the praises. Here it is the order of the basic features of the truth relative to the assembly, and pending the coming of the Spirit, when everything will take spiritual form, so that He "assembled with them", reminding us that there is such a thing. What will He do? Have I seen the Lord in the assembly? He comes in in the midst but now He is assembling with us.
Ques. Have we here the great mediatorial system coming into view in the beginning of Christianity, the Spirit and the Father and Jesus? The assembly coming in to share intelligently in the result of it.
J.T. That is exactly the truth here -- the three divine Persons. The Persons are to be apprehended each in His place.
{451}
C.G. We are to be concerned to know what He will do and follow as He leads.
J.T. That is the lesson we should learn. You can understand if He has come in, it will then be a question of what He will do. He assembled with them.
Ques. How would the promise of the Father affect us?
J.T. "The Father", not 'Our Father', or even 'His Father'. It is "The Father". It is that Person in the Trinity. It is to maintain the character of the dispensation. It helps us to maintain it, and the promise is by Him. The Spirit has come from Him.
L.C.C. Every spiritual instinct found amongst the saints responds to the movement of the Lord.
J.T. That is it. If the Lord is there assembling with us, you want to know what He is going to do; we are to be keen. You can understand if one has been there how keenly interested he would be. What is the Lord going to do now? @Luke 24 gives detail as to these great incidents. It is humbling to have to say it, but the disciples got on very well until the Lord came in, and then there was confusion. They were perturbed.
Rem. What is before us now would help to keep our minds free from having the meetings always run on the same lines.
J.T. As He presents Himself living, there is freshness. Another thing here is that the Lord spoke about "the kingdom of God". What is said is not stated in detail. "Being assembled with them, commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to await the promise of the Father, which said he ye have heard of me". As if there must be quiet waiting until the Spirit has His place. As already said, we have here the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. Each Person must have His place. What has been said suggests the component parts or features of assembly service, and that is why I suggested these scriptures -- that we might see the order in which we are to proceed. We
{452}
come together to break bread, that is the first thing; the Lord is not there. The breaking of bread brings Him in, normally, and so we see Him. He is *seen*, and that tests us as to whether we are spiritual. And then being assembled with us, what will He do? It is obvious that we all have to be on the alert spiritually to see what should proceed and move on in it -- have part with Christ.
Linking it on with the passage in Hebrews you see the force of the word "suffering" here leading to perfection; how that He is in a new condition and we are the sons that are being brought to glory, and are relatively equal to Him in that sense; so it says, "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one"; that is the order of the truth. Then, "for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", which is the order in which the Lord, as Minister of the sanctuary, proceeds with the service of God in the assembly.
Ques. Would you say a word as to where the affections of the saints come in? You spoke of the three Persons and the place to be given to each of Them. What about the promptings of our own affections?
J.T. There is a wide latitude for these; wealth is implied in them. David told Solomon what he had prepared -- great wealth. Then he says, "thou shalt add to it" (@1 Chronicles 22:14). The Lord in coming in adds to it certainly, but there is wide scope for us, so that @1 Chronicles 29 speaks of what the *princes* gave as well as what David gave. Now in the contributions for the tabernacle the princes were not specially mentioned -- everybody gave what he could, but with David what is stressed is more specially the spiritual -- those rich in this sense.
C.G. The idea of leadership comes in in that connection.
J.T. I think David makes room for that. *Headship* comes in in David.
{453}
Ques. What part does the Holy Spirit have in this?
J.T. It is a question of what part of the meeting you are dealing with. The Spirit is with us always. The Lord says He is with you always. As we sit down together it is the anointing, because it is a question of public testimony. We do not come in like worldly church-goers; although many do. There is no dignity in that. It is a question of how I go into the meeting and how I appear generally. Scripture says the Lord *placed* himself at table. I think the Holy Spirit helps us there. "So also is the Christ", in @1 Corinthians 12:12, means the whole company *anointed* . Then as we proceed in the service we are to rely on the Spirit; He is there personally, as the Comforter, to look after matters, and as we come to the covenant He is the Spirit of it. "The Lord is the Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 3:17), too, but the Spirit Himself is allied with the Lord to make the covenant effective -- a very important matter. We are made conscious afresh of the love of God. And next we get the "Spirit of adoption", by which we speak to God as Father.
H.W. We have been greatly helped of late with regard to the covenant, its teaching, and the place it has in assembly service. Might we not be in danger of dwelling too much on the covenant, detaining us from the true character of the assembly service?
J.T. We should not be detained overmuch on any of the features, but I am sure as to the covenant that it has not had its full place. The passage read in Acts looks on to the assembly. The endings of the gospels have also the remnant in view, and the assembly is not so clearly in mind. Here we are directly looking toward the assembly, and Christ is presented pending the coming in of the Spirit; His presentation of Himself living is *after* He suffered, that is, the perfect condition on which He has entered, in which we can have part; then, that we see Him. Luke says here, "being seen by them during forty days", as much as to say, a period
{454}
of time with plenty of opportunity to see Him in all the variety of features in which He would be seen, so that they should be spiritual. Then He spoke, and following that He is assembling with them, commanding them relative to the Father -- the Spirit. I believe that is the order we should have before us.
Rem. I am sure what has been said is important; and we all should get help. The Lord has given definite light regarding the assembly meeting, but we seem to get tied up that we must go through in the same way each time. To recognise the Lord as "living" amongst us would prevent us from that. Is there any warrant that we should have to reach the highest point every time?
J.T. There may not be power for it, and nothing is gained by carrying on on theoretic lines. We may have a *good meeting* without it; but Scripture gives us the outline, and if the Lord comes in and is discerned there will be freshness and variety. What is needed is spirituality. "Seen by them during forty days". That is spirituality. Spiritual intelligence and energy will save us from omitting any feature of the service of God.
Ques. Would the way in which the writer of the Acts speaks of what had gone before -- "the first discourse" -- signify the importance that ministry has? What is being given to us in these days does not set aside what has gone before, but adds to it, and this balances us.
J.T. Yes. "Concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach". So that what we seek now to see is what is *to be done by us* . I think the Lord assembling with them is striking; and now we have the privilege of coming together in assembly, and entering into the spiritual side of it, what the Lord has in it, and the need for spirituality. "Seen by them during forty days". That was not only for them, but for us; it has come down to us.
Ques. Would you say a further word in connection with coming together in assembly?
{455}
J.T. It is the attitude we are in; not for prayer or Bible reading, but "in assembly" in view of the Lord coming in. He says, "My assembly". What will He do? I think we have been helped as to the covenant because it sets us free. There had been an elimination of that in *immediately* proceeding to the Father when the Supper was over, whereas I think the Lord would have us to dwell on the Supper as giving scope to His official service in the assembly. Anything needed He will look after, and if we are spiritual we shall wait on that. He had great thoughts in His mind, in the fact that He directs that they should await the Spirit's coming. It is to remind us to be dependent on the power of the Spirit. The service of God is to proceed according to the mind of God set out in the Scriptures, but in the power of the Spirit.
Ques. Have we to wait upon the Spirit as to taking audible part at the Supper?
J.T. Yes. There should be room for Him. The Spirit as the anointing is for public order and dignity, and then as having part in the covenant according to @2 Corinthians 3, and then as the Spirit of adoption.
A.W.R. The people are distinctly brought into the service, when David says, "Bless now Jehovah your God", (@1 Chronicles 29:20).
J.T. Yes, and *persons* are much more in evidence in the inauguration of the temple service than in the inauguration of the tabernacle service. In the latter Aaron is mentioned as there, and washed at the laver, but it is generally Moses in @Exodus 40, and the glory came in. It is more the *authority* of Christ in the tabernacle which has its place in our assembly service in the earlier part. It is the authority of Christ and the presence of the Spirit in the anointing. The anointing is greatly stressed in @Exodus 40. The glory came in and Moses could not enter, that is, the time had come when authority was not so essential, but in the inauguration of the temple service there are one hundred and twenty priests
{456}
with trumpets, and the Levites the singers. They reach a point of unity in song, then the glory enters. Thus persons are in great prominence in the opening of the temple service.
Ques. Do you see any connection with @Acts 1 there? One hundred and twenty names?
J.T. Quite so; "the crowd of names". *Names* allude to persons of distinction. We must have such for the assembly.
C.G. Would this experience lead up to spiritual wealth, which you were speaking of at the outset -- spiritual riches?
J.T. Yes. In relation to the temple you are struck with the dignity of the persons and their giving. David and Solomon, the princes, captains and comptrollers (@1 Chronicles 29); then as the service is begun, one hundred and twenty priests and singing Levites, and the perfect sound reached: "One voice to be heard in praising and thanking Jehovah", (@2 Chronicles 5:13). It is a question of persons, no anointing, but the persons. And then the glory enters, as if, when a certain point is reached, God will say, 'That is exactly what I want and that is all for Me'. It is all for God, so that the glory fills the scene.
R.T. With reference to "after he had suffered", it would hardly be seemly to go back to the suffering side after the Lord had come in, as it might be before the Supper?
J.T. I think not. The point is, "perfect through sufferings". You reach the state of perfection; the condition in which Christ is now and leads on to the great statement: "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one", of the same kind or order.
Ques. Do you mean there is in the saints what answers to Christ's living condition?
J.T. Yes. We are like Him, as of His kind or order of manhood; "all of one; for which cause" -- not because He suffered for us, but because we are of that kind.
{457}
We have come into that condition -- "for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren".
A.W.R. You do not go back to the means by which you have arrived at this point.
J.T. He is made perfect. He has reached that point and we have part in it, and now "he is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name to my brethren", and then He sings. The order is perfectly clear, and if we keep in mind that the Spirit is the power, we do not depend on the externals merely, we have substance.
Rem. It is really an enjoyment of the wealth; we get occupied with the Lord in a condition *beyond* the suffering.
Rem. Praise thee with singing -- is that a sort of climax?
J.T. Yes. It links on with @2 Chronicles 5; praise reached one note and the glory fills the scene.
F.C.H. What is the force of sanctifying? -- "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren".
J.T. That brings the Lord in in another way. The writer had been speaking of God. "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory". That is God. God doing something for Himself. He has made "perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings". That finishes that side; then the Lord Jesus is alluded to as the Sanctifier in the next verse. Of course, the sanctifying process went on at the same time. It is noted three times in Hebrews. We approach it in the reverse way. The first is in chapter 13:12: "that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate" (@Hebrews 13:12). That is separation. The second is @Hebrews 10:10: "by which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all"; and this in chapter 2 is the third: "he that sanctifies". The process of sanctification went on and reaches this
{458}
climax that He and we are the *same as regards the kind of humanity* . We have part in His humanity. We are all of one. It is not a question of unity, but *kind* .
F.C.H. That is the means by which we arrive at it.
J.T. He has brought us into His own humanity as risen and glorified.
A.W.R. The Man "out of heaven".
J.T. Yes. As the heavenly One, such also the heavenly ones -- a wonderful thought! And I believe that is what "perfect" means. He has reached a condition He can share with us; otherwise He would have had to remain alone. "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone" (@John 12:24). Think of His sharing His humanity with us! Of course. He is personally always God, and as Man anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions (@Hebrews 1:9).
C.G. That is a wonderful thought -- sharing in His humanity.
J.T. He is *no longer now alone*.
F.C.H. It is a necessity if He is not ashamed to call us brethren.
J.T. That is the point. Viewed as His brethren we are not of an inferior *kind of humanity*.
Rem. That was in mind as He took flesh and blood.
J.T. He took part in flesh and blood for a purpose, to accomplish redemption; now He is in another condition. Eve typifies the assembly from this point of view. 'Ishshah' she is called in this connection. Eve is her name after sin came in; 'Ishshah' is her name before there was any sin, and we have part in what that means.
A.W.R. Your reference earlier to "a spirit has not flesh and bones" (@Luke 24:39), enters into this.
J.T. He is not a spirit in this sense, and yet the wonderful thing is that the last Adam is stated to be "a quickening spirit". But He says, expressly, "a spirit has not flesh and bones" (@Luke 24:39), so He is calling attention to the kind of humanity He has now taken on.
{459}
THE GATES OF ZION
@Psalm 87:2; @Isaiah 28:5,6; @Ruth 4:1 - 5
I have in view in reading these passages to speak of gates. It is a subject that begins early in Scripture and has a somewhat wide range, but my thought is to confine my remarks to what we call administration; the gates of a city having that significance. We have reference to both the foundation of a city and its gates; the one is the beginning, and the other the completion of it. The foundation is usually out of sight, but the gates are public and usable actively. We find in @Psalm 87 the idea of the foundation: "His foundation is in the mountains of holiness" (@Psalm 87:1). It is not *the* foundation here, but God's foundation. That thought is taken up in 2 Timothy, as you will remember; the foundation there is not said to be the foundation of the assembly, but God's foundation: whatever that may be; the idea is that it is God's and that it is *firm* . Earth's foundations are spoken of in this way: "He laid the earth upon its foundations: it shall not be removed for ever", (@Psalm 104:5). What is signified in @Psalm 87 is that what God has founded, referring undoubtedly to Zion, is in the mountains of holiness; not only was it a place of strength, but of holiness. The subject is too large to turn aside to it, but it is important to note that the idea of holiness enters into the foundation. The Lord Jesus, we are told, was "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead" (@Romans 1:4); not here by resurrection *from among* the dead, but by resurrection of the dead, and that according to the Spirit of holiness.
The Lord had spoken to His disciples as to the subject of who He was, what men were saying, and when He received an answer to His question. He discerned it to be by revelation of His Father. What an
{460}
interesting matter it was, dear brethren! They answered, 'This one says this, and that one says that'. Jesus says, "But ye, who do ye say that I am?" (@Matthew 16:15) And the answer came. Undoubtedly the Lord was looking for it as coming from the Father through someone; and what a wide field that introduces us into -- what comes from the Father, through human vessels, but nevertheless *from the Father*. Indeed it is a sort of principle upon which God acts when He would answer a question begotten in our hearts, using one specially selected, so that we discern that it is from the Father. We are to have discernment, therefore, to know that such an answer comes directly from God to our hearts. Perhaps there is not one here who has not had an experience like that.
The Lord inquired of His disciples, "Who do ye say that I am?" And Peter, answering, said, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God", (@Matthew 16:16). The Lord said, "flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens" (@Matthew 16:17). The revelation came directly from the Father -- "my Father", He says, "who is in the heavens" (@Matthew 16:17). What a moment it was! Although the Lord's life down here was marked by great moments throughout, this great incident indicates the manner of His relations amongst the disciples. Important things came up constantly, and what occasions they must have been as He would speak with them of many things! @John 13 to 17 is the best example we have of this: the Lord was opening up great thoughts to them, and they asked Him questions, too, and expressed difficulties. On this occasion, Simon says, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God" (@Matthew 16:16). And the Lord says, "Blessed art thou", indicating that if someone has received something from the Father, he is blessed in that sense. What a thought that is to let into our souls! "Blessed are *your* eyes", He said, "because they see" (@Matthew 13:16). Peter, as thus blessed, is a person of peculiar distinction; so,
{461}
indeed, is every true Christian. The saints are dignified by God, especially as receiving communications from Him. We have to remember that, and that the Lord is very much displeased when any disparaging remarks are made about His people. And so He says, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona" (@Matthew 16:17). Simon would never forget, I am sure, that he was called blessed by the Lord Jesus, who gives the reason for it: "for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens" (@Matthew 16:17). The answer came that way. Then the Lord says, "And I also, I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter" (@Matthew 16:18); that is to say, he was *material* -- the kind of material Christ needed. The Lord adds, "and on this rock I will build my assembly" (@Matthew 16:18). It is there Peter is founded. Where is it? It is in the holy mountains! The Lord Himself is the foundation. That is what Peter confessed Him to be. It is a solid and firm foundation marked by holiness.
Then the verse I read in the Psalm says, "Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion more than all the habitations of Jacob". Note the word "more". He loves the habitations of Jacob, but He loves the gates of Zion more. However, He attaches great importance to Jacob's habitations, and He is resentful as to things there that are not suitable to Him. The Lord said to Zacchaeus, "Today salvation is come to this house, inasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham", (@Luke 19:9). He kept the dignity of the man before Him in mind, but He said, "salvation is come". The dwellings of Jacob are to be *saved*. "Thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house" (@Acts 16:31). Salvation comes to them as the Lord has His place in our houses. His eye sees everything, including what is unsuitable, and He has power to deal with it, and does, even to the extent of taking away a loved one. In many ways He deals with conditions that are incongruous, for He does love the habitations of Jacob, but, as I said. He loves the gates of Zion more than these.
{462}
I want now to dwell on this subject *of gates*, and in doing so to illustrate how the New Testament is amplified by the Old. What a mine of wealth it is to draw upon! It is most interesting as we get a thought in the New Testament to go to the Old and see it enshrined there! How carefully each thought is set out! The book of Proverbs speaks of a jewel in a swine's snout; that is, something that is of God in an utterly incongruous setting, but you will never find anything like that in the setting which the Old Testament provides for God's thoughts. You will find the jewels of God from the New Testament are beautifully set in the Old, and so it speaks of Zion's gates. The New Testament ends with this thought. There are twelve gates in the heavenly city, and each gate is a pearl. What perfect unity is suggested in them! Then, there is the idea of entrance through the gates, but think of anyone saying, 'I will go through the gate that suits me: I will not go through that particular gate for something has happened there that I do not like'. The thought before us is the gates of *Zion*, who will slight any one of *those* gates? The Lord loves them, especially when the idea of what they stand for is pronounced. And then, as I said, in the heavenly city there are twelve gates, and each one a pearl; the acme of refinement is expressed in them. One might say much about that, too, but I am speaking now of the unity that is suggested in the twelve, and that each gate is the same -- one pearl. They are all of the same moral value, and the Lord will not brook any slight being cast upon any one of them. He expects us to regard them as part of the heavenly city, for the gate is that by which we enter, and those who wash their robes have right to the tree of life, and to go in by the gates into the city. It is a question of coming in and going out (see @Acts 1:21), and it is instructive to consider how the Spirit of God keeps this before our souls throughout the Scriptures.
{463}
In @Psalm 127, which is a song of degrees, we read of children in the believer's household. The songs of degrees are full of interest; they give degrees of *ascent*, and they include the great idea of the household and the children in it. A point of importance in this particular psalm is, "They shall not be ashamed when they speak with enemies in the gate" (@Psalm 127:5). These children have been brought up relative to the testimony. I do not know of anything more interesting, at least from this point of view, than the growth of children in the knowledge of God -- in the holy thoughts of God. The songs of degrees include that as one of the leading thoughts, and in connection with it, introduce the idea of conflict -- "when they speak with enemies in the gate" (@Psalm 127:5). What a thought for parents to have in their minds for their children, that when conflicts arise -- and they *will* arise -- that they should know what to do. As has often been remarked, the present is the period of the church militant, and children are to be saved, not only in view of having part in the service of the house, but to have part in the conflicts of the testimony; hence the importance of bringing them up according to Scripture so that they might speak with the enemies in the gate, as knowing what to say to them.
Now, the passage in Isaiah says, "In that day will Jehovah of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the remnant of his people; and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate". That is a statement of what the Lord is ready to be to us. It is said in @1 Corinthians 1:30, "But of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption". We need Him with us, and how touching it is that He is ready to be these things to us; and further, God has made Him these things to us. So that we are to stand out in this adornment -- a crown of glory and a diadem of beauty unto the remnant
{464}
of His people. We are in remnant times, when people will say contemptible things about us as being of God in this world, and we may be cast away as worthless. That is the kind of treatment the Lord Jesus received, and we must expect the same if we are true to Him; but then, in all this we are dignified, for to the residue of His people in remnant times Christ is a crown of glory and a diadem of beauty.
Then @Isaiah 28 says, "for a spirit of judgment". I do not know of anything more needful today than a spirit of judgment. We are told that we shall judge angels; and the twelve apostles will judge the twelve tribes of Israel in the great period that is coming. What a place we are to have! Do we realise that God has called us into this? He will be for a spirit of judgment to those who sit in judgment. In Israel there were thrones for judgment -- "thrones of the house of David" (@Psalm 122:5) -- seats of judgment. If we sit in judgment, we are to have the *spirit* of judgment! One often thinks of Jesus in this sense, of whom it says, "they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek", (@Micah 5:1). Think of our blessed Lord standing before those officers who smote Him on the face as if He were nothing, but He was the Judge of Israel! He showed throughout His ministry that He was the Judge of Israel. And then He said to the officers, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?" (@John 18:23). The officers did not mind who Jesus was! They did what they pleased! The Lord was cast out as worthless, and they acted against Him without restraint. That is the treatment the Lord received here, before the Sanhedrim, where the judgment of the high priest was given. Where was the spirit of judgment in all this? Did He not feel it? The Lord did; but the spirit of judgment was there in Him, and He is with all those who truly sit in judgment.
And then, the passage says. He is "for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate". It is the choice
{465}
of the battle-ground. Is there a drifting into partisan feeling instead of a true spirit of judgment? Those marked by the spirit of judgment will say that partisan feeling must not enter into this. The very best cause loses ground as soon as it drifts into a partisan matter. Hence those who have the spirit of judgment say, 'This is God's matter, and we must get it to the position where true judgment is'. Where there is conflict, the Lord is "for strength" to those who take that course. As soon as you make it God's matter, then you will meet conflict. The current of natural feelings is against that. The most sorrowful situation is caused by human feelings -- feelings against persons -- for that is what comes in and the battle is necessary because of that; those who have the spirit of judgment say, 'It must be a question of what is due to the Lord, or nothing. The battle must be turned to the gate. That is where the true spirit of judgment is'. The Lord will be strength to every brother and sister who is set for that. He is for strength to them that turn the battle -- not *at* the gate, but *to* it. You know where the gate is. Every spiritual person knows it.
Another painful situation, dear brethren, is that many overlook the fact that the assembly has *ears*. The assembly is said to have the means of hearing. People often say they knew nothing about a certain difficulty, but why did they not know? If we are in the assembly characteristically, we *shall* know, for the assembly has ears for things relating to the truth that are current. It says of the work at Antioch, that the report concerning the work there "reached the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem" (@Acts 11:22). *That is a principle*. Some lately have ridiculed this word, but the word *principle* is one of the best words there is as used in divine things. What I have been speaking of is a principle which belongs to the assembly characteristically -- that its ears are opened to everything of God that is going on in this world. Our ears are to be opened, and if things that
{466}
seriously affect the testimony are near our doors and we do not know them, we are very remiss. Sometimes we make our ignorance a virtue. We should not excuse ourselves on the ground of our ignorance. Ignorance in this sense is never a virtue. We are to *know*, and those who have the spirit of judgment *do* know -- and further, as I said, they know where the gate is. If the battle is to be turned, it is to bring it to the gate. If you get it there you will get true judgment; things will be put right, for the spirit of judgment is there, and those who sit in judgment are there. They will not listen to the voice of persons moved by mere feelings about a brother. My feelings about a brother may be without foundation or worse, showing that they do not belong to the gate; we want *evidence* -- not feelings -- for the gate. Judgment there is to be on the principle of, "by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned", (@Matthew 12:37). The gate is where the spirit of judgment is, facts are demanded -- concrete evidence in every case. As the Lord Himself says, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil" (@John 18:23).
I wish now to go on to the verses we read in the book of Ruth, to give an example of how this all works out, because Scripture does not speak about a matter without giving us an example of it. This little book is written to develop the great line of testimony -- the royal line -- and in this connection brings in David's genealogy, for that is the ultimate idea. It is the line of Christ, shown fully in @Matthew 1, from Abraham down to David, and through Zorobabel down to Joseph and Mary -- the line of Jesus, the royal line; a most interesting subject. In this book of Ruth, which establishes a link in this great chain, an incident is recorded where Ruth holds up her cloak to be filled with barley, and Boaz, who measured it to her, *went into the city* (@Ruth 3:15). It is the commencement of a great matter, and the principal actor in it goes into the city, not
{467}
consulting this one or that one, and not going into this house or that house; but up to the *gate* of the city; you will notice it says, "And Boaz went up to the gate, and sat down there". This affords instruction to us concerning our assembly matters; our care meetings, as we call them, and our assembly meetings. This chapter has such matters in view. Boaz had a great affair in hand. It has now come to a crisis and he goes up to the gate and sits down there. He is not going to do anything in a hurry; not that things should not be done immediately if they are clear, as Mark repeatedly says, "immediately". But with Boaz there is no undue haste or natural pressure in the deliberation at all.
Then it says the kinsman who had the right of redemption came by. Unto him, Boaz said, "Thou, such an one". Is it by accident that such a man comes by? No! When we are moving along right lines things will happen such as this, and so the needed brother came along, it was divine ordering. Boaz did not have to seek him or send for him; he is available; and Boaz said to him, "turn aside, sit down here". Boaz is sitting down and now this man sits down. Then Boaz "took ten men of the elders of the city, and said. Sit down here. And they sat down". Thus we have *twelve* men. Are we not now going to get right thoughts and a right decision? Be assured that we are. I am speaking of a most practical thing, and further, God is in this matter. Boaz is not going to take advantage of anyone. Anyone who takes advantage of a brother, or moves secretly to gain his ends, is not approved by God. This is an important matter in which others are considered, and that being so they must be present, and not only so, there must be sufficient testimony also. Matters cannot be settled with the principals absent. A person who is being arraigned should not be absent when judgment is being executed. That is not the spirit of judgment at all, beloved brethren. Let us be truly Christians -- men of God who can deal with matters
{468}
which arise amongst us, so that we might go on with the testimony and not lose the Lord's presence.
Now listen to what Boaz says, in effect, to this kinsman: 'You are directly concerned in this matter of which I am thinking, but you have a prior claim; which is an important matter here. I am considering for the testimony of God; it concerns the royal line; it concerns the inheritance of God; it is a matter of raising up the name of the dead'. Now, what is to be done? Everybody concerned, who would have a question to raise in the matter is present. Ruth is not here, but she has no question to raise; her part is all settled. It was a question between herself and Boaz, but there is a kinsman who has a prior claim, and Boaz says, I will not move until this claim is settled. It is a question of the spirit of judgment, of what is right, of what is due to God and to every one involved. The matter can now proceed, so it says, "he took ten men". They were available. There must be witnesses; and everything must be in the open; and so here are ten men of the city; these with Boaz and the other kinsman, all sitting down -- twelve of them. Will they not get help from God? Certainly they will get a right judgment from God. This is a matter that concerns the testimony and everything must be clear as in the light of the sun; as indeed Solomon so beautifully puts it, "Fair as the moon, clear as the sun, terrible as troops with banners" (@Song of Songs 6:10). This is what the judgment of God is; indeed, what the assembly is in type. We must not treat with impunity the gates of Zion; the judgment of God is there, and woe be to him that disregards that judgment; it is terrible as troops with banners, but it is fair as the moon and clear as the sun.
These men sit down to hear Boaz, and what a brother he was! He says to this kinsman. You have a right prior to mine. He does not in any way seek to usurp this right. He says to him, "Naomi, who is come back out of the country of Moab, sells the allotment that
{469}
was our brother Elimelech's. And I thought I would apprise thee of it and say. Buy it in the presence of the inhabitants, and in the presence of the elders of my people. If thou wilt redeem it, redeem; but if thou wilt not redeem, tell me, that I may know; for there is none to redeem besides thee; and I am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it. And Boaz said. On the day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance. And he that had the right of redemption said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar mine own inheritance. Redeem thou for thyself what I should redeem, for I cannot redeem it", @Ruth 4:3 - 6. Let me suggest, dear brethren, that Ruth comes into this matter as representing the assembly. The other kinsman apparently could undertake the matter if it were not for Ruth. Many judgments may go through with Ruth left out! Do we consider for the assembly when reaching judgments, or are we in principle leaving Ruth out?
Well now, Boaz says, "thou must buy it also of Ruth". The assembly must be brought in. The great decisions of Christendom, as I might speak of them, are invariably made without Ruth: they leave the assembly out. Let us think of Ruth in our deliberations, for they are assembly matters. This applies to every matter that comes up in our meetings. It is a question of Ruth, as it were, and as she is brought in, everything is settled. Boaz is the only man that can meet the situation. He would have Ruth, and we must have her, too. That was the point at issue: if the inheritance is to be secured, full place must be given to assembly truth and principles, and that may expose us. If we are not rich enough, or great enough, to make full room for the truth of the assembly, we cannot have the inheritance, she is bound up with it. Let us see, dear brethren, that the assembly is not ignored in matters that have to be adjusted amongst us. We are responsible to hold
{470}
on to the truth of the assembly; caring for assembly order is of all moment now, and if it be that, then all mere personal feeling must go. I may have to expose myself by owning that I am not rich enough to give up my personal inheritance, or that I cannot redeem without marring my inheritance, but if I value the assembly and recognise the Lord's rights in connection with it, then everything else must be surrendered so that what is of Himself might prevail, and that all may be done in relation to the spirit of judgment in the gates of Zion. It will be observed that in presenting the matter of the inheritance to the kinsman, Boaz said he must buy it *also* of Ruth; that is, her claim must be recognised: and then also the name of the dead must -- through her, of course -- be raised up on his inheritance. That is, all the thoughts attaching to Israel (compare @Romans 9:1 - 5) and Israel itself are to be raised up through the remnant. Christ will effect all this.
{471}
SERVICE MANWARD LEADING TO WORSHIP
@Exodus 4:27 - 31; @Exodus 12:21 - 28; @Acts 11:25,26; @Acts 13:1,2
J.T. These scriptures indicate how the worship of God may be the outcome of service rendered to the saints by those qualified for this. It is seen in the passages read, first in Moses and Aaron, then in Moses, and then in Barnabas and Saul. Worship is seen to be the outcome of teaching or other ministry. It follows that the ministry depends on the ministers who are themselves dependent upon divine resources. In the first passage we have "the mountain of God" where the two brothers meet; Aaron kisses Moses, that is, there is brotherly affection between the ministers. Then, "Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him, and all the signs that he had commanded him. And Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the children of Israel; and Aaron spoke all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and did the signs before the eyes of the people. And the people believed. And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, ... they bowed their heads and worshipped".
W.M. Were the signs to accredit the ministers?
J.T. Yes. Moses had said to Jehovah at the beginning of the chapter, "They will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice; for they will say, Jehovah has not appeared to thee" (@Exodus 4:1). And then we have the signs. In the New Testament the service of the ministers was confirmed by "the signs following". The Lord will never fail those who minister. He will accredit them, not now in the way of public miracles, but in what in the circumstances is sufficient. There is still the need for those who minister to be accredited to the saints, and the Lord *will* accredit them.
{472}
W.F. What is in your mind as to the service of God in this connection? Would it include the ministry of those who serve as leading to the end which is in view in the ministry, the worship of God?
J.T. What I have in mind is service in the sense of the worship of God. His people, being prepared for it, are led to it through ministry. The end of the service in @Exodus 4 was worship by God's people. This is particularly seen in this chapter and in chapter 12. There are also other instances. The service or teaching of Barnabas and Saul for a year in the assembly at Antioch brings it clearly before us. The result was that "they were ministering to the Lord". That is not in mind at all in much service that is carried out today. Many professed servants -- some real to a point -- go no further in their thoughts than the relief of men.
E.B.G. Do the circumstances brought before us in this chapter give an indication that God places great value upon ministry, in that He continues with the thought in the face of the apparent reluctance of Moses to take up the service?
J.T. I think you see how He overcomes obstacles even in the one who is to be the leading servant. Moses places obstacles in the way, although he is taken up from his infancy with a view to service. When the time comes he is not ready, but the Lord overcomes the obstacles in grace, particularly in furnishing him with a brother. God begins with him in view of the service, beginning with him on the mountain of God. God did not send him to the mountain, but Moses reached it. We are told that he led the flock behind the wilderness and came to the mountain of God. That is all to the credit of Moses, and being there, Jehovah appears to him. That is the first great thought in view of immediate service. Moses came to the mountain of God, where God would make Himself known.
W.F. Have you in mind the beginning of chapter 3?
{473}
J.T. Yes, the mountain of God comes into view in the third chapter, and again in chapter 4 as the meeting-place of the two brothers. Going back to Abraham, we see the mountain of Jehovah as the place of divine provision, so that the ministers understand that they are not cast on their own resources, but it is a matter of God's provision. "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided(@Genesis 22:14)". This is a great thought, a fixed principle reached in relation to Abraham and Isaac. Ministers who are barren of substance do not induce worship in those whom they serve. The minister has to be in wealth. The *great* minister in the New Testament, other than the Lord, is Paul. He speaks of the unsearchable riches of the Christ. The resources are inexhaustible.
A.H.G. Are there two aspects of the ministry presented in the two servants, Moses and Aaron?
J.T. Yes. The first is authority in Moses. Inasmuch as he disclaims ability to speak, the Lord furnishes him with a brother who could "speak well", so that the first direct ministry is from Aaron. The passage states that Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him (verse 28), and all the signs that He had commanded him, and Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the children of Israel, and Aaron spoke all the words that Jehovah spoke unto Moses. The thought is that Aaron represents the *brotherly* feeling here, ultimately developing into the priest. Here he speaks as the mouthpiece of Moses, and speaking must carry with it affection and sympathy. This is most essential in ministry. Moses himself had the words directly from God. The first thing is that one has a message, something to minister, then the next, *how* he does it. Is it merely the communication of divine thoughts, or is the minister in accord with what he is ministering?
R.D.H. Do we get the material for ministry on the mount of God?
{474}
J.T. Yes, that is the thought; where the revelation is made and then where the brothers meet, because brotherly affection is part of the divine provision.
R.D.H. Do we get the mountain at the end of Matthew?
J.T. Matthew corresponds with what we have already had. We have much ministry connected with mountains in that gospel. The Lord goes up into the mountain, and the disciples come to Him *there* (chapter 5).
A.F.G. Is that how ministry is maintained on the divine level -- on the mount of God?
J.T. The mountain speaks of being lifted up above the level of ordinary religion. The idea is elevation morally, so that we are told in Mark that the Lord went up into the mountain, and called whom He would, and chose the twelve that they might be with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach. They go out from that elevation. On the other hand, the aspect presented in Luke is what the minister is *personally*. The Lord began at Nazareth and attention is called to Him there, as it is said, "the eyes of all ... were fixed upon him" (@Luke 4:20). That side of things is presented in Aaron.
Ques. Would the great thing in ministry be to consider for God first?
J.T. Quite so. God had said to Moses, "say to Pharaoh, Thus saith Jehovah: Israel is my son, my firstborn, ... Let my son go, that he may serve me" (@Exodus 4:22,23). That is the order, that he may serve *Me*. There can be no doubt that Moses communicated this to Aaron, and Aaron to the people, and that it would have affected them as we see in verse 31 -- they worshipped. We should keep in mind that the mountain of God is the place of divine resource where God provides. The brother is provided there, as we have seen.
E.B.G. What is your thought in regard to the brother? In the first scripture, Aaron met Moses, and
{475}
then in @Acts 11 Barnabas goes to seek out Paul. Have you something before you in that connection?
J.T. Yes, the two men together. So that there is scope for radiation of brotherly affection. We are told that Aaron kissed Moses -- Jehovah provided him. Moses would understand that it was a divine provision on the mount of God, a concrete and practical evidence of the provision of God. Aaron was a provision for Moses. "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?" (@Exodus 4:14) Then God directs Aaron to go to meet Moses; the meeting takes place in the mount of God, and Aaron kissed him, that is, the brother is ready where he is needed. Moses needed him. It was God's provision.
E.T.S. So that there are not only public evidences of relationship, but evidences of affection in the kissing.
J.T. Yes, that is the point. He was really a brother. He kissed his brother, having taken the journey to meet him. Jehovah says, "Behold, he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart"?(@Exodus 4:14) Now we have the thing verified. He went to meet him on the mountain of God and kissed him, so that the brotherly relation is settled and confirmed, and Moses begins at once to tell Aaron what God has said to him. It says, "Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him, and all the signs that he had commanded him": that is, Moses showed that he was not concerned with having any advantage over his brother; he tells him all, there is no reserve. He might have been selfish and concerned about being superior to his brother. He might have held things back and intimated to him that he had an advantage over him. But there is transparency, and his transparency leads to the telling out of things. All this is happy and had a good effect.
E.T.S. So that there was really nothing of officialism about him, was there?
J.T. No, and no thought of any reserve. Reserve
{476}
tends to limit the outflow of affection. Frankness and transparency have a great place in divine things.
A.H.G. Would this indicate the way in which the servants work together, having in view the great end of the service of God?
J.T. You have it worked out here in affection and confidence. They shared what had already been provided in connection with the mountain of God, and then they come to the people, and in the ministry they show this beautiful spirit.
A.F.G. I suppose the ministry is greatly affected by these brotherly relations?
J.T. Very much. That is one idea in them. Love is the great thing, "the greater of these is love" (@1 Corinthians 13:13). Love is of God, and it is marked by simplicity and transparency. Confidence is thus established so that ministers themselves radiate what is in mind. The persons who are ministered to understand as they see the ministers. And so Luke presents the Lord as to what He was *personally* in His ministry at the outset.
A.F.G. So that there is a wonderful result here almost immediately. The people believe.
J.T. That is what we should notice. There are immediate results if what the ministers present is seen in them livingly.
W.M. Does God get His portion in that they not only believed, but they worshipped?
J.T. Yes. They believed what was said. That is to say, the presentation of the truth carried its own commendation. They come to the people. These two men, simple, frank and open, bear all the evidence of having had to do with God and receiving from Him. Then the next thing is, "when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped". The ministry discloses what God is. The ministers are equal to it, but then God had come in
{477}
and visited them in their affliction. A great feature of ministry is to bring God in.
W.F. That would be the impression that Moses had received at the burning bush -- who God was and His thoughts about His people.
J.T. Yes. It is bringing God in here. Of course ministry presents truth, and conveys doctrine, but it brings God in. The testimony is that God Himself had visited His people.
Ques. In that way the ministers would convey the feelings of God to the people in their service?
J.T. I think so. Aaron had been provided, that is the principle. They were united, they love one another, there is no jealousy, and what they say carries weight; so that Israel would say, 'What they tell us is true, God Himself has certainly come in'.
J.F.S. Are we to understand that this mountain is a type of Christ?
J.T. It is a symbol of divine provision, and of course all is in Christ. It is one of the "ancient mountains" mentioned in the blessing of Joseph in @Deuteronomy 33. Genesis contains the ancient things and it is one of the mountains of Genesis. It comes in here in the way of ministry. Everything is set out in Christ; a mountain suggests strength, stability. "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (@Genesis 22:14). This clearly is a question of provision, or divine furnishing.
Ques. Later on, God says, "I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam" (@Micah 6:4). Would Miriam have a part in this service?
J.T. Miriam comes in later, but that is another matter. She serves in the second chapter in regard to Moses himself, although her name is not given in Scripture until she is actually ministering to Jehovah in chapter 15. According to the prophets she is one of three whom God sent before Israel (@Micah 6:4).
F.I. Would she represent the subjective side? Whereas the two whom we are considering at the
{478}
moment present more the objective side, in order that service might be presented authoritatively.
J.T. Yes, that is what she stands for. Moses and Aaron are here as from God in the way that Christ is the Apostle and High Priest of our confession. They represent that side, but how important it is to represent God not only in what I say, but in what is seen in me, what I am characteristically.
F.I. Do you not think it would help those who minister if it were seen that true service to God in the way of worship can only be produced as the outcome of faith working by love in the ministry?
J.T. Exactly. Matthew gives us more the side of authority, the Lord's authority in view of the assembly; Mark presents the levitical side, in the ministers sent out from the mountain; but Luke presents the *Man*, hence what was personally attractive and ornamental. At His baptism Jesus Himself was beginning to be about thirty years old. It is not only the actual age, but *what He was* at that age. He, having been baptised, was praying, and heaven acknowledged Him, and then we are told that He was led in the wilderness to be tempted of the devil; led *in it*, not into it (see New Translation). Then He went into the synagogue as was His custom, and stood up for to read, and opened the book at the passage in Isaiah with reference to His anointing. His attractiveness comes before us -- how He read; He sat down and began to speak. Attention is called to what He is as a Minister. In our ministry we are to combine in our services attractiveness with authority in a moral sense.
A.H.G. Does the thought of the wilderness which comes out in Luke and also here have some bearing on this service?
J.T. I think it has. We are reminded of it in the Lord's history, and also in the history of Philip, who is sent down to the wilderness to preach to the eunuch. We gather from this that no mere human or earthly
{479}
resources are needed. All comes from God, the wilderness contributes nothing.
B.S. In both cases where worship is mentioned the people are still in Egypt.
J.T. Yes; the mountain of God is in the wilderness, and in that connection we see the ministers. The spirit of a brother would enter into what was said: "And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped". They were affected by God coming in. In chapter 12 we have the skill of the minister in condensing his thoughts, not exactly what he is, but the skill in which he ministers. In the first instance we see the beautiful relations of affection between the persons and how they spoke to each other, and also how the speaking was through the brother. Here in chapter 12:21 it is not Aaron that speaks, it is Moses. He called all the elders of Israel, and what he says to them is before us in the seven verses to the end of verse 27, where it says "the people bowed their heads and worshipped". Jehovah's words to him begin with the first verse, and run on to the twentieth verse, that is, twenty verses are taken up with what *God* says to Moses, and seven verses cover what *Moses* said to the people. Now what we have before us here is not the way he spoke, but the skill with which he conveyed the thought without enlarging too much on it. We may gather from this that brethren should not take too long; long addresses do not help.
E.B.G. That is very good, and should commend itself to all. The thought of condensing is important. Should we not be much concerned to avoid needless repetition?
J.T. Yes. We get examples in these great ministers, Moses and Paul, as to how things are to be done.
J.F.S. Was this second worship in advance of the other -- deeper?
{480}
J.T. Well, the wording of the first is as here: "they bowed their heads and worshipped". In the first it was a question of God's love to the people. He had said, "I am come down to deliver them" (@Exodus 3:8); but in this chapter it is what was said about the passover, it is more actual teaching.
R.D.H. Moses said, "Take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood". That is not recorded in the instructions of verses 1 to 20.
J.T. Well that is the principle of ministry; always of course, in keeping with the Scriptures. You may add or subtract or leave out. The hyssop would be Moses¬ own thought. It is the skill of a levite in ministry to convey the impression to those to whom you are ministering that you are very small and insignificant. All greatness must come from God. The hyssop, I suppose, would be the idea of smallness -- "take a bunch of hyssop". Solomon spoke about it. It grew out of the wall. Moses directs that it should be used to "dip ... in the blood that is in the bason, and smear the lintel and the two door-posts with the blood that is in the bason". That brings us to another variation: the word "bason" is not found in the original instructions.
W.F. There is no bason mentioned. It is, "take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts" (@Exodus 12:7).
J.T. Moses puts that in also, no doubt, to make the service practical. Hyssop would be easily obtained.
F.I. Although Moses condenses things in this portion, we get the whole of what was said to him in verses 1 to 20.
J.T. Yes; it would all come out as the Spirit wished to apply it. I am referring to ministry as we have it now. We know "in part" and hence minister "in part". We can thus see that it is important that the prophets speak by two or three, not more, because the saints cannot take in much at a time.
E.B.G. You have remarked elsewhere that it is not necessary to tell all that is known of a subject at one
{481}
time. Attention has been called to the fact that Moses later on would give in detail all that had been said to him. Everything that is from the Lord will find an opportunity for expression.
J.T. The servant often gets a word from the Lord which goes beyond what he may say in a given service. It can be kept. It will come in for another time.
W.F. These verses tell the people what they are to do. It is simplified to them. All that was meant might not be fully entered into at the moment.
J.T. The children are brought into it very beautifully in what Moses says (verse 26). "It shall come to pass, when your children shall say to you. What mean ye by this service? that ye shall say. It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses". That would appeal to the children. The more the children of the saints are in the atmosphere of what is spiritual the better; and of course there should be something that a child can take in. Levitical instinct or skill would lead the minister to consider for the youngest in the audience. I think what Moses said here would appeal to an Israelite's child. Not only were their houses passed over, but he says they were "delivered". Every child would think of that -- his father's house delivered. They would converse with one another, the children would ask, and this is what they were to say. The idea of a house would be understood by a child.
A.H.G. The house would be very much in view in this service?
J.T. Yes. The believer's household has a great place in Exodus. The skill of the minister, seen in Moses here, would lead to his carrying with him all those to whom he is ministering. He would seek to carry the children along and give them something to hold their minds.
{482}
E.B.G. There are also different points at which they worshipped. There is worship in the full sense, which we may look upon as a climax, but there is worship at various stages as progress is made in the truth.
J.T. Yes; we see it in Matthew's gospel -- the children praising in the temple. The Lord valued it (@Matthew 21:15,16). There are those who would keep them out and have them taught by themselves, but the children are brought in here. What is to be said of the passover is in answer to the children's inquiry, "It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses". And immediately "the people bowed their heads and worshipped". I believe that all our meetings for edification ought to induce some movement towards God.
A.H.G. The idea of the house seems to enter very much into the apostle Paul's service. He speaks in the Acts of teaching from house to house. Would that be on the same line?
J.T. It would. On the occasion of the visit of Paul and others to Tyre (@Acts 21:3 - 6), the wives and children accompanied them until they were out of the city. The young were there and you can understand that there was something in Paul that affected them. We are told in @Acts 11:26, that Barnabas and Saul taught a large crowd for a year in the assembly at Antioch. There is hardly another scripture like that. I think it is to bring out what is seen in these two brothers in their ministry at Antioch. We have been likening Barnabas to Aaron; Barnabas went to seek out Saul. God told Moses concerning Aaron, "he goeth out to meet thee" (@Exodus 4:14). Here it says of Barnabas, "having found him [Saul], he brought him to Antioch. And so it was with them that for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly". I suppose "in the assembly" would indicate the attitude of their
{483}
minds. In another sense the assembly would be composed of the "crowd", but the ministry would be marked by the dignity of the assembly.
W.M. Does it seem in that way that the assembly affords the atmosphere for ministry?
J.T. Yes, that is the point. God is taking up the assembly now among the gentiles. These ministers are teaching in Antioch for a year, they go through all the seasons of the year, but the thought of the assembly is present. We can understand that assembly features would be formed. Barnabas must have considered Saul as especially fitted for the work there. He must have discerned earlier the features that were there. According to chapter 9, Barnabas took Saul and brought him to the apostles and related to them how he had seen the Lord in the way and that He had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus. So that he must have discerned what was there, and probably discerned more than is recorded.
E.B.G. How would that work out in our day? Would it work out in discerning and seeking out those who had evidenced that they had light and help from God in the local surroundings?
J.T. It would work out in many ways. Suppose a brother looks after the gospel, he must be a *preacher*, not an official; the brethren have not appointed him, for the assembly does not preach or teach. He would have the need of the locality in mind, and that would lead him to invite a brother who had power in preaching. Barnabas would see what was needed in Antioch and say to himself, 'Well, I could go on here, but I know a man who could do better just now'. I think that is the principle.
E.T.S. Like Aaron kissing Moses really.
J.T. Yes, he recognised that Moses had something more than he.
{484}
F.I. I suppose Barnabas was aware of the commission given to the apostle with regard to the gentiles. It is at this point that the gentiles are brought in.
J.T. There can be no doubt that Barnabas knew more than is actually stated. The Lord had said much to Saul at his conversion, as he himself states in @Acts 26. Barnabas had known of Saul, and he knew that he would fit into this work. There would be some indication anticipatively as to anyone that the Lord would use in a special way. Prophecy going before is a principle as to ministers (@1 Timothy 1:18).
E.B.G. Are you thinking of what Paul said to Timothy when he committed the charge to him "according to the prophecies as to thee preceding" (@1 Timothy 1:18)?
J.T. That is what I had in mind. Prophecy going before would be an indication of the mind of God about him, but the laying on of the hands of the elderhood (@1 Timothy 4:14), would come into it and confirm it. Barnabas is acting somewhat in that way here.
W.F. He was not sent by the assembly at Jerusalem, they had commissioned Barnabas to go as far as Antioch and a great number were added to the Lord through his ministry, but he did not keep the work to himself. The work was progressing and he saw another who could carry it on.
J.T. He knew something of Saul, and no doubt had some inkling of the prophecy going before. There were indications of the mind of God about this man. Barnabas took him to the apostles. We do not hear of such a transaction with any other man. Barnabas is said to have been a good man and full of the Holy Spirit. A man of such features is with God.
A.H.G. In Samuel we read of one who could tell a good deal about David before he came out in a public way (@1 Samuel 16:18).
J.T. That is helpful. He could tell a good deal about him; he could speak of his qualities, adding, "Jehovah is with him" (@1 Samuel 16:18).
{485}
A.H.G. So that one who is concerned for the service of God would be on the look-out for such features coming to light.
J.T. I think we ought to be on the look-out amongst the younger brethren. That is what is needed, "the Lord hath need of him" (@Mark 11:3). That would be in Barnabas¬ mind: the Lord had need of Saul, and he found him and brought him to the place and worked with him. The younger men are coming on and we should have an eye on them.
E.B.G. In that connection it is important to see that there is no selfish end to serve and that all personal interests and desires must be subordinated to the great gain of the testimony and what God has in view?
J.T. I do not know of a passage that illustrates that more than the one before us. Barnabas is a great servant and yet he seeks out a young brother and they are together in service for a year in Antioch.
E.T.S. Is there any difference between the assembly and the "large crowd" in verse 26?
J.T. We can picture the scene. The word assembly would certainly point to people. The teaching is not in a place like the school of Tyrannus, but "in the assembly", so that it appears to me here that it would be what was in the minds of Barnabas and Saul, and not simply so many people. We should be instructed in the idea of the assembly and convey it to people. Those taught would gradually come into the assembly, and of course the result was seen in the assembly that was there in chapter 13.
W.F. We get the expression "crowd" in verse 24 when, as a result of the labours of Barnabas, a large crowd was added to the Lord.
J.T. And again in verse 26, "they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd".
A.F.G. Is the end defined with regard to Antioch in chapter 13?
{486}
J.T. Yes, "Now there were in Antioch, in the assembly which was there, prophets and teachers". The assembly existed through their ministry, and then there was the detail. There were these brothers who ministered to the Lord and fasted.
A.F.G. Why are they specially mentioned here?
J.T. To bring out the wealth that was in that place, all referring back to the word assembly in chapter 11:26 -- the result of the teaching *there*.
J.C. Do you think that Barnabas had in his mind that there was a servant who could lead them further than he could?
J.T. Yes. We should observe what intervenes between these scriptures, that is chapter 12. In the end of chapter 11 we have the matter of the collection for the poor saints in Judaea, and Barnabas and Saul are deputed to carry this bounty to Jerusalem. Then at the end of chapter 12 we are told that "the word of God grew and spread itself" (@Acts 12:24). The word had that power, it spread itself, and "Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, having fulfilled the service entrusted to them, taking also with them John, surnamed Mark" (@Acts 12:25). These brothers apparently fulfilled their service, whatever they were asked to do, and they did it well. They are models. That comes in between the chapters we are considering, and then we are told what was at Antioch. It appears as though matters were pausing for some time at Jerusalem, then as the work at Antioch developed and became established, the assembly actually existed in the place, fully furnished and enriched, and the service of God went on. The Lord was ministered to.
A.F.G. Do these men suggest the quality of it?
J.T. That is the idea, the richness of what was there, so that the Holy Spirit can operate from there as a base, sending out ministers.
J.H. Do we gather that their ministry had been of such quality that even in their absence the work proceeded,
{487}
until there was this definite result seen in the beginning of chapter 13?
J.T. It proceeded without them, you mean; that is the way it ought to be. If a brother is ministering in a place he ought not to act as if the thing will cease to exist when he leaves. The word is significant, "the word of God ... spread itself" (@Acts 12:24). Elsewhere it says, "the word of God is not bound" (@2 Timothy 2:9). It works of itself.
E.T.S. Would you say a word on ministering to the Lord? What would that really convey?
J.T. Ministering to the Lord has the character of worship. The word used means service: here it is what is towards Him, ministered to Him, foreshadowed by the service maintained in the tabernacle and temple; so that glory to God in the assembly is the full result.
{488}
FELLOWSHIP AND ASSOCIATION WITH CHRIST
@Luke 5:l-ll; @John 21:5 - 14; @Matthew 17:26,27
J.T. The scriptures read, involving fishing scenes, are intended of the Lord to help us first in regard to fellowship (@Luke 5); then in regard to Christ in resurrection (@John 21); and finally (@Matthew 17), in regard to sonship, our association with Him in sonship. The reason why fellowship is suggested in @Luke 5, is that we have the word *partners* used twice. There are two words, both signifying fellowship. The first, in verse 7, is partnership that can be reckoned on to afford assistance; the second time the word occurs, in verse 10, it denotes fellowship in the true sense, what we have in common. I think it will be seen that the Spirit of God has recorded the facts of this remarkable miracle with this end in view; for there are many who are glad to receive help, and count on others for it, but who do not go so far as the recognition of fixed relations in fellowship.
Ques. Do you suggest that there are two kinds of partnership?
J.T. Well, it is rather two phases of the same thing, the first is in the sense that others are obligated to help you spiritually, and you count on that. In a certain way generally, all are in that relation. So, in the need that existed, they called on their partners in the other ship to come and help them. They were in the other ship, but still partnership existed.
Rem. The word used in verse 7 is also used in @Hebrews 6:4 -- "partakers of the Holy Spirit".
J.T. Quite so. Here the point we are seeking to make is help, in the sense that there are others who could help on this principle, and they are called upon to help.
M.W.B. Is that the first way in which we should express fellowship practically?
{489}
J.T. Well, it ought to be an incentive to come into it, to come into what is available, if we obtain spiritual help, for it is only by the Spirit of God that we really get help; and if help is obtained in a spiritual way as from the Spirit of God, there should be a further move to *where this is*.
C.A.C. Is that thought largely entered into in 1 Corinthians? I was thinking of the power for edification in the assembly.
J.T. It does. The ministry, especially prophetic ministry, extends far and wide, and people get help from it, and that ought to be a great incentive to move in the direction whence the help comes. Is that in your mind?
C.A.C. Yes.
D.L.H. Would you say that all Christians are in this fellowship that you are speaking of?
J.T. Well, it is a question of the obligation to help, but I would hardly go so far as to include them in the fellowship, because the word in verse 10 as applied to Christians contemplates mutual obligation to be free of evil. The use made of it in 1 Corinthians implies that we are obligated to one another in regard to our associations in the light; but certainly as those who know that, we are ready to own our obligations to Christians, to help them, whoever or wherever they may be. I was only thinking of the idea of help, that there were those who could be reckoned on for help in time of need. That was what I had in mind, not to extend the idea of fellowship in 1 Corinthians to all, because it cannot be extended to them save in the sense that they are free of evil, at least in principle. But then, there is the obligation to *help* any Christian.
Ques. Would Aquila and Priscilla be an example of this in taking Apollos to them, and then the brethren writing to the disciples to receive him, and when he had come he "contributed much to those who believed through grace"?(@Acts 18:27)
{490}
J.T. That is a good example. Apollos was not yet fully owned as in fellowship, but there was much there evidently to indicate that he was on the way, and needed help, and Aquila and Priscilla were ready to extend it, and to do it well, so that he came into the fellowship and the service of God, and was commended and commendable. If there had not been help at that time, and given in the way it was, he would probably have continued as he had been, in an uncertain state and relation.
M.W.B. If there is need in one locality, is it within the scope of fellowship to ask for help from another?
J.T. Well, I am glad you mention that, because there is a constant danger of what we may call Congregationalism -- independency and self-sufficiency in meetings. Whilst in a certain sense it is designed that the local assembly should be self-sustaining, as having the Spirit and the elderhood, yet the universal fellowship must not be lost sight of, and that any help or ability to help anywhere should be available, and availed of too, in a seemly and subject way. The thought fits in here, they were within range, it was not a message sent, they were *beckoned* to.
M.W.B. Though they were in another boat, they were in the same partnership.
J.T. You have in your mind that the two boats might be used to illustrate two meetings?
M.W.B. Yes, I was wondering whether we should not only be attracted by the advantages of help being available, but is there not a sense in which we should accept the obligation of rendering help?
J.T. Well, I think we ought to hold ourselves in that attitude, not to be ready to say. 'It is not my business', because it is; whether we intervene profitably or otherwise, certainly we should make it a matter of our business, as governed by general principles, in the way of prayer. Another thing that comes out here is that the Lord is in the midst of all this, the situation
{491}
arises from an act of His, not an act of evil, but an act of Christ, bringing out who He is; and it would be in the way of blessing, which this may be taken to illustrate. Surely we should be ready to lend a hand and make the most of the blessing, that nothing should be lost, because there are diversities of gifts; the man whom the Lord may use to get souls, to launch out into the deep, may not be able to teach the word of God as Paul could, so that a teacher would be useful, if available.
Ques. When they heard that Peter was at Lydda, they *at Joppa* sent for him. Would you make a difference between that and beckoning?
J.T. Well, I think there is a difference. They were very urgent in sending for Peter -- he must not fail to come. Then the message from Cornelius was the result of direction from heaven to send for him. So that those who can help should be always ready, and availed of by those who are in need, whether in the way of blessing or dealing with evil.
Ques. Did the testimony come into Europe on that principle?
J.T. "Come over into Macedonia, and help us", (@Acts 16:9). Quite so. This partnership is very convenient, people who go along together, and can beckon to each other. It indicates an understanding between them; and it is well that brethren in localities should understand each other.
M.W.B. We have sometimes limited the invitation to questions of need or service, and difficulties. Would it extend so far as circumstances where there is a great depletion of the number of brethren available for the Supper? I was thinking of such circumstances as occur in the north of Scotland, when a large number of brothers are away on their calling. Would it be becoming for a meeting nearby to recognise their obligations and go over and be present at the Supper?
{492}
J.T. Very much so. It is a question of supporting the weak.
C.A.C. That is very good.
Ques. In saying that Peter guarded himself in going, were you referring to those he took with him?
J.T. Yes. In meeting difficulties at Jerusalem he was particular to mention "these six brethren" who had accompanied him -- an indication that we may take as many as possible if we feel special witness as to any matter is needed; and the sequel showed he was wise in that. If there was any question about it, he had these brethren to appeal to. So that in all these matters we should not expose ourselves, in the extension of help, to the charge of interference. If there are those who are ready to make a charge of interference, it is important to forestall them.
Ques. How do you regard the fishes? It seems the Lord is blessing Simon in this great haul of fishes.
J.T. Yes, it is a scene of blessing; it is introduced by the reference to the word of God, there were those who "pressed on him to hear the word of God". If the brethren come together to hear the word of God, you can look for something. The Lord called attention to that, and He acted according to the circumstances. It was a seaside matter; it is not a resurrection scene, it is in the sea -- God's way in the seas, and we see the abundance there is. I think the Lord is on these lines: He saw the ships standing there, and entering into one which was Simon's, He asked him to draw out a little way, so that He taught from the sea, from the boat. It is a suggestion of what is in the deep -- the realm of God's sovereignty; therefore the scene is one of blessing. In the midst of it we have this great acknowledgment of Simon, which we should look for in times of blessing -- not simply the catch, but the judgment of sin, true repentance towards God. He fell at Jesus¬ knees and said, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man. Lord". But then the Lord was there; it was not a situation
{493}
where the Lord would depart from him. It was a situation where Peter's need could be met. The Lord was there, but He made no effort to preserve the fish; the ships were in danger of sinking, but the *Lord* did not remedy that part; it was a question of partnership; help coming in *that* way, and that is exactly what comes into view.
Ques. Does it connect with @Psalm 8:8, "whatever passeth through the paths of the seas"?
J.T. Exactly; all was put under Him, really His deity is implied; it refers to creation. The sea is a great scene of activity on the part of the Lord, and here there are remarkable results, but He does not attempt to remedy the danger of losing people, that was for the partners; that principle of help now comes in.
Rem. These conditions are sometimes allowed to test the availability of love, and the ability to see where help is needed.
J.T. That is exactly the point, I think, to bring out the working of the divine nature in us, what God delights in. The Lord does so much, but then He leaves much; it is for the partners; and that, of course, implies every one of us, no one should regard himself as exempt from the obligation to help the saints.
Ques. Is what you were saying illustrated in @Isaiah 41:6? "They helped every one his neighbour, and each said to his brother. Take courage".
J.T. They were going to make a god there.
M.W.B. That was partnership in an evil matter.
J.T. It should rebuke us as to whether we are as diligent in our partnership as the idol-makers are. The partners here in Luke were equal to their obligation. The tenth verse would bring out that they were more than helpers, they were really in heart together -- really partners: that is what God looks for in our fellowship. It is a fixed thing with us. The mutual astonishment comes in there, *all* were affected by the work of God.
{494}
M.W.B. So they were not only one in action, they were one in being.
J.T. That is what verses 9 and 10 mean. It says, "For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken: and so was also James, and John, the Sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon". They were not called brethren here, but just "sons of Zebedee". The point is, they are partners with Simon, that is, really with him in the thing, no jealousy existent.
D.L.H. The word in the original means that they shared and shared alike.
J.T. That helps us. I should like to see that spirit amongst us and generally, people marked by proper feelings about others, being affected by what God is doing; and then the Lord, as it were, honours that in saying to Simon, "Fear not; henceforth thou shalt be catching men" -- not merely one event, but it would be his *occupation*.
L.D.M. Verse 7 says, "they beckoned to their partners", changing from Simon to them all.
J.T. I think it is to bring out the collective thought.
A.W.G.T. Does what you say preserve us from the independency as to help from brethren nearby?
J.T. Well, it does. Independency is often expressed in brethren in a locality saying of a certain thing, 'It is our matter'. Maybe your ship will sink and you will lose everything! When the spirit and attitude of independency becomes fixed, the Lord may say, "Your house is left unto you", (@Luke 13:35).
Rem. Then it is a great matter that in our localities we should be spiritually near one another, and view one another for good, so that power would come in.
J.T. You can see how the Lord intends that; @1 Corinthians 12 shows that the economy of the assembly is in that setting.
Ques. Would Judah inviting Simeon to help him in his lot be an illustration?
{495}
J.T. A good illustration. We have often noted that Simeon's lot was inside Judah's, which would have a tendency to vex; but it did not, excellent relations prevailed between them, so that Simeon helped Judah in his warfare to secure his possession, and Judah helped Simeon. It is really a love matter. The danger of sinking brought out the relation of partnership, and readiness to help, and then *feeling together* (verses 9,10), due to the great results.
M.W.B. Just as Paul and Barnabas, as they went up to Jerusalem, declared on their way the conversion of the gentiles, causing great joy, rejoicing in the mercy of God to the nations.
J.T. That is good. Then another thing is that Simon is to be catching men: that it is to be his occupation: "thou shalt be catching men". He is not to be simply a person known to be a fisherman, but one who *catches men*.
J.W. Why does the Lord single out Peter in this service?
J.T. I think He intended to make him first: "First ... Peter", (@Matthew 10:2). Luke does not give us the calling of the apostle as Matthew and Mark do; the first mention we have of Simon is in chapter 4; and they are not seen as pairs of brothers in Luke, they are called rather informally. It is to bring out the circumstances, that in their very midst the work of God was going on, the word of God was being spoken, but it did not come in through them, it was spoken by the Lord, and they are carrying it on.
Ques. Does the thought of catching men give the idea of bringing into fellowship?
J.T. In the last verse read it says, "leaving all they followed him". That is the first thing, if we are to take on the catching of men, we are to be known as *followers of* Jesus, as having left *all*. The ships were brought to land, however; everything received needed attention. Another thing is that they were washing
{496}
the nets before this happened, showing that it was a well-managed business. The Lord looks for conditions like this in our ordinary occupation if He is going to choose us for His service.
Ques. What are we to understand by the breaking of the nets?
J.T. The circumstances brought out the reality of the partnership, there are other things in it, not in mind today, but imperfection marked what was used. Perfection in this sense awaited Christ's death and resurrection. The net of @John 21 did *not* break.
Ques. Does Paul, in @Philippians 1, referring to the circumstances in which he was, use those circumstances to draw out the love and support of the brethren?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Does Lydia apprehend these fixed relations of fellowship when she says, "come into my house and abide there" (@Acts 16:15)?
J.T. I think she does. Liberty for the apostle to abide there would be a fixed matter; her hospitality would be reckoned on, so that as Paul and Silas were released, they went to her, as if the door was always open. Those of us who move about the country know that there are certain whom we can reckon on in this way. The Spirit of God says that when the apostle visited Melita, the chief man of the island showed hospitality *in a very friendly way* -- not simply hospitality, but "in a very friendly way" (@Acts 28:7). That is the kind of feeling that marks a hospitable house, that you are welcome. A friend is, in a sense, more than a brother. The term *brother* is somewhat formal and official, but a friend is different. It is not that one is here to criticise, but there are many touches you get in one house that you do not get in another.
C.A.C. I was thinking of the expression at the end of @3 John: "Greet the friends by name"; @3 John 14 that would indicate that this friendly character should come into evidence in the last days particularly.
{497}
W.E.B. What is specially chronicled of Hushai is that he was the king's friend (@1 Chronicles 27:33).
J.T. Yes. He came to Jerusalem, out of which David was rejected, as Absalom came in; he came in at the same time, and that meant the overthrow of Absalom -- friendliness to David.
Ques. You would not suggest that acceptance of friendliness from the chief man of the island of Melita compromised the fellowship in any way?
J.T. I do not think so at all; I do not think the Spirit of God would record it as He does if that were so. As a result of this friendliness, Paul is received there, and he stayed a long time, and striking testimony to the power of God was rendered. And as Paul and those with him were leaving the island, they were furnished with such things as they needed. Surely the Spirit conveys in the narrative that more than mere natural kindness was stirred up.
Rem. It says, "The friend loveth at all times", (@Proverbs 17:17).
Ques. Would it be illustrated in the way that Abraham cared for those three who came to him, and then he is spoken of as the Friend of God?
J.T. Quite so.
C.A.C. Is this a step on the way to what you have before you in @John 21?
J.T. I thought that @John 21 leads up to a further thing, that is, Christ *on the shore* . He is not in the midst of the circumstances, but they are, these seven brothers; and it says, "And early morn already breaking, Jesus stood on the shore" (@John 21:4). It is another position; He is outside their operations, not in them, but He is directing them in them. The end in mind is on the shore, and the Lord is there.
C.A.C. Should the fellowship, as you have spoken of it, have that in view?
J.T. I think so. Fellowship is a wilderness position, as I understand, in the presence of evil, and requiring
{498}
the wall of fellowship to protect us, but then from that we go on to Christ risen. The circumstances may need correction, as they did here, for serious defection had taken place, but still the Lord calls them *children*, which is a very touching expression, showing that He is expressing fatherly care over them. He puts it to them as to whether they had any meat. It is not like @Luke 24, "Have ye anything here to eat?" (@Luke 24:41) It is, "Children, have ye anything to eat?" -- a very tender, gracious way to address them at a time when they were not right. The Lord's question in @Luke 24 is a test for any gathering, as to what is *there*, what the brethren have. @John 21 does not say, "Have ye anything here to eat?" (@Luke 24:41) but the Lord is *in* the circumstances in @Luke 24; He was in the assembly, where a disordered state of things had arisen. But in @John 21 He is on the shore and the disciples in the sea, and so He just says, "have ye anything to eat?" The answer is, "No".
M.W.B. You are emphasising that it is not "here" in @John 21, for He was not in those circumstances.
J.T. Quite so; whereas in @Luke 24 it is "here", because He was in them.
Ques. Is @John 21 the Colossian setting?
J.T. Well, it is somewhat. Paul regulates the conditions in Colosse by letter, not having seen the saints there; so that it is regulation at a distance. Their order was good, but they were in danger of certain things.
J.W. In difficulties in a locality, is it for us to think of the food question?
J.T. If there are difficulties and you have not sat down together and faced the difficulty, you will not get much meat: not that the Lord does not help us, He does -- the Lord here is dealing with such a state of things. There were seven of them, and the leading ones mentioned are Simon Peter and Thomas -- not very encouraging in the circumstances, because Peter had not yet been fully restored; and they went off
{499}
fishing. "I go to fish",(@John 21:3) Simon says. Well, it is an enterprise without the Lord.
Rem. That must of necessity end in their having no meat.
J.T. Exactly. They acknowledged it at once. Then the Lord, instead of telling them to launch out into the deep, says, "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find". The *right* side suggests power. Here the Lord undertakes to do something from the shore, with the result that Simon Peter goes to the shore -- the Lord becomes attractive now. It is no more "Depart from me": he casts himself into the sea; he was naked; that is, exposed in all this. Whenever the Lord takes on anything. He reaches the point at once. Peter is exposed, he is naked. Paul was urgent that he should not be found naked (@2 Corinthians 5:3).
Rem. Peter moving as he did proves that there was affection for the Lord.
J.T. That is what comes out. When the Lord is operating for adjustment, whatever is there comes into evidence. So John discerns the Lord. It is a question now of going on to resurrection, of joining the Lord where He is, not getting Him into our circumstances, but of reaching the Lord where He is at once.
W.E.B. Is that where the true features of love are found in the saints, as joining the Lord in resurrection?
J.T. Yes. If you get a note like John's, "It is the Lord", every fibre of one who loves Him will be brought into action; so that Peter drew his coat around him and cast himself into the sea.
M.W.B. Is there a suggestion in the fact that the first move on right lines was one of obedience? We must be subject in filling out the requirements of the Corinthian ministry before we can be drawn over to the other side.
J.T. That is right. The Colossians apparently were quite clear as to order, but the point, I think, in the epistle is *Christ*, "Christ is everything, and in all" (@Colossians 3:11). So
{500}
that if I love Him, as soon as the note is struck, "It is the Lord", all my affections are brought into action -- I *must* be with Him. Then the passage read in Matthew brings us into companionship with Christ in a public way -- "for me and thee". We are exactly in His position *here*.
M.W.B. Would you say one word about the difference between the partnership in view in @Luke 5 and the way they shared together in @John 21, which is figuratively resurrection? In what sense is fellowship or communion known?
J.T. Well, the Lord in directing them to bring in the fishes they had taken, is honouring them; they were *great* fishes, not viewed as boat-loads, but the number is given, one hundred and fifty-three. It is a question of count. They are to be used; so that it is a question of what *we have* as with the Lord in resurrection. And the Lord says. Come and *dine* -- a dignified thought, not merely something to eat.
M.W.B. Would it answer to eternal life, that kind of sharing together?
J.T. Yes. There is great dignity about it, the kind of fish, and the number; and they are to be used. The Lord gives the invitation, everything being ready for them.
C.A.C. Is that rather the thought of fellowship as John presents it in his epistle?
J.T. Just so. It is fellowship *with* in his epistle, not fellowship *of*, as in Corinthians.
C.A.C. I wondered whether @Luke 5 would not suggest the Corinthian fellowship, but @John 21, fellowship as John views it?
J.T. I think that is good. The change of preposition helps. Fellowship *of* is the *character* of the thing, it is not anything in which Christ has part; He does not have part in the partnership in @Luke 5. In John's epistle it is fellowship *with*, the apostles had fellowship with the Father and with His Son, Jesus Christ, and
{501}
then the saints have fellowship with the apostles and with one another.
C.A.C. Would that be the kind of fellowship that would be enjoyed in the land?
J.T. I should say that. And that, of course, links on with sonship as in the scripture read in @Matthew 17. The idea is that *the sons are free* . It is a question of the obligation being put on the Lord to pay the tax, and He uses it to bring out the fact that the sons are free -- to establish spiritual freedom. He could not possibly be under such obligation, but He would not give offence, and at the same time He established that the sons are free -- a very precious thought. And the catching of this one fish -- pointing to divine resources -- is to enable us to fulfil that obligation, but as identified publicly with Christ.
{502}
PREPAREDNESS
@Mark 14:12 - 26; @2 Corinthians 9:1 - 7; @Revelation 19:7,8; @Revelation 8:6
The subject to come before us is *preparedness* -- a thought that is prominent throughout Scripture. The idea of preparation indeed began with God, and extends back to the beginning of His operations, and further back, for His operations were the outcome of His counsels. We find that wisdom was there, as God began to prepare. She says, "When he prepared the heavens I was there" (Proverbs 8:27); and it proceeds to speak of other preparations of God to stress that it was there, that they were all done in wisdom. Referring back thus far we have to conclude that the prominent thought was God preparing in view of the working out of the counsels of His love. So in @Genesis 1 we have a resumption of God's preparations; some evil damage having taken place in what He had done. He begins over again to prepare. @Genesis 1 shows the deliberation with which He undertook the great work; the Spirit of God hovered over the face of the deep, that is, there was feeling as to it; "And God said. Let there be light: and there was light" (@Genesis 1:3). One day after another brought out what was in His mind in the way of preparation, and we see in chapter 2 how, as man was formed, there was further preparation -- the garden, involving skill, taste, thoughtfulness; and Adam being in mind, the intelligence that was in him to work out, as it did So that God worked deliberately, thoughtfully, and with feeling, too, forming a link at once with His great creature, for *Jehovah* appears in chapter 2, as man is in mind.
The thought runs through, specially in the touching words of our Lord Jesus recorded in @John 14. The section begins, "Jesus ... having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end",(@John 13:1) and the
{503}
whole of it, that is chapters 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17, is to be read in the light of those touching words. He assures His feeble disciples, saying, "Let not your heart be troubled" (@John 14:1). A troubled heart prevents the working out of divine thoughts, and the Lord had in His mind to unfold divine thoughts at that time, as indeed always -- at all these meetings the point is the unfolding of the mind of God -- and He would induce a suitable receptive state, an untroubled heart, amongst those present. "Let not your heart be troubled". He says, "ye believe on God" (@John 14:1) -- they had gone that far. He had induced that in them, faith in God; He had indeed said to them, "Have faith in God" (@Mark 11:22).
It is a great point as to our general position here below that everything comes under God. Many things arise daily to trouble our hearts, international matters, business matters, matters in connection with our professions, illness, and so forth, all tending to rob the Lord of material He wishes to use to work out the divine thought. So He says, "Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe on God, believe also on me" (@John 14:1). Not that that "also" robs Him of His deity; no, dear brethren, far otherwise. He is dealing with the mediatorial position, what we may call the economy into which He has come, and God remains God; the Lord had come into a mediatorial place, but yet retained His own personal dignity. One to be believed on, too -- "believe also on me" (@John 14:1). Then the Lord goes on to say, "In my Father's house are many mansions ... I go to prepare a place for you" (@John 14:2). Well, that is the point in this section. He is dealing with those who were to form the assembly, as He is now, for His service goes on. He says, "I go to prepare a place for you" (@John 14:2). It would take too much time to unfold what that means, even if I could unfold it. I only touch on it to show that the principle of divine preparation runs on, and "for you", as the Lord says -- "I go to prepare a place for you" (@John 14:2); the saints were in His heart unalterably at that time,
{504}
indeed ever; during this whole period of centuries it is said of Christ, "he ever liveth to make intercession for them", (@Hebrews 7:25).
I have said so much as to the divine side, so as to show that all these matters emanate from God, He leads in everything. There is that which is not of God, and the world is full of what is not of God, and John's ministry is largely to help us that we might understand what is not of God and what is of God. What is not of God has to go as sin, what is of God is to remain, and preparation is of God, the idea is of God.
I proceed now with what I have particularly before me, that is, to speak of preparedness on our part as introductory in view of assembly service. I have selected Mark's account because it suits what I have in mind better than the others. The disciples had the thought of preparedness; Luke tells us that *the Lord* had the thought of preparedness in view of the passover, ultimately in view of His supper. It is a word that governs the Lord's supper perhaps more than anything else, and brings in the part the Lord has in the initial stage of the service of God in the assembly. In Mark His disciples inquired from Him as to this matter. We do well to join in this inquiry from the Lord, for it is a question of getting to the Lord, dear brethren, in view of the present confusion, the darkness that can be felt, as to these matters, in Christendom. It is an urgent matter for each one, all of us in our gatherings, to get to the Lord about it. Much has been said by this and that one, and we can thank God for the consensus of ministry on this point, but still, we are to prove all things, particularly in regard to this matter of assembly service. We are all apt to say things without much thought and particularly if it seems new, but new things are not always true, so that as to what came even from the lips of an apostle. Scripture speaks approvingly of those who searched the Scriptures daily to see if these things were so (@Acts 17:11). One would have been
{505}
very interested in the assembly at Berea because of that very point; what brothers they must have been! They searched the Scriptures daily to be assured that what was being said was true. We may be sure that they would ask the Lord at the same time. We never reach a safe conclusion without asking the Lord; assurance comes in that way. We are told to consider things, to consider what is said, and "the Lord will give thee understanding in all things" (@2 Timothy 2:7) -- that is the true safeguard.
The Lord says here, "Go into the city" -- an expression that also has a great place in Scripture. The great minister of the assembly, when he was converted, was told to go into the city to be told what he should do. And the Lord sends the two disciples into the city. He says, "Go into the city, and a man shall meet you carrying a pitcher of water". Carrying is a levitical thought, one great feature of levitical service is to carry things. It is not simply that the man had the pitcher of water, but he carried it. And what enters into the mind at this point is that the Lord brings in the objective idea. He diverts us from ourselves, for in regard to these matters, we have to learn, as I might say, objectively. Many are prone to look in on themselves in regard to the things of God, especially the breaking of bread, and think things are not just right or fit. It is right to examine ourselves, but not to be self-occupied, and for this we must turn our eyes out on *another* -- here a man carrying a pitcher of water. He has a burden -- spiritually something of great value, that is the idea. Why is he carrying this burden? I suppose we may see a full example of this in the apostle Paul's ministry at any time as he moved in his wide field, he was carrying things; he was a man who bore burdens -- always carrying a pitcher of water. The supreme example of this burden-bearing is Christ Himself, I need not say. As to everything, the great objective thought is seen in Him. What goes on in us is according to this. As we
{506}
are looking at Him, the work of God proceeds in us; our eyes are on the objective thought, what is presented to us of God objectively.
The Lord says, "Follow him" -- that is another thing -- and enter where he enters. What could be more interesting, than to follow those disciples into Jerusalem, into the city, and to see how their eyes would be on the alert for this man! How interesting it is to heaven to follow our movements in this respect, for it is a spiritual matter! Heaven knows what is proceeding in our hearts as we look out for this man; it is under the direction of the Lord, you will notice, so that we are on safe ground, but be sure he is carrying the pitcher of water, for that is the point of identification. There is no reference to his physical appearance, type, or the manner of his walk; it is a matter of obedience, of following the Lord's directions, what is absolutely essential to this service, in the initial stages of it particularly. John shows how water thus carried is used; the Lord used what was there, we may assume it was in the same upper room, in order that the saints should have part with Him.
Well, the disciples do exactly as the Lord told them to do -- a very fine thought for the young people here, do exactly as is prescribed by *the Lord* . There is the matter of preparation, and every believer ought to have indelibly in his heart the idea of preparation for the Lord; and they did exactly what the Lord told them and they found the house, and they said to the good-man, "The Teacher says. Where is my guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples?" The disciples had rightly said, "Where wilt thou that we go and prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover?" -- because they were thinking of the Lord; but He was thinking of them. He never forgets us. The surest way, I believe, to be made conscious of the Lord's thoughtfulness and provision is to think of and for Him. He demands that indeed. Elijah says to the woman of
{507}
Sarepta, "Make me thereof a little cake first", (@1 Kings 17:13). That is the secret of this position, that the Lord has the first place, then you come into great things. So here He came then with the twelve; it is a *great* occasion.
So that we may see what the preparation means, the passage says, "as they lay at table and were eating" -- this is an eating scene, Mark presents that side. Mark says nothing about the memorial in the Lord's supper, but refers to the eating of it, that is, the Lord is *providing* for us; if we have Him in our minds and would have things right for Him, He supports us so that that may go on; there is food. Moreover, the need of food is important if there is to be any heart-searching, and that is one of the things that comes in in the initial stages of divine services, because the word is, "Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?" (@2 Kings 10:15). That is, as it were, what the Lord would say, as Jehu said to Jehonadab in @2 Kings 10:15. The Lord here says, "One of you ..." It was as they were eating. He considers them, for if He is to get results, there must be food, and that always applies; in cases of restoration, or in dealing with sin, it is important that there should be food. And hence, "One of you ..." and then, "Is it I?" He is dealing here with sin in someone -- and the need of that is frequent, alas! I only refer to it so that ample room may be made for the Lord in such matters. We must not restrict Him in ourselves, because His operations in the assembly are all in the minds and hearts of the saints; what the Lord is doing He is doing there, what the Spirit is doing. He is doing there; and we effectually limit all this if our minds are wrong, if we have wrong thoughts. So the Lord leads in this matter and makes it plain, without being too personal, where the betrayer is. It is an important matter to have things disclosed, so that we understand. You may say, 'This is not an assembly meeting'. It is the light that governs the precincts of it, as I may say. It is important
{508}
to understand the precincts, for in approaching God in the tabernacle or the temple, the precincts had to be considered, and any adjustment had to be made there. The washing took place in the court.
So here the evil one is disclosed, and then the Lord goes on to what He had in mind; the preparation was there, the room was also there, furnished and prepared. All that refers *now* to the state of our souls in view of the assembly, on those lines we become ready. I mean, the furnishing here refers really to the state of the saints. The Master says that it is His guest-chamber -- "Where is my guest-chamber?" It is a question of His rights in our hearts and whether things are suitable to Him there. So that, as the right state is there, although there may be one person out of accord, the general position is clear, and the Lord proceeds to do what He had in mind. It was the passover, but the Lord's supper was in prospect; that is to say, love proceeding beyond anything that ever had entered into the passover feast before. It was love going on to the best, that is the testimony to Christ's love, "Take this; this is my body". And the cup too, "This is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many". "And they all drank out of it", the passage says. The Lord had dealt with whatever evil there was; whatever needed to be adjusted, He adjusted it; and now He proceeds with what is uppermost in His heart, for it is a question of the disciples, of *His own*, and He opens up to them the thought of the new covenant, and leads up to a mutual state of things.
I want you to take that in, dear brethren -- a happy mutual state of things ensued from the Lord's ministry amongst them, what He said and did. "They all drank out of it". He does not tell them here to do it. He does in Matthew, but here they *do* it, they are moving on in their souls. You see how perfect the Lord's work is, and how under His direction the disciples do what is needed, and then there is progress. As they all drank
{509}
out of the cup, the Lord told them what it really was -- "This is my blood, that of the new covenant". I suppose the expression never had such force from Jeremiah's day down to that time, as it had to them; in the Lord's blessed lips at that time what a force and power there would be in it! The apostles were ready for it obviously; they all drank out of it, and then they sang a hymn and they went to the mount of Olives. You see thus the progress; the spiritual movement, I may say, arising from the idea of preparation. God is praised; we can understand the hymn -- it is to God. And then the *upward* movement.
Now I pass on from that to show how this procedure culminates, as it occurs week after week. The Lord intended it should occur constantly during His absence. Alas! during a great gap in the assembly's history it was shut out. What the Lord lost in all that, in those centuries in which He was denied the desires of His heart! And what was the secret? Unpreparedness there was no idea of preparedness for Christ in the great system that grew up in Christendom. The teachings of the Nicolaitanes, of Balaam, of Jezebel, all deprive the Lord, rob Him of His rights; for His supper is a question of His rights. Yet He has come back to it, the Lord has rescued His supper from the unhallowed surroundings it had got into, and set it down in the midst of those who love Him, where it belongs; characteristically it belongs to the assembly, and to no other circle. He has revived it in view, among other things, of this preparedness of the Lamb's wife.
The celebration in @Revelation 19 is a very great one; after the destruction of the false thing, Babylon, in chapter 18, the celebration in heaven is wonderful, and it works out to this, "the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready". It is what the saints do in relation to Christ in view of the great occasion that is now imminent, thank God -- the marriage of the Lamb: she has made herself ready. "And
{510}
to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints". I mention that to show you how the idea of preparedness runs through, and should find a place with us individually, but I am speaking particularly of what is collective, so that the Lord should have His place amongst us, that scope should be given Him, that He should perform what *He* sees is needed. Let Him have scope, let us learn how to be restful, till there is a touch from Him. This enters into the thought of the wife, it is a question of loyalty to Christ and His rights, subjection to Christ, too -- she has made herself ready; it is a process that is going on now; all these meetings are to that end, that the brethren should understand the need for readiness, for preparedness, in view of the great matter, the marriage of the Lamb, which is now near.
Then I want to add to all that, something from 2 Corinthians. The chapter read deals with the question of giving, but I am not speaking of that by itself; what I am speaking about is this matter of preparedness, for without the preparedness for giving, the giving is nothing. What does God care about dollars or pounds? He cares nothing about them in themselves. A man might dole out, we are told, all his goods for the poor, without love, and what does God care about that? -- he is *nothing*, that is what Scripture says, I am speaking of this matter of preparedness. The apostle is stressing in these two chapters -- 8 and 9 -- that it is a question of the giver, the gift, of course, from such a giver, but the point is the giver, whether he is prepared, whether I am *prepared* to use the box, as we speak of it, or to give in any sense. I have to be prepared for that as much as to propose a hymn to be sung or to give thanks to God. It is a spiritual matter. God is dealing with *persons*. The mere material thing by itself is nothing to God; the cattle on a thousand hills are His.
{511}
God is thinking of the persons who give and of those who serve Him. He is seeking worshippers who worship in the true sense, and givers who give in the true sense. Paul speaks to the Corinthians in chapter 8 about the Macedonians; he had a way of bringing forward the work of God in other saints to stimulate those he is dealing with, and here he speaks about the Macedonians. This they did, he says, "not according as we hoped, but they gave themselves first to the Lord, and to us by God's will" (@2 Corinthians 8:5). "By God's will" -- how entirely under God they were in this! These chapters would help us as to whatever we have to give, little or much, that it should be in the spirit of divine giving. "God loveth a cheerful giver", not his gift exactly, but the person, it is a question of his state, the spirit and manner of his giving. And so the apostle stresses that the Macedonians were ready; he tells the Corinthians how ready they were, and now he tells the Corinthians, according to these verses, that he had boasted of them to others also. He had a remarkable way of using the work of God in one place to stimulate it in another place. Why not? It is one thing. He says, 'I have boasted of you, that you were ready a year ago'. How remarkable this is! He kept it in mind that they were ready in this matter a year before. How extended the thing was! But the exercise, the preparation, was all pleasing to heaven. The apostle was labouring to prepare the saints for this matter of giving. Of course he laboured to prepare them for other matters, the Lord's supper was a great thing with him, but he says now, "On the first of the week let each of you put by at home, laying up in whatever degree he may have prospered, that there may be no collections when I come" (@1 Corinthians 16:2). He said, as it were, I want you to do it of your own selves so that it is your doing, not for my eyes or ears, but for God, and do it on the first day of the week -- if a *day* will affect you, that ought to. And do it at *home* he is not dealing with the collection for local needs, but to
{512}
meet need elsewhere, affording an opportunity for giving as expressed in God: He is the great Giver. The apostle says, "Thanks be to God for his unspeakable free gift" (@2 Corinthians 9:15).
God is bringing us round to this, and what can be greater? So he reminds the Corinthians that he had boasted about them that they were prepared a year before; but he was afraid there had been a lapse; and there often is -- there are those who decide to give, but they change their minds. How sorrowful that is! The apostle was afraid of that, and he does not want to be ashamed. Of course *they* should be ashamed, but he says, 'I am so identified with you that if you have cause to be ashamed, I am ashamed'. He had a peculiar way of telling everybody about the Corinthians, so he says, I shall be ashamed that you are not ready. He says, "I thought it necessary therefore to beg the brethren that they would come to you, and complete beforehand your fore-announced blessing, that this may be ready thus as blessing, and not as got out of you. But this is true, he that sows sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he that sows in the spirit of blessing shall reap also in blessing: each according as he is purposed in his heart; not grievingly, or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver". It is the state of a man, that he is becoming like God, and has purposed in his heart on those lines. This is going to be a matter of the glory of Christ, that is what the apostle has in mind. He says, I am ready to serve in it with others who are Christ's glory, ministers of the assembly, but it is a question, not of what they carried, but of what it represents, the preparedness of the brethren in this great matter. So you will understand I am not speaking of the material thing in itself, but of what the saints are, which is a great thing. So putting into the box requires preparedness as in the affections; it is a question of what I am, so the apostle says earlier that a man is
{513}
accepted according to what he has -- whatever it be, it is the man that is accepted.
There is one thought left; it is in the verse read in @Revelation 8. And now, dear brethren, I want to say a word to those who are serving in a special way. Of course all the saints are to serve, but a word now is needed in regard to those of us who serve in a specific way, as to the importance of preparation -- not of the subject-matter, but of the persons who serve. So the word here is, "the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves that they might sound with their trumpets". "Prepared themselves" -- notice that. Now you see that, in all these cases, it is mainly a question of the persons and what God has in the persons. If God has not something in what I am doing now, what is it? You may say. 'It may help others'; but God must have something in it; He is thinking of the persons *in their service*. It is not to prepare the subject but to prepare myself -- that is the word. The seven angels had the ability -- I mean the trumpets, which I suppose I might say represent gift -- and power to sound; but that is not enough. No doubt they could make the sound of the trumpet; the apostle deals with that in speaking of ministry in @1 Corinthians 14; there must be distinct sounds; it is not simply that I have a trumpet that can be used, but the person using it is to be suitable. It says, the seven angels *prepared themselves* that they might sound the trumpets. The gift one may have is not all. In Ephesians the man himself is the gift, but in Corinthians it is power given from God to be used in service.
So, dear brethren, God, I believe, has in mind that in assembly service, domestic service, business service, in walking on the street, in riding in the train or in motor cars, we are to be pleasing to Him. God is to have pleasure in us all the time; but particularly in our preparation for service. A brother humbly gets to the Lord -- according to Proverbs we are to watch at His
{514}
gates, at the posts of His doors -- well. He is pleased with that. The Lord takes notice of the humility of our minds; what we are in regard to what is before us. As one says, 'Lord, Thou knowest I cannot do anything of myself; although I may have ability to speak, I must get what is spoken from Thee', well, the Lord is pleased with that and He will not fail such a one in the service in view. The history that is going on in heaven all the time in regard of such matters is but little thought of by us, but it should be on our minds.
So you will readily see that the idea of preparation enters into the things of which I have spoken. It is a question of what is needed in every case, so that we might be equal to each service and that God has His part in it. The vessel is to be dignified by the anointing, so that something might be said by those who hear, as was said of the Lord Jesus: they "wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth" (@Luke 4:22). "The eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him" (@Luke 4:20) -- it was a question of the Person, of the Minister, what He was. The words were beautiful, but the Person was attractive; He was there in all His grace as the Minister on that occasion.
{515}
SERVICE EXEMPLIFIED
@Acts 6:15; @Acts 7:1 - 3,54 - 60; @Acts 8:4 - 8, 26 - 40
J.T. I thought that a consideration of these two chapters would be blessed of the Lord to us, opening up the service relating to the testimony of God as a whole, and then the special service of the gospel. Both these servants, that is Stephen and Philip, had held subordinate appointments, that is, that of deacons, but they purchased to themselves good degrees and great boldness in the faith; Stephen in relation to the whole testimony of God and Philip in the gospel. The thought is that, whilst we are to wait on our ministry, those that are in it in a specific way are to be marked by faithfulness in what they find to do, industry in service is promoted, and, if we have to do with the whole testimony, the glory is particularly involved; so also in the service of the gospel. But in Stephen's case the glory shone in him before he spoke about it; the servant is to take on the service involving glory -- he takes it on in that way, he exemplifies what is presented by manifesting it. It is said that Stephen's face, before he began his address, shone as the face of an angel. A corresponding incident in the history of our Lord is in @Luke 4, a well-known passage. The Lord says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me ..." (@Luke 4:18). Then it says "he sat down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed upon him" (@Luke 4:20). Then it says further, "All bore witness to him, and wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth" (@Luke 4:22). The passages are to show how the minister becomes an object of interest spiritually by what he is and his manner, even before he enters on his ministry.
Rem. So that what a brother ministers is helped by his general demeanour.
J.T. Yes, so far it is not because of his effectiveness in service, but what he is, how the truth is effective
{516}
*in him*. Here it is a question of heavenly appearance; the Spirit of God is about to move on to the heavenly side of the truth. It was already reflected in Stephen, so that one in such circumstances gives a lead spiritually; as he determines the truth that is needed, he has already taken it on himself. Stephen is really introducing a new line of thought and he is already reflecting it. A new line of thought in the ministry is apt to arouse opposition, as it did here, so it is all the more imperative that the minister should be himself the exponent of it, so that the bearing of what is meant can be seen.
H.P.W. Even in the Old Testament days, Moses was with God first and his face shone as he came down to the camp.
J.T. That is a good illustration of it. Stephen immediately speaks of the God of glory. You must expect that God has more than one glory; so if fresh ministry produces a new thought of glory we should not be repelled by it, but rather attracted to it to follow it up, because the glory is varied. The "God of glory" implies that the whole domain of glory is of God and He develops it, and it reflects in those He uses, for the saints generally are vessels of mercy prepared for glory. We ought to be ready for whatever glory appears.
P.L. One star differs from another in glory (@1 Corinthians 15:41). Does that suggest the saints at home in that domain of glory and thus entering into the service in their own distinctive features?
J.T. Just so. In opening up those thoughts the Spirit of God begins with Abraham, not with Adam or Abel or Noah. In opening up the truth in a vessel, in Abraham, He takes him out and shows him the stars. There is a suggestion of an infinite domain of glory, but varied, the stars representing saints; they ought to be ready to take on whatever God is moving in in a distinctive way.
A.M.H. The attractiveness you speak of is brought about by just putting one's hand to what offers itself,
{517}
and developing on those lines, until some particular colour is taken on.
J.T. That is, I think, what appears. Stephen, it says, "full of grace and power, wrought wonders and great signs among the people" (@Acts 6:8). He had been appointed to serve as a deacon, but that was not deacon's service. And then it says "they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke. Then they suborned men, saying. We have heard him speaking blasphemous words against Moses and God" (@Acts 6:10,11) (read verses 12 - 14). Then we are told about the glory that shone, that his face was like the face of an angel, pointing to a heavenly glory, as if it developed there in the presence of such opposition, and was visible; it says "all who sat in the council, looking fixedly on him, saw his face as the face of an angel".
A.M.H. Prior to his being selected for deacon's service, it says he was full of the Holy Spirit. Is not that of great importance to this subject? Without that the Lord cannot do much with us, can He?
J.T. Quite.
Ques. Does @Psalm 104:15 bear out what you are saying? It says, "wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man's heart". Would that equip us for effective service?
J.T. Yes. One is thus furnished. It is *man's* heart, it is what is normal to Christians, for ministry is in manhood. The apostle laboured to effect that in the Corinthians; they were to be children in malice, but in their minds grown men.
H.P.W. Is there not with us all, even as young brothers, a desire in some way to serve the Lord? It sometimes presents a difficulty as to what form it should take. Do you think the Lord would have us serve in any little way that comes to hand, and He will develop that and specially help us along certain
{518}
lines, and that is how He indicates the way He would have us progress?
J.T. I think that is the order we find in these chapters. Stephen and Philip served as deacons, serving tables, which does not require gift, but evidently they did it well and it developed into much more exalted service. What we do we are to do well -- whatever one's hand finds to do, to do it with his might, and to do it in a satisfied way. "The trees of Jehovah are satisfied", (@Psalm 104:16). Satisfaction of soul ought to accompany the Lord's service. We are not to be concerned to have more place made for us, for more place will be made for each as he progresses and is equal to do the thing that is to be done.
Rem. It is said of Joseph before he is sent out in service for his father, that he was doing service with the sons of the handmaids -- he was qualifying to be sent out to his brethren.
J.T. It was not congenial companionship in service: it is to be noted that the companionship was abhorrent to him, but he was doing service with them. It is often a very needed discipline to have to serve with uncongenial companions. But there was love -- he was loved by his father; that is a point to be observed too, love that enters into sonship.
Ques. Was the blind man in @John 9:25 right when he said, "One thing I know"? Then he went on -- he had the revelation of who Jesus was.
J.T. I think he represents development in the truth -- not in service, but in the truth, which is another thing, to develop in the truth.
H.D.T. Why does the glory shine in regard of the opposition particularly?
J.T. Well, it is a necessary thing. We are pretty sure to meet opposition if the Lord is going to use us, or is using us, and it is not so much how we meet it verbally, but our spirit and manner. I think the end of chapter 6 is to bring out the qualifications of
{519}
Stephen for the great service he was to perform, how qualified he was, and in the passage read at the end of the chapter, we have, not simply the face of an angel, but *moral* glory -- complete correspondence with Jesus in His moral glory; Stephen was suffering in the spirit of his Master.
P.L. "In meekness setting right those who oppose", (@2 Timothy 2:25). Would that be the spirit to meet the opposition?
J.T. Exactly. He is taking on the glory in that way, for in truth the idea of glory must run through. Stephen is a vessel prepared to bring in the thought of glory. In the beginning he reflects the heavenly side, angelic glory, the point being that service is heavenly glory, for angels are all ministers. "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" (@Hebrews 1:14). Stephen's face set out the heavenly side of glory, but he ended with the moral glory, the greatest kind of glory, that is, suffering like Jesus, as He suffered on the cross and prayed for His murderers.
A.M.H. Do you think that tribulation or opposition tests as to whether self or Christ is dominating me? If it is Christ, there will be the taking on of more and more of His features.
J.T. That is, I think, what is presented here, the glory that rests on us as taking up service and developing in it and the ability that develops, knowing how to select what is needed for the moment in service.
H.P.W. It is a very remarkable start to his discourse -- "The God of Glory" -- it shows he must have been thinking of the God of glory; he knew Him.
J.T. Well, we are to be touched by that. The glory ought to enter into all our service; in a meeting like this the glory would shine. So that, in entering on service, young brothers and sisters may see what a domain of glory opens up, the heavenly glory first, and then the glory of God in its variety and bearing,
{520}
and then the moral glory that shone in Jesus, particularly in His sufferings on the cross, reflected in us. Unless we are equal for this latter, no end can be reached. God reaches His ends in service here through suffering, through the ministers suffering, hence in the governmental domain. That is Peter's ministry, it is the sufferings of Christ and the glory that follows.
P.L. So that, would you say, in @1 Corinthians 15 we have the heavenly glory, then, in the Ephesian epistle, the glory of God, and then finally, in 2 Timothy in the suffering spirit of Paul about to be martyred, have we the moral glory?
J.T. Yes. How perfectly what we get in Stephen here corresponds with the display of moral glory in Jesus!
Ques. There does not seem to be any adjustment recorded in connection with Stephen's experience. I was thinking of Moses, he seemed to have a great deal of adjustment in his forty years in the wilderness -- Stephen speaks of him -- he thought his brethren would have understood. What would you say as to that?
J.T. I think Stephen peculiarly corresponds with the Lord. How quickly a young servant *may* develop! Moses had eighty years of experience before he was commissioned, and then needed much breaking up; but we do not get that in Stephen's history. But the needed discipline and formation must have been there, for there is no discrepancy; the ministry is perfect.
Ques. Is your thought then that the early sight and contemplation of the glory in that respect would enable us to be matured earlier in service?
J.T. Well evidently, as has been pointed out, before taking on deaconship, one of the requirements was that they should be "well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom" (@Acts 6:3). Stephen was "full of grace and power" and "wrought wonders and great signs among the people" (@Acts 6:8). I suppose he was entirely in accord
{521}
with the dispensation, which is another point to notice. He had taken on very markedly the spirit of Christ and the wisdom of Christ and the grace of Christ. Let us not forget the grace side, because it is a question of the dispensation, and God is always jealous that it should be maintained in the ministry -- "grace and truth came by Jesus Christ";(@John 1:17) they subsist in Him.
A.M.H. So that the glory shines in the Lord in grace in the gospel when He says, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do" (@Luke 23:34). Would you call that a shining out of the glory?
J.T. I think it is; it is His moral glory.
Ques. Would a sight of the actual glory greatly help us in this connection? What came out in Stephen would be helped by his seeing the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
J.T. Quite so, and it would help him in having to do with the brethren whom he had to serve in material matters. What occasioned the appointment of these seven men was a sectional feeling, a development of dissatisfaction. We have been remarking on the trees of the Lord being satisfied, but some of the brethren had become dissatisfied, which of course greatly interferes with the ministry, and hence the apostles deputed this matter to the deacons, so that they should go on with the word of God and prayer. Such a man as Stephen must have been affected and disciplined by the experience of dealing with the conditions that existed. I suppose he would thus be more able to bring in the phases of the truth needed.
Rem. A servant of Christ never knows what promotion may be in store for him. Here is a man who begins with meeting the material need of some disaffected saints, and he is called to the greatest service: to close the old dispensation, we may say, and make way for the ministry of Paul, which gives character to the new.
{522}
J.T. Quite so -- making way for Paul. It is all moral glory shining, bringing out the truth, but exhibiting at the same time the spirit of grace and patience.
Ques. Does the shining out of the glory in that way indicate great moral superiority in the face of opposition?
J.T. Yes. And what formation there must have been there! There is no evidence of any support at all even on the part of the brethren, for he was in the council chamber; not in the assembly of the saints surrounded by sympathetic brethren, but in the midst of hostility. Hence the importance of being reminded of the need of formation. The dispensation is to finish in the manner in which it began, that is, in moral glory corresponding to Christ.
Ques. Is there inward formation and what is outward? Peter says, "The spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you" (@1 Peter 4:14).
J.T. Quite so. The formation is manifestly here.
H.P.W. All this is very searching to any who seek to serve, for it really means that the state of the servant should enhance his ministry.
J.T. That is the idea, that he is what he says; "Altogether that which I also say to you" (@John 8:25).
H.P.W. And there is nothing that would search us, as to what we have and where we are, like being alone, as Stephen was.
J.T. Yes.
H.S. Will you say a word more as to the close of the dispensation here being in glory, for, if we are at the moment at the close of the dispensation, what we see around us is rather discouraging. Is this dispensation also going to close in glory?
J.T. That is what we ought to have in mind, I am sure. The moral thing is there. Then it says, as murderous opposition was displayed, "being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God" He is confirmed now: there would be no
{523}
support from the council, but heaven is watching all this, and what a sight it was for heaven -- one man with such composure and intelligence and feeling, beginning with the God of glory and touching with exquisite skill, point after point, such items as were needed to bring the truth to bear upon them, and then to be able to fix his eyes on heaven! And heaven opens to him. We may count on that, on heaven being active for us.
H.P.W. So he fixes his eyes on heaven and is a lovely example of @2 Corinthians 3:18 -- transformed "into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord".
J.T. I think he is the best example of that. And then how he can speak of what is in heaven. Having been there, Paul said he heard things, not allowed to man to speak, but here Stephen sees things and he can name them at once. I think it is a tribute to his state, he understands glory and can name it; he began with the God of glory, but now he is able to name glory.
Rem. There is a difference between what he sees and what he says: "he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said. Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God".
J.T. I think you see the skill of the minister, able to transpose what he sees into what *should be said*. One does not need to convey all one sees or knows, it is what should be said. With Moses, as we have often remarked, the instructions given him relative to the passover were long, but in speaking to the people he epitomises; he says what should be said. The principle of measure is a mark of the minister, to know just what to say. How much Stephen could have said about the glory! But he just says what should be said, and that is "Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God". He
{524}
does not mention the glory, the point was, the Son of man was there, not the Christ or Messiah, but the Son of man; that was what should be said at that time. When Philip began to speak, as we shall see, he began to speak about the Christ, he preached the Christ, but here it is the Son of man because it is a change-over, the Son of man is entering on an extended domain of service and administration. The whole of humanity was contemplated. I think it is a very fine thought that in such stress of circumstances he is able to say what should be said.
H.P.W. He really had a universal outlook here.
J.T. That is what is in mind, the Son of man is in relation to all men, but He is still standing, not yet sitting, waiting in patience. And another thing the servant sees here is that everything is secured in heaven, the glory is there and the Son of man is there ready to serve further, for God will go on with His thoughts.
Ques. Does it link on with the testimony of Jesus before the high priest? -- "Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven", (@Matthew 26:64).
J.T. Somewhat, I think. It refers to the universal interest of God as over against the limited or special interest in Israel.
Ques. Is it correct to think of Jesus as in this attitude of standing now?
J.T. I think it was at that juncture just to bring out that He was still ready to serve; the patience of God as to Israel is there, but I think the Son of man would be that God was going to work in grace amongst humanity. As we shall see in chapter 8, He begins at once. The burial of Stephen is the end of a chapter, and the persecution continued, and then the passage says "they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word. Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them". It is those that were scattered now. The Son of man is
{525}
standing at the right hand of God, and that means that operations are to go on. And here we have a wonderful evangelical service without any special appointment; there is no official side to the chapter.
H.S. Can we not see in verse 2 some correspondence with this precious ministry of Stephen? Pious men buried him, making great lamentation over him.
J.T. Well, it is the only burial we get in relation to servants in Christianity; I suppose it has a dispensational significance, like the burial of Sarah. What comes out is that as this great servant is buried, there were publishers of the testimony he rendered. In the order of things coming into view there are a lot of publishers as in @Psalm 68:11. "Those then that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word".
H.P.W. Is it recorded for our encouragement that what might have seemed a calamity, the scattering of the saints, was turned of God to the furtherance of the work? God can use even that.
J.T. Exactly. And seed is evidently sown in the coming great servant who is there -- Saul. He is to be not simply a servant, but an appointed official servant (see @Acts 26:16, and footnote in New Translation). That is, the operations are to go on, and the heavenly testimony of Stephen is to open out in divine brilliancy in the ministry of one made fully competent.
H.T. Would it be right to view Philip, not only in regard to his own soul history, but as to what was general among the saints at that time? There was evidently the desire amongst those scattered to preach; was Philip the development of that in a specific way?
J.T. Quite so. They were not overwhelmed by the terrible attack of Saul entering into the houses of the saints in his persecuting zeal. No doubt the enemy is attacking now, but the thing is to go on, the surest way is to go on with what is of God; the Son of man is
{526}
at the right hand of God, having all power, and the work of God is to proceed.
H.D.T. If there is a general evangelical spirit amongst the saints, God will see that there are preachers.
J.T. They will develop, I am sure. And you find here a variety of terms for the gospel. The scattered ones preached "the glad tidings of the word" -- a remarkable title for the gospel. The chapter contains various references to the gospel. In verse 4, "the glad tidings of the word"; then in verse 5 it says of Philip that he preached "the Christ" -- that is another view of the gospel; and then again in verse 12, they believed Philip announcing "the glad tidings concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ" (@Acts 8:12) -- that is another term. Then we have in verse 25, the apostle Peter and others "having testified and spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and announced the glad tidings" (@Acts 8:25) -- that is the ordinary term; and finally it is said in verse 35 that Philip opened his mouth and announced "the glad tidings of Jesus" to the eunuch. It is, to my mind, very remarkable that in this unofficial chapter, we get such a variety of terms covering the gospel, as if to remind us that it is well understood, and I think those who preach it would be well advised to study all these terms, because they help us as to those to whom we have to preach, whether we should preach the glad tidings of the word, or the glad tidings of the Christ, or the glad tidings of the kingdom of God, or the glad tidings of Jesus. It is a question of the variety of features and whether I can tell which should be used.
H.P.W. Do you think that if we were more acquainted with the God of glory we should have a greater appreciation of the wealth of the gospel in all these aspects of it?
J.T. Exactly, The God of glory is an administrative thought really, that He is the *God* of it. Then we have a term -- the *Lord* of glory. That is also an administrative
{527}
thought. The God of glory suggests the source and immensity of it, the variety of glory, and the administration of it comes in more particularly in the *Lord* of glory.
H.P.W. So in the end where Stephen saw the glory of God, that is really God in all His blessedness shining out.
J.T. It is all there. The God of glory appears to Abraham, and Stephen begins with that, so that it seems to me that chapter 8 is an opening up of chapter 7. The latter is the testimony in suffering, it is a man expressive of moral glory, of suffering as seen on the cross; chapter 8 is the gospel in its varied glories as opening up that, showing that God is going on, not in judgment, but in the glory of His grace.
Ques. Do we see divine glory, in that opposition is answered by evangelical expansion?
J.T. That is the idea; it is the glory of God; instead of being hindered, it widens out more and more.
Ques. I was wondering whether that was continued in chapter 11, where you get the preaching at Antioch, after the pouring out of the Holy Spirit on the nations. Would all that be additional glory?
J.T. Quite so. There are, I believe, about twenty appellations of the gospel. These varied glories set out in the gospel deserve our keenest consideration, especially those who seek to serve in that way. What a domain we have entered on! And if persecution arises, instead of being hindered there is expansion.
Ques. Do we not get that with John in the isle of Patmos? He says, "I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ", (@Revelation 1:9).
J.T. Yes. I should like the brethren who preach here to take account of this great matter, this variety of glories that shine out in the gospel, and how the
{528}
chapter begins with nondescripts, as we might say, simply scattered suffering saints, but they preached the gospel, and then the great development in one man whose house becomes marked by prophecy -- at least, his four daughters were prophetesses, and prophecy obviously would confirm the gospel.
H.P.W. You referred a little time back to having some sense of the various aspects of the gospel, and the question which one you are to apply. Do you think that what is recorded of Philip and the eunuch here would help in that way? That is to say, he finds out first where the man is; is that one of the features you would look for, so as to fish effectively, so to speak?
J.T. I think so. First of all, those "that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word". I would like to come to what is in Philip personally; how he came under the angelic direction and moved accordingly, then how he came under the direct influence of the Spirit, and then how he became raptured, how he developed in the light and became so pleasing to heaven that he was raptured. But, first, let us take the glad tidings of the *word* -- what does that mean? It is preached by the scattered saints. This certainly deserves attention, for it is a question, I believe, of the glad tidings opening up *the mind* of God. What wealth there is in that in the sense of glad tidings!
Rem. That is what we want, to get our gospel preachings enriched.
J.T. Exactly. Then, next to that, Philip preached the Christ. He had no commission, as far as we see, he was not appointed like the twelve to preach the gospel, but he preached the Christ; he says, as it were, 'Whatever you may think of me, there is a Man in heaven who can do things for God' -- that is the idea of "the Christ". And Philip developed in his service. Then the chapter says he announced "the glad tidings concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ" (@Acts 8:12). One can understand that, he would be
{529}
thinking of power in the way of protection and order here -- the kingdom of God.
H.D.T. Does this feature of glory stand over against the need that is present?
J.T. Yes. There is glory in each of those features.
H.D.T. What connection, if any, would the thought of Samaria have with "the Christ" in @John 4?
J.T. There certainly is a connection. That was what the woman was impressed with -- "Is not this the Christ?" (@John 4:29) -- she presented Him in the way she apprehended Him. Now Philip is preaching Him, and there is "great joy in that city".
H.D.T. Could each feature of the glory be traced through to stand over against the existing need?
J.T. Yes. This Simon (verse 9) was a man who did great things, he gave out that he was some great one -- well, *the Christ* is greater.
P.H.H. The thought of the Christ seems to be connected with feeling, both in this chapter and in chapter 9. Would that have a bearing on the preaching today?
J.T. Well, it is the Man who can do things. God said, "I have found David, ... a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfil all my will" (@Acts 13:22) -- that is Christ. Simon gave out that he "was some great one", so that the preaching of the Christ would meet that. Whatever the opposition is, what is presented is to meet it.
Rem. Paul, in 1 Timothy, speaks of "the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God" (@1 Timothy 1:11).
J.T. That is another term covering the gospel. We have also "the radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ", (@2 Corinthians 4:4). So you see what varieties of glory enter into the preaching of the gospel, and I thought this chapter, not being marked by special commissions given, fits in with the present time; it is a question of purchasing to oneself this kind of thing by industry, by spiritual energy, by being with God and doing the thing one's hand finds to do. There is no
{530}
evidence that Philip was invited, or had any special arrangements made for him, but he just went and preached, and this was the result: the Spirit of God gives us this array of titles of the gospel in connection with this man and these scattered saints, as if He would say that they know what they are doing; they knew it spiritually, because of their devotedness.
H.S. Does he not also prepare the way for the ministry of Peter and John? Surely that was a very great service.
J.T. That is another thing; Jerusalem acting with them, for Jerusalem was still in the place of administration, and the apostles being there, Philip's service is confirmed.
A.M.H. Do you think the fact that Philip presents the gospel in so many different ways militates against the idea that each person has a certain line in the gospel? Do you think we should all be prepared to take up all lines?
J.T. I am sure that is right; and to take up any one of these features as it might suit a given occasion.
A.M.H. You would not tie yourself and say. My line is to speak to simple souls, and so on? You would rather expand in whatever direction the Lord might lead.
J.T. Not to be a children's evangelist, or the like. This is a chapter that really serves in that way as showing how these devoted believers knew what they were about. The chapter begins, as regards the gospel, with the glad tidings of the word; it is a question of intelligence in the mind of God regarding the gospel.
H.P.W. Ought the servant's preaching to be enriched constantly as he goes on?
J.T. Yes. A young brother might preach in the street once or twice, and heaven is taking account of and is pleased with what he is doing, and heaven, in its own way, will intimate to that brother that there is more to be done. A man might even be moved because
{531}
of his business so as to be used of God elsewhere -- for angelic service alludes to providential ways. Philip was told to go down towards Gaza, and he rose up and went. There was nothing attractive, for there was not a word said about the Ethiopian eunuch; the angel did not tell Philip about him or of service of any kind. It is a question of *obedience* in service; he rose up and went at the direction of the angel.
H.P.W. Is your point here that a man should accept the providential ways of God with him, and have in mind that his path is ordered of God in connection with His service.
J.T. I think it is important to connect that with this passage. Angelic service is often seen in that way; God settles a matter for us by some providential ordering; and then, as Philip is found in a spot that is called desert -- nothing attractive in it -- the word to him is, "Approach and join this chariot". He did what he was told to do, only now he is promoted in that, having moved under angelic direction, the Spirit directs him, which is a higher thought. Then, as it seems, he acts so well in relation to the eunuch that "the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip". Another thing is that Philip did not have to fall back on one of his old sermons. The passage says, he began "from that scripture"; he took up what the man was engaged with.
A.M.H. Are you calling attention to Philip's being caught away? And in the end of the dispensation, if these features are developed with us, may the Lord see fit to take us home?
J.T. That is exactly the point. The history of Enoch brings out this matter of being caught away, and it is a question of those that *please God*. Before he was translated, "he had this testimony, that he pleased God";(@Hebrews 11:5) and I think the Lord has great regard for our thinking of what is suitable to Him in our service, not only the results we get, but the way we do things, for the previous chapter speaks of the kind of man Stephen
{532}
was, and then Philip follows on; they correspond with what the Lord Jesus was in His service, the pleasure there was to heaven in everything Jesus did.
H.P.W. I do not know that I have quite got your thought about his being caught away. Should this kind of spirit mark the saints immediately before the rapture?
J.T. I think so, in everything they do they are concerned as to the way the Lord would have it done.
H.D.T. Will you say a little as to Philip's going down with the eunuch?
J.T. That is another thing. It is the opposite to clericalism -- he went *down* with him into the water. The fact that there was water there at all is a remarkable thing, for the place was desert; as we move with God everything serves us.
Ques. Would you say a little as to Philip's beginning from that scripture and announcing the glad tidings of Jesus to him?
J.T. Well, it is what speaks about the Lord personally as Man. It is @Isaiah 53, that is the *Man* -- He shall grow up before Jehovah as a tender plant and as a root out of a dry ground. It was what He was under God's eye, the kind of man Jesus is. It was in keeping with the position; it was the service of the Son of man, serving an Ethiopian. It was a question of the race; the Son of man stands in that relation.
H.D.T. Would it be right to say that it is not so much the historical fact that is stressed, but the way Jesus was in the circumstances as "a lamb" and "a sheep"? The spirit in which He went that way is stressed.
J.T. Quite so.
H.P.W. Have you any thought on this last verse of chapter 8: "And Philip was found at Azotus, and passing through he announced the glad tidings to all the cities till he came to Caesarea"?
J.T. Well, I suppose the thought is that he went to that point -- to Caesarea; but Peter was used *there*.
{533}
Philip was found residing there later with his four daughters and was a very hospitable brother, showing that, as well as being an evangelist, he could be hospitable. Luke tells us that Paul and those who came with him stayed "many days" with Philip; showing that a servant must not think that preaching is all; he must be a brother, and if he has a house, be hospitable, because he can serve the testimony that way, too.
H.S. Could we regard this chapter as partly fulfilling @Psalm 68:11 "The Lord gives the word: great the host of the publishers". Then "Ethiopia shall quickly stretch out her hands unto God" (@Psalm 68:31)?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Would you say that such a brother has the idea of entertaining from God Himself, in @Luke 14?
J.T. Just so. The idea of entertaining belongs to the gospel, and Philip and his four daughters correspond. Hospitality is one of the most important services. His four daughters are spoken of and Paul and his company abode with Philip many days, and Agabus is able to speak to Paul by the Spirit there; so that the evangelist's house comes into view and that in Caesarea, not in the midst of his own labours, where he might be honoured, but where Peter laboured; and he is exercising hospitality in a liberal way.
A.M.H. That would be a feature of the glory -- it is like God.
{534}
GOOD SOLDIERS OF JESUS CHRIST
@2 Timothy 2:3,4, @Joshua 2:8 - 11; @Judges 7:13 - 15
What is in mind to speak of is of a military character, hoping that it will carry with it what edifies and nourishes as the word of God. First, as to the obligation resting upon us to have part in the military feature of the service of God. It will be remembered that in the type in Numbers all the males from twenty years old and upward, those that were able to go forth to war, were enrolled. It will also be remembered that it is remarked in the book of Judges, after the great series of battles ending in the people of God entering on their heritage, that some had not known the wars of Canaan; and so it is, that there are those constantly coming in amongst the saints who do not know war and need to learn it. It is not an optional matter, it is imperative, for conscription is the principle with God in this respect; and we are to understand what it is that is to be contended for, involving, as Jude says, "the faith once delivered to the saints" (@Jude 1:3). What is of God was never delivered to others; not to self-made councils and ecclesiastical dignitaries as historically known, but to the saints. So the idea is that the saints are in possession of it and are to value what they have, "the good deposit", and maintain it against all opposition; and that in this service they are to be pleasing to the Lord, as we learn in this fourth verse, "No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier".
In certain services we may perhaps assume that we are pleasing to the Lord; it is imperative that we should be in every service, but as in military service we are apt to forget that it is imperative there also. The idea of being pleasing to God is outstanding from the days of Enoch and earlier. Indeed, as God made one
{535}
thing after another in bringing the creation into its present form, seen in @Genesis 1 and 2, He takes care to pronounce on each; He was concerned that all should be according to His own mind. When we come to Enoch, we are told that "he had this testimony, that he pleased God";(@Hebrews 11:5) not simply as God's handiwork, as part of creation, but in the outshining of what was there through discipline, through education from God, before his translation. Not that *we* have the testimony that he pleased God; we have it, thank God, but that *he* had it. How pleasing to him it must have been that God gave him to understand in his daily walks with Him, as it were, that he pleased Him; for God's thought in the companionship He takes on is that it should be congenial. In like manner each is to please Him who has called him to be a soldier.
Then what comes out at this point is that soldiership is learnt from God, so that we are to understand it is a spiritual matter. Hence the saints, as come out of Egypt, celebrated Jehovah as a "man of war" -- "Jehovah is a man of war", they say (@Exodus 15:3); but then, in the same breath they say, "Jehovah, his name". There was more there than warriorship and military power; "Jehovah, his name", a name that is regarded by the spiritual as to be revered. So that the thought leads to worship. That chapter -- @Exodus 15 -- is full of the spirit of worship, including the triumphant note, "Jehovah shall reign for ever and ever!" (@Exodus 15:18) No thoroughly subject person desires aught else than that, than that "Jehovah shall reign for ever and ever",(@Exodus 15:18) a settled order of things in which the subjects are satisfied.
Another thing that comes in is that, in our warfare, we go through a certain training, so that the Lord can take His place as Head, as Leader, and not be ashamed of us -- because we please Him. Hence in the book of Joshua we have five chapters dealing with the education of Joshua and Israel; particularly their army, but Israel as a whole, before we have the Captain of Jehovah's
{536}
host. He does not appear in the first chapter, for now we are on military ground, and military dignity and order and glory must be considered for; it is a matter of divine warfare and a holy matter too; no room for fleshly exhibition, anger or hate, in it. Hence chapter 5 of Joshua records the position at Gilgal, where all that is of the flesh would be a reproach. To bring spiritual matters into an ordinary army of this world would generally bring one under reproach, but in divine warfare, to bring in fleshly feelings, places one under reproach; and that is what Gilgal implies, the reproach of Egypt rolled away; whatever feature of Egypt it may be, it is drastically dealt with in the circumcision. So the passover is kept, and then we have the old corn of the land, the suitable food now is a heavenly matter. Our warfare is spiritual; not with flesh and blood, but with powers in the heavenlies, and we need heavenly food to sustain us for that, and that food is no less than Christ Himself as indigenous to heaven; as belonging to heaven, as He says, "The Son of man which is in heaven" (@John 3:13). He is to be apprehended in that light; partaken of, fed upon, in that light, for this warfare.
Immediately after this heavenly bread is spoken of, Joshua lifts up his eyes and sees the Man with His sword drawn. Joshua, being the ostensible leader of Israel, thinks of someone as an addition to his army, to his military power, and inquires, "Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?" (@Joshua 5:13) The reply was, "Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come",(@Joshua 5:14) as much as to say, as indeed the footnote indicates, 'for I, the captain of the army of Jehovah, am now come' -- the time has come for it, conditions are ready for it. That is, I think, what is meant. It is a military matter, and the Captain is there; He belongs to heaven, and when suitable conditions exist. He comes in to lead. 'I as Captain of Jehovah's host am now come'. I know of nothing more encouraging in times of stress, of
{537}
conflict, than the sense that the Lord at an opportune moment comes in. Certain exercises have to be gone through by us, and the sense of dependence deepened, and we for a time are to endure the ignominy and stress, but as we make room for Him, He never fails to come in, and the required results are reached. It may be we need to be led on to the heavenly side and to judge the natural ways we have in conflict, but He waits His own time and comes in then and announces Himself as in complete charge of the whole matter, and everyone who knows Him wishes that, and that only. It is entirely His matter now, the conquest of Canaan is not Joshua's matter; it is a matter for the Captain of Jehovah's host, and there can be only one end as He takes charge -- complete victory.
I wish now to show how in conflicts God places some thing or person in the enemy's camp that will ultimately disrupt it. One could cite many instances besides those two of which I have read. I believe it is a great principle with God that He not only takes up leadership, but operates, choosing His own battlefields, and causes conditions in the enemy's camp to disrupt him. The warfare goes on, of course, but the Captain of Jehovah's host is in position, the ground is holy too; another important matter, "Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy" (@Joshua 5:15). Military service is holy, as the service of God in the sanctuary is holy. Dear brethren, this has to be kept in mind. We are told about the Lord Jesus in Romans, "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead" (@Romans 1:4). Grappling with the great enemy of God and men. He maintained the standard of holiness, and as on the cross, we know He said to God, "Thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel", @Psalm 22:3. So that holiness is to be maintained in all these features of service. As I was saying, the principle of God working in the enemy's camp for its overthrow is to be noted.
{538}
We have, for instance, such a person as the wife of Pilate at Jerusalem -- a remarkable personage brought in at the right moment. Had her husband had right instincts he would have been affected, but his conduct is rendered the more reprehensible by the testimony of that woman. She said to her husband, as he sat there on the judgment seat, "Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him";(@Matthew 27:19) that is Jesus. That Pilate was not affected does not set aside the triumph of that; it was a moral triumph that there was somebody in the enemy's camp -- no other than the wife of the judge, who testified to the righteousness of Jesus at that moment. Jesus died, of course, but the moral victory was there, and it is on this principle that God had that woman there. Again, the thief of whom we often speak; he had a moment before been on the side of the enemy, but now is against him as on Christ's side -- witnessing to His righteousness, and condemning the worst feature, perhaps, of the enemy's camp, that is, what is called the underworld. This man beside Jesus on the cross bears testimony to it. He says, as it were, I know that I am justly condemned, I am one that sinned in that feature of the world, I am dying a malefactor justly; but "this man hath done nothing amiss" (@Luke 23:41). And moreover he says, "Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom" (@Luke 23:42). Christ was to reign for ever and ever, he knows this. Thus one in the enemy's camp, by his testimony, in principle disrupts it; it is only a matter of time. It could not be without the death of Jesus, but I am speaking now of the testimony that was there. Then again, we have the centurion, the officer who superintended the crucifixion of Christ and the two thieves. He says, as he noticed what happened, "Truly this man was the Son of God" (@Matthew 27:54). He is the representative of the Roman army, and his testimony involved the disruption of the whole system. The Son of God sets up another system. The stone cut out
{539}
without hands (@Daniel 2), shall overthrow the great gentile empires, but "itself shall stand for ever" (@Daniel 2:44).
Now I come to Rahab the harlot. This designation attached to her, is surely to remind us of what I am speaking of. She is no longer that, she has flax in her house, she has it spread on her roof, she hides the servants of God with it; and yet she is living on the wall of Jericho, she is under the rule of the king of Jericho, outwardly. He sends to her, but she is in principle disrupting his whole system, and what comes out here is, that she speaks, not about herself or anything in her to commend herself, but about God and God's people; a sure evidence that she has been secured for God, and she is going to effect what He intended she should effect, that is to say, a clear testimony in Jericho to the power of God and the power of God's people, and that they must prevail, and the world go down. Let us hear such testimonies as these and we shall be greatly strengthened in confessing the name of the Lord. Being enrolled at twenty years old, as they were in Numbers, means that a young Christian believing in the Lord Jesus and believing in his heart that God has raised Him from the dead, confesses His name. That is the idea; one is thus publicly a soldier of Jesus Christ and now henceforth it is for him to *please* the Lord, as such. How stimulating it is that, although in your workshop or office, or schoolroom, it may be, you feel the power of the world, that there is in you there at any time a testimony to God, a testimony to what will bring down the whole evil system around you. When it was suitable to do so, Rahab went up to the roof and conversed with the two spies. It is a remarkable incident. She says, "We have heard that Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red sea before you". The saints come into view as the subjects of God's service. How much God is doing today in all the manipulations among the nations and in the commercial world. What else can it be, but for the saints? "All things", says
{540}
the apostle, "work together for good to those who love God" (@Romans 8:28). Rahab understands that what God did at the Red Sea He did for His people.
What a word that is for young Christians, as it says in Romans, "who was delivered for our offences" -- as if there was nothing else in view -- "and was raised again for our justification" (@Romans 4:25). Jesus¬ death is for us, His resurrection is for us. His present session in heaven is for us, ever living, as it says, to make intercession for us. What then are *we* doing? That is the next thing that Rahab speaks of; and that is part of the testimony to the world; the power of the saints; what they are capable of. It will come to light when Israel will become the battle-axe of God, but more so now in a spiritual way in this warfare in heavenly places, or, it may be, in the wilderness as we confess the Lord Jesus as our Saviour. So Rahab says, "We have heard ... what ye did to the two kings of the Amorites". The humble believer would not enlarge on *his* work, but when one such as Rahab speaks of what the saints do, there is a testimony to the power amongst them. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world",(@1 John 4:4). And the Lord says to the assembly in Philadelphia, "Thou hast a little power", (@Revelation 3:8). Rahab knows how to speak of it; she says further. We have heard "what ye did ... to Sihon and to Og, whom ye utterly destroyed". How fine a thing it is to speak of a work of this kind that is really well done. "Ye utterly destroyed" them, she says. If we understand what Sihon and Og mean spiritually, we shall see the force of this more fully. It is a question of our way of thinking of ourselves -- as big -- until each can say with the apostle, "I am crucified with Christ, and no longer live, *I*, but Christ lives in me", (Galatians 2:20). You can thus see, how as in conflict, what stimulation it is to find in the enemy's camp the means, in principle, of its destruction.
{541}
I go on to Judges. In Joshua it is a question of conflict in regard to the inheritance, and as I was saying, one in Jericho as outwardly of it, but who has completely turned round; she now knows God, and knows what God is doing. She knows the saints and knows what the saints are doing, and as it were she is coming into fellowship; her name is to be perpetually remembered in Israel. It is a question of the inheritance of God and what God places in the enemy's stronghold to disrupt it.
Now in Judges it is not exactly a question of taking possession of the inheritance, but of maintaining ourselves in it, the enemy seeking to rob us of our food. The Midianites had invaded the land and destroyed the food of Israel; what God had provided for them. How much there is of that today, and what a great service it is to rescue it! The Lord says of one who gives food in season to his household: "Blessed is that bondman whom his lord on coming shall find doing thus" (@Matthew 24:46). Thus we see the great importance of food for the saints. In a day of small things God says, "Bring the whole tithe into the treasure-house, that there may be food in my house, and prove me now herewith ... if I open not to you the windows of the heavens, and pour you out a blessing, till there be no place for it", (@Malachi 3:10). That shows the importance of making room for what the Lord is furnishing us with, for it is not God's way to continue ministering what people do not value.
Now, the Midianites were destroying the food, and Gideon, as first introduced to us, was doing what he could in a very circumscribed environment to defeat what the enemy was doing. He was hiding the food from the Midianites. That was how Jehovah found him employed, and the verses I have read speak of something in that camp that would disrupt it. Numerous as the Midianite hosts were, they were going to be overthrown, and there was a testimony within their own
{542}
midst to this very thing. Thus Gideon is caused to hear what transpired between these two men in the camp, and, dear brethren, in our conflicts we should understand this matter.
God could have given deliverance otherwise, but He said in effect to Gideon, 'You are to go down to the camp and see this thing I have put there, and you will be assured that victory is yours'. So it says, "Gideon came, and behold, a man was telling a dream to his fellow; and he said. Behold, I dreamed a dream, and lo, a cake of barley-bread tumbled into the camp of Midian, and came to the tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it; and the tent lay along". There was only one Rahab; only one wife of Pilate; only one thief on the cross who was converted; only one centurion at the cross who confessed Jesus; here there were two men in Midian's camp speaking of the victory over their own people that God was about to give Gideon. I want you to note that Jehovah directed His servant to go down into Midian's camp to see what was there.
In the New Testament we may find examples of this kind in the teaching, how the weakness of the world is exposed. You get, for instance, in @Revelation 9, apparently great warriors, but they have hair as woman's hair; meaning that they are morally weak; and so we are told to resist the devil, and he will flee from us. With all his show of outward power, he is a defeated foe, and cannot stand before true Christians, being the soldiers of God. The Christian knows the arch-enemy, he understands by spiritual teaching the weakness that is there. We all are to understand it, what we have to contend with, and how weak the position is, if rightly understood. Scripture abounds with evidence of this. Gideon is to know it in a first-hand way. So Jehovah says, "Go thou with Phurah thy servant" (@Judges 7:10). Two are better than one in such matters. Two spies went to Jericho, and here there are Gideon and his servant, and then two men in the camp of Midian. One has
{543}
the dream, and tells the other, "And his fellow answered and said. This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, the man of Israel: God hath given into his hand Midian and all the host". Think of that, between two Midianites! The man who dreamed, for the moment, was a servant of heaven in the enemy's camp, and the other man who had light about the dream, was also a servant of heaven. He says, "This is nothing else ...". It is a process of reasoning -- "save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, the man of Israel". What light and encouragement for Gideon at such a moment! And he goes on to say, "God hath given into his hand Midian and all the host". This interpreter of the dream is as valuable for this purpose as if he were the archangel Michael come down. He is God's vessel for this service, God may have at any time in the midst of our conflicts in the very enemy's camp, what discloses his weakness and effects ultimately his overthrow. The knowledge of this gives assurance as we go forward as warriors of God.
One could say much about @Ephesians 6, for that is the chapter that enlarges on our position at the present time. What a dignity there is in it! What armour is provided! Nothing less than the whole armour of God. We read of the Lord Jesus coming out presently from heaven and the armies of heaven following Him. We already belong to those armies. The book of Joshua opens it up to us, it is a question of heavenly bread, and heavenly warriors, and the Captain of Jehovah's host taking His place at their head. Joshua is directed to take his shoes off, as the ground was holy, and he does. And because of the testimony of those two men in the camp of Midian, Gideon worships. So you can see, dear brethren, that what I am speaking of now is no less a matter than the service of God, towards Himself, that all these military matters really have this in mind. Gideon worshipped, as you will observe. "And it came to pass when Gideon heard the telling
{544}
of the dream and its interpretation, that he worshipped. And he returned into the camp of Israel, and said, Arise; for Jehovah hath given into your hand the camp of Midian". He is full of assurance, of encouragement to go forward, and we all know the great result -- a complete victory over Midian by Gideon and his three hundred men, who are spiritually tested, so "that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us",(@2 Corinthians 4:7) and to show that "the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ", (@2 Corinthians 10:4,5).
That is what I had to say, dear brethren, and I trust it will be of service, for the need of soldiership is great, of contending earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints, and, in doing it, to please Him who has called us to be His soldiers in our times.
