{1}
Pages 1 - 229 -- "Wells and Springs" Notes of Readings in New York and other Ministry, 1942 (Volume 156).
WELLS AND SPRINGS (1)
@John 3: 27; @John 4: 1 - 30
J.T. The proposal is to look at the scriptures which treat of springs, or wells, or other water typical of the Spirit, especially in view of freshness in the assembly. Our hope and expectation is that through these meetings God will help us to a clearer apprehension of Christ and the assembly. The apostle says in @Ephesians 5, "but *I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". He had been speaking of natural family relationships, but the subject of Christ and the assembly was the main thought, and so it is throughout Scripture. Christ and the assembly stand out as the theme -- especially now, in view of the translation of the saints and the marriage of the Lamb. God would help us to have a clearer view of this great matter, and help that those who do not recognise the greatness of it may be drawn into it as having part in it. It is thought that linking on the idea of springs with the subject will lead to a clearer apprehension of the freshness that is essential to assembly functions.
There can be no question of the freshness that is in Christ. He remains what He has always been since He became Man. The voice of the Bridegroom is there, and the feelings of the Bridegroom, and they remain even in heavenly glory. In the type, He comes out of His chamber, we are told, the sun representing Him, and rejoices as a strong man to run the race (@Psalm 19). There is no question as to freshness and vigour with Him, but there is a very great question as to these things with those of us who form the assembly. Even if we apprehend the truth in any measure, we are apt
{2}
to think of it in a merely academic way, instead of being conscious of having part in it; participating in the joy of it.
@John 3 affords us a view of Christ as the Bridegroom, John the baptist saying that he is the friend of the Bridegroom, who rejoices to hear His voice. This section will help us to begin with what is peculiarly applicable to our times, in accord with John's ministry; John the baptist being a model in the sense of appreciation of Christ, and disallowance of himself, in order that Christ may be everything and in all. He brings Christ in as the Bridegroom very noticeably, and then proceeds to enlarge upon the greatness of Christ's Person, leading up to the statement that the Father loves the Son and gives all things to be in His hand. Then we have this well-known passage in chapter 4, affording us a clue as to how the bride comes into view, from the standpoint of John's gospel. The woman undoubtedly may be taken to represent how the bride comes into view. A most disreputable person actually, yet she is brought into complete, and you might say, intelligent appreciation of Christ. He is now the one Man that displaces all the others, of whom there were six -- five, and the one she then had, which was not her husband -- and there can be no question about her disallowance of him at once. It is evident that we get deliverance from all that is corrupt by coming into contact with Christ, and He becomes all to us. The woman immediately takes an interest in His affairs and speaks to others about Him, and secures others for Him. That is, I think, a good platform for us to begin with in this inquiry.
A.N.W. John says that the Bridegroom must increase. Is it in the bride that he visualises it?
J.T. We cannot say that John understood the assembly; but she is Christ's fulness. You can hardly get a greater concrete expression of the idea of increase as regards Christ than in the assembly which is said to
{3}
be His fulness. God "gave him ... head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all" (@Ephesians 1: 22, 23); it is very wonderful that we have part in that. The matter of the bride and Bridegroom is introduced, not in a mere doctrinal way, but by one marked by spiritual feelings; one to whom Christ is becoming all. "John answered and said, A man can receive nothing unless it be given him out of heaven. Ye yourselves bear me witness that I said, I am not the Christ, but, that I am sent before him. He that has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices in heart because of the voice of the bridegroom; this my joy then is fulfilled" (verses 27 - 29). It seems to me that it is suitable that the introduction to the matter of the Bridegroom and the bride should be through one who is full of it, as the Baptist is.
C.A.M. Why is it said in verse 23, "there was a great deal of water there"?
J.T. John used it for baptism, which would point to death. In the next chapter it is said that the Lord's disciples were baptising, but He Himself was not doing it. He was not making Himself a Centre by any formal sacrament, but would become a Centre, because of what He was personally, and the woman in @John 4 represents how He becomes everything to christians. As to the water at Aenon, quantity is stressed. Quantity is not the point in chapter 4.
C.A.M. I thought the quantity might suggest that all had disappeared in death, making way for this living suggestion about the Bridegroom and the bride.
J.T. Well, yes -- if they all had disappeared. One is very doubtful of that, because of what was going on. "There was therefore a reasoning of the disciples of John with a Jew about purification", @John 3: 25. In view of that does this allusion to the quantity of water and John's baptism continuing, reflect favourably on
{4}
John? It is not a question of the quantity of water, not that *he* is making anything of it, but the Spirit of God mentions it; John was baptising there on this account. The question is whether the baptism of John really had not lost its force, because John the evangelist brings Christ in in ministry before the time mentioned in the synoptic gospels. They say that the Lord waited until John was cast into prison before He began. In John's gospel the Lord began before this, and morally He superseded John. John himself attested that in saying, "He that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was before me" (chapter 1: 15). According to chapter 1 John had stopped; he "stood", and his disciples began to leave him. His service had already accomplished its purpose; but he is going on with it. John, however, appears in his true and glorious character in that he repudiates any thought of rivalry with Christ; he disappears here with flying colours: saying, "He must increase, but I must decrease" (chapter 3: 30). That is the end of John, because the Person is on the ground now who is to take up everything for God. God had not allowed the removal of John. John carried on until that happened; but the Lord had entered on His service. A divine Person need not wait upon any formal matters in the government of God. I think it is to give the right place to Christ in our own times. He cannot be bound by formal or legal ties.
C.A.M. It seems to emphasise what John says: "A man can receive nothing unless it be given him out of heaven".
J.T. That is right. I suppose he is alluding to what came out of heaven. The Lord was baptised at the Jordan; heaven owned Him then; and so in chapter 10 of this gospel, the Lord as rejected by the Jews comes to where *John was baptising* (chapter 1: 28); meaning, I think, that He passed over what took place at Aenon.
{5}
W.B-w. "He that has the bride is the bridegroom" -- do you think that was prophetic? John was a prophet.
J.T. Yes. It is a statement that carries its own weight with it. The Old Testament spoke of the Bridegroom, but who is the bride to be? The Bridegroom is in evidence here, but there is nothing said about the bride, except that the Bridegroom has her; she belongs to Him. But where is she? How does she come into evidence? I think @John 4 answers that. In Matthew we have the Bridegroom mentioned, and we have the marriage mentioned, but where is the bride? That is a challenge to each of our hearts. How does she come in? Does she come in through baptism or through the Lord's supper, or through an apprehension of Christ in His greatness; a well of water in her springing up into everlasting life? That is the point we want to get to.
W.B-w. Is it not true that she comes in by baptism in one aspect of the truth?
J.T. Well, that may be true on the public side, but how many are baptised that are not responding at all? The real point is the well of water springing up into everlasting life; a living state of things. What kind of a bride can there be without a living state of things?
J.T.Jr. Does John the baptist suggest the thought in himself first as leaping with joy (@Luke 1: 41), and then his joy fulfilled (@John 3: 29)?
J.T. That is the idea exactly. John the evangelist shows him to greater advantage than any other of the gospels, although Luke speaks of him as leaping for joy before he was born, at the voice of the mother of Christ. In @John 3 he is an intelligent man, appreciative of the greatness of Christ. He is superseded, and yet he says his joy is fulfilled, because he hears the voice of the Bridegroom. Every one of us has to inquire, Am I ready for that? Are my affections stimulated by the thought of it?
{6}
F.S.C. Is John a forerunner of what should mark the assembly?
J.T. Well, he is an example for us. He makes nothing of his own distinction; he makes everything of Christ; and now what is nearest to the Lord's heart is the bride, and the Lord's voice is the voice of the Bridegroom to John the baptist. He says, "my joy then is fulfilled".
W.G.T. How far did Johns thoughts go when he said, "He that has the bride is the bridegroom"?
J.T. It is a statement that conveys its own meaning to anyone who has an ear to hear. It is obvious that the possessor of the bride is the bridegroom. There is no question as to the Bridegroom here. John hears His voice, but where is the bride? And that is the question today. There is no doubt about the Lord's voice in the ministry, but where is the bride? Where are those who are stimulated in affection at the thought of it?
W.G.T. When John's disciples followed Jesus, was there some suggestion that He was seeking the bride?
J.T. Well, there was something there the two disciples wished to be taught, and they wished to know where the Lord dwelt; then as Peter was brought to Him the Lord said, having the assembly in mind, that he should be called Cephas; assembly material was coming into view. John's gospel is to make much of Christ. The way to bring in the saints as the bride, is to make much of Christ. If you make much of Christ you are sure to make much of the saints. If I do not make much of them, I cannot claim to love Christ, the Bridegroom, because the saints are His bride.
W.B-w. Do you think the apostle John got an impression here about the bride? In the end of the book of Revelation, he refers to the bride.
J.T. Yes. You can see how in the last days, these great points are stressed in his ministry, and the Lord is stressing them *now*. John quotes John the Baptist here. In Revelation, John himself brings in the bride
{7}
in the most concrete way, and sees her finally coming down adorned as such for her Husband; to whom she says, "Come". So that the question as to where the bride may be, is now before us; before everyone who professes to believe in the Lord Jesus. Have I part in it? Am I moved by the very thought of the Bridegroom? Am I stimulated?
A.A.T. In the New Translation the word *fountain*, in chapter 4, is used several times instead of *well*.
J.T. The *fountain* is a spring. The note at the bottom of the page, referring to verse 6, says, "Another word is used for the *well*, verse 11, in which the spring was; and this word, translated *fountain* is used for what springs up as life in the renewed man". That shows that the word *fountain* alludes to a spring; and that is why the chapter is before us, it is the leading thought in the New Testament, which we shall see greatly unfolded in the types of the Old. It is a spring. The Lord says that the living water which He gives, becomes in the believer a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life. That is where the bride begins to come into view. The thought of eternal life must underlie it, because clearly, we must be in a living state of things for marital relation. Those forming the assembly are living people.
J.H.E. Do we see that in Achsah? She asked for the upper and nether springs.
J.T. That is right. The basis is here, in the Lord's teaching ministered to this woman. John the baptist's word that his joy is fulfilled, even at the hearing of the voice of the Bridegroom, indicates that the bride is coming into view in this chapter. There is a word for everyone of us as to whether we have heard His voice, and whether we are responding. John is a model for us.
Ques. "One man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I not found", @Ecclesiastes 7: 28. Would that bear on what you have before you?
{8}
J.T. Yes. Each of us is challenged as to whether he possesses the qualities of the bride. In @Proverbs 31 we have the woman portrayed before our eyes as one who cares for the interests of her husband in his absence. That I think comes out in this woman in chapter 4; she began immediately to look after the interests of Christ; she testified to the *men*; He is especially thinking of them. He is "head of every man". The woman had a very sinful history and this includes each of us, which we have to confess; but when we get to the Eve side of the assembly there is no sinful history. She came out of Adam and Adam had no sin then. We shall come to it, I think. This matter of sinful history we all have to face, while we are down here; but as glorified above there is no past sinful history at all; it is all gone, never to be revived or thought of. You cannot imagine that the assembly, the bride of Christ, will have reminiscences of sin in this world. It is impossible to think of it.
Rem. John the baptist recognised Christ as "He ... who baptises with the Holy Spirit".
J.T. That is what the Lord Jesus would do. John says, "I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God", @John 1: 34. He had not yet come to the thought of the Bridegroom. The Son of God is his first great testimony; now he speaks of the Bridegroom. In baptising with the Holy Spirit the Lord Jesus secures every one of us for the assembly.
A.N.W. How did John the baptist come to change from speaking of the Lamb of God to that of the Bridegroom?
J.T. I think the Lord made Himself felt in John's soul. Earlier, he had said he did not know Him; he had not then heard His voice, but now he has seen Him and also heard His voice, showing, as remarked, that the Lord Jesus began to minister before John the baptist was cast into prison.
{9}
F.H.L. Do you think John the baptist had something beyond the Jewish bride in mind when he said, "A man can receive nothing unless it be given him out of heaven"?
J.T. He may have, but I judge his mind would be governed by Old Testament references. John the evangelist indicates that John's mind was merging into the truths of christianity. You can hardly say where his words in chapter 3 end. They run into christianity, you might say, but I do not think the assembly was definitely in his mind.
W.B-w. Referring to the sinful history, does the word, "He who has his origin in the earth" imply this?
J.T. It does; the assembly's origin is heavenly. Redemption and the ministry that makes it effective in men's souls, lead us to take heavenly ground. Sinful history is an individual matter, attaching to each of us; but as remarked, redemption meets this, to the infinite satisfaction of God, so that we can take heavenly ground in the assembly.
A.R.S. Would the truth of new creation imply removal of sinful history?
J.T. It does; "old things are passed away", and among them the sinful state and history. The question of sin, however, has to be taken up through the conscience as a moral process; this enters into our formation, and is expressed in the new man. New creation fits us for heavenly glory and the counsels of God.
A.B.P. Is this woman an example of one who is born of the Spirit?
J.T. Well, she is; new birth is taught to Nicodemus in chapter 3. The Lord did not speak of it to the woman. It is where people take pharisaical ground, that the truth of new birth is stressed, but when a man or woman is degraded and owns it fully, then chapter 4 is the instruction, and what such an one needs is inward deliverance, which is by the Spirit. The believer judges the thing authoritatively through the *mind*, resolving to
{10}
serve God's law, and the Spirit supports him -- the teaching is @Romans 7 and 8. New birth, in itself, is an initial thought, but the springing well added to it, through redemption, renders the believer powerful and victorious. A man like Nicodemus would be greatly harassed with legal thoughts; he would need deliverance from the law; but the woman of Samaria would suffer from reminiscences and tendencies of her earlier life, and hence would need the Spirit as a *spring* within for deliverance.
Rem. The basis of this is being linked up with something that has come out of heaven.
J.T. That is the thought that John the baptist has, that He that comes out of heaven is above all. He has a great way of giving precedence to persons. He shows the Lord Jesus was *before him*. Jesus was about six months younger than John the baptist, but John says, He is before me. He *cried* and said this. John is ready to give way to others, and now it is not simply the Person of Christ, but because He is out of heaven. He must be above all. How wonderful it is that the church is out of heaven!
A.R.S. So that whatever goes into heaven has come out of it.
W.R. Would you link the idea of the Bridegroom, as having His origin in heaven, with His coming from the Father? I think James says, "Every good gift and every perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of lights", @James 1: 17.
J.T. The Son is the gift of the Father, but then *coming* out of heaven would apply rather to the Person of Christ. The Person is heavenly Himself. "If then ye see the Son of man ascending up where he was before", @John 6: 62. He says, "I came down from heaven". That is the idea. He is a Man out of heaven. He was not a Man before He came down, yet He speaks, while on earth, of "the Son of man who is in heaven". So that the idea of man in heaven is there. Heaven is full of
{11}
the thought. Christ, as Man, is Head over all things to the assembly, which is His body. There are two thoughts in @Genesis 1; the first is in verse 26, where God says, "Let us make man in our image". That is the kind of earthy being. Then in verse 27 we have *the Adam*, involving distinction, and it is male and female. God breathing into Adam's nostrils the breath of life made him a very distinguished order of being. That is the divine thought and that is what fills heaven. It is not that Christ is a Man on earth, but He is to fill heaven.
A.R. When the Lord says to the woman, "a fountain of water springing up into eternal life", that puts her on a different platform altogether.
J.T. The first platform is eternal life. That is the way *up*: the springing up. It is not only that I lay hold of life objectively; I have a spring that springs up into it, making me superior to death. I am not only alive, but in the *sphere* of life.
C.H.H. You were speaking about freshness in @Ephesians 4, where we get "renewed in the spirit of your mind". I understand that word *renewed* is the idea of freshness. Would that be the condition the assembly would take on through the springing up? The next chapter says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly" -- as though the assembly would take on that freshness.
J.T. Yes. The renewal of the mind is involved in all that we are saying, so that the new man in Colossians is in freshness. The idea is freshness, or youthfulness. The word *man*, in that connection, does not imply sex; it is quality or character. There is only one new man. The heavenly city is called the new Jerusalem in @Revelation 21. She comes down from God out of heaven adorned as a bride for her husband.
A.R. Would you say that at the Supper, every first day of the week, the saints come together in spiritual freshness as a bride ready for her husband?
{12}
J.T. That is what we are trying to get at. It is the matter of how this enters into the service of God. We now have come to the thought of life; not only the objective thought of it, but the inward means of reaching it. We reach eternal life; a sphere or order of things. That is the basis on which marital relations must be; it is not a dead state of things; it is a living state of things, and that is, I believe, why this great thought of the fountain is brought in in this chapter. It underlies the truth of the assembly and the service of God.
C.A.M. When we think of manhood in christianity, it includes the feminine idea as seen in @Genesis 1: 27. Now that that Person has come to earth, His voice brings about the formation of the bride.
J.T. That is right. He was here alone clearly, as Adam had been alone. We do not know how much older Adam was than Eve; both were created on the same day, but Adam had the experience of being *alone*. God took account of this fact and that it was not good, and moreover it did not fill out His thought. "Male and female created he them", and they had dominion. @Genesis 2 enlarges on this great subject. Chapter 5 goes back to it and says, that on the day that God created them He called their name, Adam. Clearly He did not create them together, although the word create covers the woman, yet properly speaking, according to @Genesis 2, she was *built*. She was made according to design. The idea of architecture, or design is there, and God Himself had that thought; the completion of the being that God's counsels required involved the female as well as the male. All this was only provisional -- Christ and the assembly formed the ultimate thought.
A.R.S. Adam says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh". @Genesis 2: 23. Eve does not say a word.
J.T. She is passive. She said too much afterwards.
{13}
C.A.M. It is a very wonderful thought, that the heavenly side should be in view, but brought about on earth. It was a heavenly idea before this occurrence.
J.T. Certainly Adam had not yet sinned, and the operation of creating or making Eve was before sin came into the world. God undoubtedly in His own thoughts had heaven in mind; that this great order of being that He had in mind should fill heaven. Of course, it would be in the second Man, who is "out of heaven", but I am speaking of the order of being. What we are speaking of did not come out immediately, because God was going on with the earth for the moment. The heavens are spoken of as made -- what is called the sidereal heaven. Chapter 1 does not say it was very good by itself, as if the Ephesian truth could not yet be unfolded. Our subject now requires Ephesian truth; we cannot understand it otherwise. In any subject we take up, the full final thought of it should be first in view, and then the details. I believe this section of John's gospel gives us basically the full thought, the Bridegroom's voice and one man rejoicing in it -- satisfied by it -- and then the idea of the bride coming in, as seen in this woman in chapter 4. The Lord, when the woman leaves, turns to His workmen. We, for instance, have been talking about Christ and the assembly; well, that is for every saint, whose ear can hear. The next thing is the workmen, through whom the Lord Jesus works specially; it is important that they should be spoken to by themselves, and that is the next thing that comes in. The Lord puts them in a low place; He says, "others have laboured, and ye have entered into their labours" (verse 38), but then He says, 'Behold, I say to you, Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest' (verse 35). That is another important thought; sometimes it is well for those who are specially labouring to talk about these things. What we are considering now is not that; but what the Lord said to the woman. We are thinking of the formation of the
{14}
assembly, and how to be maintained in freshness; and of the spring -- the springing up into everlasting life.
C.H.H. Would the fountain in the believer include the thought of cleansing as in @Ephesians 5?
J.T. That is rather the water that came from the side of Christ; water of purification. This in @John 4 is the Holy Spirit as the water of *life* inside, as satisfaction and deliverance in the sense of power. There are three that bear witness, the Spirit and the water and the blood. There is the water and the blood; they each witness, but the Spirit is the living witness, and the Spirit is in view in the living water here. The woman needed the blood and the water, but this is not stressed here. The point is that she gets deliverance for her affections in the power of the Holy Spirit; that is what is meant. So that she emerges from the influence of the men she had to do with, into the thought of one Man, as the apostle says: "for I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ", @2 Corinthians 11: 2.
C.H.H. Would the words He spoke to her be the water of cleansing?
J.T. He says to His disciples, "Ye are already clean by reason of the word which I have spoken to you", @John 15: 3. That is not the Spirit.
W.B-w. In the end of chapter 3 it says, "He that is not subject to the Son ..." Do you think He had in mind the false bride, to come in in the organised religions of today -- not subject to the Son?
J.T. No doubt, and so He speaks to Thyatira as the Son of God, who has His eyes as a flame of fire. You might put what you suggest into Romans -- the woman is free from her husband if her husband be dead. That would be the Jewish system; we have become dead to the law by the body of Christ. This woman had five husbands and the one she had was not her husband, which would be six -- think of the power of that. If she lived in Samaria, when Philip and the apostles went
{15}
down there and assemblies were formed, she would come into the truth of Romans; she would know this. She has already come into it in principle, because she sees her body as a vessel. It had been a vessel of corruption, but now it is to be a vessel for Christ in the assembly, and how has she become free from the old things? -- by the body of Christ. The Christ must die, and I can only be free before God legally through the death of that One, and that, of course, is what Romans teaches.
W.B-w. In Ephesians, the wife is to be subject to the husband. Is that the way the truth works out?
J.T. Quite so. The closing verse of @John 3 shows that those who are not subject to the Son are under wrath; and how am I to get free of that wrath? She was claiming to be of the seed of Jacob. How would she get free of all that -- of Samaria and judaism? Only by the body of Christ; and that opens up a wonderful field of instruction, and, of course, Romans is the doctrine of it. Paul and Barnabas went through Samaria to settle the question of Jewish legality (@Acts 15: 1 - 3). They passed through Samaria. Well, suppose she was there, and knowing Paul's doctrine, she would say, I have got free by the body of Christ.
W.B-w. She would be married to another and bring forth fruit to God.
J.T. That is the idea -- to be married to another. Who is the Other? She is telling the men here that the Other is Christ; He is the Christ, she says -- "is not he the Christ?" She does not say, He had told her He is the Christ, but He had told her all things she had ever done. How can she get clear of all that? It is by the body of Christ in death. "We have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all", @Hebrews 10: 10.
J.T.Jr. Would you say there is any correspondence in what Rahab said to the two spies? She spoke of Sihon and Og being destroyed.
{16}
J.T. That would be the idea exactly. She would understand the bigness that is prone to mark us at times. Sihon and Og are really the big "I". The woman of Samaria cherished whatever bigness attached to her according to her own reckoning. She put her fathers and her worship, and "this mountain", over against all that was in Jerusalem. But this assumed greatness had no value whatever. *We* have to come to this, that Sihon and Og are overthrown in us, before we can come into the assembly.
F.H.L. Would leaving the water pot be a proof that she had learned from the Lord's teaching?
J.T. Quite so. Leaving the water pot was no accident. It shows she had come into the idea of being a vessel. The assembly is a vessel. It comes down from God out of heaven.
W.G.T. The Lord says, in verse 10, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee ..." Would that not be the right way to approach the whole matter from her side?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord is bringing before her what John the baptist brought out in another way. John the baptist referred to it formally, that this voice he heard was out of heaven and above all. The Lord Himself says, "who it is" -- not who I am -- "that says to thee, Give me to drink". The element of going down must get into my soul. The glorious Creator and Sustainer of the universe is calling upon her for a drink of water. He is asking for a drink of water, and He has created all the water. It indicates the change that has come about in His becoming man, according to @Philippians 2. That enters into the truth of the assembly, that we understand what it is to come down; to think nothing of ourselves; "For let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus; who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form", @Philippians 2: 5 - 7. That thought is conveyed
{17}
here. The Lord says, "If thou knewest ... who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". That was intended to get into the fibre of her being; she was to learn how the Lord descended, so that *she* might come down and be nothing.
C.A.M. When John says he heard the Bridegroom's voice, we might ask, What did he hear? Would you say that he heard some such tones as this.
J.T. Yes. The Lord elsewhere likens Himself to a merchant man seeking goodly pearls. He had a definite thing in His mind. Well, He found one pearl of great price, and He sold all whatever He had and bought it (@Matthew 13: 46). Well, if He were talking to you about that, you would hear the Bridegroom's voice. Oh, you say, the bride was not there. She was not; but she was in His mind. Divine Persons can regard abstract things as if they existed concretely. "Whom he has foreknown, he has also predestinated", @Romans 8: 29. The concrete persons as walking here in time, are contemplated. God foreknew everyone of us. So the apostle says, "whom he has foreknown, he has also predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Son". That is His mind for every person whom He has foreknown. As taken account of thus He loves us. As Paul says, "... who has loved me", @Galatians 2: 20. It does not say, He loves me, but, He *loved* me and gave Himself for me. The Lord loved Paul before He died.
A.R.S. The Lord took a body in order to die.
J.T. He came in order to die. He "came by water and blood ... not by water only, but by water and blood", meaning that He came in connection with these things. There would be no meaning in His coming otherwise.
A.R. The Lord, in saying these things to this woman, had the assembly in His mind?
J.T. Unquestionably. That is the setting of it. You can understand He would clothe her with assembly
{18}
thoughts. He knew what she was going to be. He knew her from the beginning.
G.H. I was wondering if there would be a lesson for us in the way He approaches the woman. There is divine skill and wisdom. He says, "Give me to drink".
J.T. He takes the ground of *asking her for something*, and He based His word on that afterwards. "If thou knewest ... who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink". He intended to bring out these great thoughts. His wonderful design; although God, He had come down to a position of asking her for a drink of water. It ought to touch our hearts. He was weary with His journey, and sat just as He was at the fountain. He made no effort to be anything more than He appeared to be outwardly.
Ques. Did she, in a sense, break through the Philistine ranks like the three mighty men of David?
J.T. I think she would; as she came to know Him, she would get a drink of water for Him, whatever the cost to herself.
A.R. Why does she say, "I see that thou art a prophet"?
J.T. That is because the Lord exposed her to herself; that is the order of the truth. The Lord said, "Go, call thy husband, and come here. The woman answered and said, I have not a husband. Jesus says to her, Thou hast well said, I have not a husband; for thou hast had five husbands, and he whom now thou hast is not thy husband: this thou hast spoken truly. The woman says to him, Sir, I see that thou are a prophet" (verses 16 - 19). She is beginning to see something. Hitherto she had not seen anything; she spoke as a natural person, about water, or whatever the Lord said; she spoke as a person with no spiritual perception, but now something has happened. The Lord has touched her conscience and she sees. What does she see? That is a good enquiry. You get it many times in the prophets. What do I
{19}
see? What am I getting? She says, "I see that thou art a prophet".
W.G.T. Would you say the prophetic word deals with the moral issue first, and after that bridal affections are awakened?
J.T. That is right; God has left Himself a door into man's soul through the conscience.
A.C. Before the woman gets to the truth of what the Lord is bringing out here, she is quite respectful in all her answers; she says "Sir" three times.
J.T. Quite so; the last is, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet". That shows her eyes are becoming opened and like the man in chapter 9, she says He is a prophet, and I believe that is a normal thing. We begin to discern Christ by the way He brings God into our souls and convicts us of sin; and the idea of worship comes in after this. You might say, it is quite incongruous that such a person should be talking to the Lord about worship, but it is not. The woman has light from God; she *sees* things now, and what does she see? She sees Christ as a prophet, and if you take up that word *prophet* and apply it, you see how powerful it is. Scripture says God brought Israel out of Egypt by a prophet. A prophet is a powerful minister of God.
T.W. It is remarkable that she immediately speaks about worship.
J.T. And the Lord did not make the slightest suggestion that she should not have introduced that subject; in fact, He enlarged upon it, and speaks of the service of God and of God Himself in a peculiarly spiritual and exalted way. Why is it? It is because she began to judge herself; a new life had begun in her soul; she saw Jesus as a prophet. What we are saying now is what the Lord is helping us in, in stressing prophetic ministry; that the service of God runs along with that feature. By it we understand how we must serve, and we must have God brought before us. Paul says, "For *we* are the circumcision,
{20}
who worship by the Spirit of God", @Philippians 3: 3. I believe the prophetic ministry that God has pressed upon us in recent years is largely to bring out what God is, and how He is to be worshipped, and that is the point here.
C.H.H. Why, in the face of that, does she say later, "Come see a man"? Why does she not refer to Him as a prophet?
J.T. Well, that helps in what we are saying. She is not only seeing a prophet, but she is seeing a Man; that means not only a power of attraction, but an object of affection. "And seven women shall take hold of one man in that day", @Isaiah 4: 1. Why is that? It is because Christ becomes supreme; other men disappear. These other men are displaced; she went to the men, but one Man has come into her soul, displacing all others. He has displaced the others. He has rights over the other men too, and she is looking after the Lord's interests in speaking to them. She does not come to the children and start a Sunday school; she goes directly to the men, because Christ is Head of all men.
W.B-w. Is there some order in the suggestion of the living water? It says, "whosoever drinks ... shall never thirst for ever", and then "the water ... shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life", after that worshippers are spoken of.
J.T. I think it is through eternal life that God gets His portion. In drinking the living water, primarily, I get my portion; I am satisfied; but it is on the basis of eternal life that God gets His portion. I think the new race, out of which the assembly is formed, is there and that brings up the whole question of eternal life. It is the basis of what we are talking about. There can be no nuptials aside from a living state of things. It is not mere doctrine; it implies what is living.
{21}
A.P.T. Does @1 Corinthians 14 indicate the presence of eternal life? A word comes "to another sitting there".
J.T. I think so; the organism contemplated in @1 Corinthians 14 is composed of living persons; it is an organism; and that underlies the fact that you may get something in the ministry meeting from the Lord directly, and a person speaking discerns that you have it. I do not say I have ever actually seen it, but what underlies ministry meetings, so-called, is that I am sensitive enough in the living organism to discern that someone has been affected by the Spirit of God, according to what is stated, and I give place to him, and I sit down.
W.B-w. Does the never-thirsting aspect refer to us down here where thirst is; whereas the fountain springing up into everlasting life belongs to another realm -- higher up?
J.T. It is deliverance, but it is more than deliverance. It is *an out of the world, heavenly condition of relationship and being*. It is out of the world. I am not only satisfied there, but God gets His portion there.
W.R. Here the woman seems to be altogether independent of the world. She is completely delivered, at the end, from the world system.
J.T. Yes; and she is looking after the Lord's interests. That is the next thing, which we might compare with the gospel meetings every Sunday night. I have no doubt the Lord uses them, but then who is looking after them? In the meeting room, and at the door, there should be some supervision of them. Of course, the preaching must be by one who has ability for the service; but there is much besides this to be done. Well, you say, I have no gift; but this woman did not have gift; yet she looked after the Lord's interests. She would not forsake the gospel meeting. She would speak to the men; here they went to Jesus because she spoke to them.
{22}
A.R. The gospel service really points to Christ, does it not? -- "Come, see a man".
J.T. Quite so. He is the attractive Centre for all. In John it is said three times that the Lord was to be lifted up, and the last reference to it is in view of drawing all unto Him. He is the Centre of the whole universe, the Centre of attraction. That is the point. The woman is attracted, and others become attracted to Christ because of what she says.
W.B-w. Would that support the idea of going outside, and getting others to come to the gospel meeting?
J.T. That is, I am sure, what God would say to us, because the gospel services are often left uncared for, not properly looked after. It is a question of the interests of Christ, and all men, in a sense, are included in them. Christ is the Head of every man, and men are to be considered from this point of view.
{23}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (2)
@Genesis 2: 10 - 25
J.T. The brethren will be aware that our subject for these monthly readings is wells, springs, or other typical living water -- active water denoting generally what is living -- in relation to the assembly. We had @John 4 at our last meeting. In the chapter which is proposed for our present consideration, we have the river standing in relation to the assembly, as seen in Eve, the most exalted type, representing it *apart from sin*. The type we had last time stressed the historical phase of the assembly; that the members of it have had to do with sin, as seen in the woman of Samaria. Eve appears before sin came into the world, so that she represents the assembly in its most exalted, eternal relations, without any sin-stained history. It was taken out of Christ, so that it is His counterpart. It is said in Ephesians that God gave Him to be Head over all things to the assembly, which is His body, the fulness of Him who fills all in all (chapter 1: 22, 23).
It will be before us now to discover what the river signifies as in this early type. First it is to be noted that it went out of Eden, which would suggest, typically, a heavenly environment. It is a place of delights, an extended one. The river was to water the garden, which was more limited, and from thence it flowed out universally. The suggestion clearly is that *production*, resulting from such an influence, is in mind. Mention is made of gold, and bdellium, and the onyx stone; three features of material which would have part to the structure, for the idea of structure is in mind. The woman is built; that is the word used.
C.A.M. Scripture seems to stress the source of the river, all through to the end of the Bible; it is an important point.
{24}
J.T. Eden was a wide area, but the significance of the word is pleasure -- the pleasure of God, I suppose, or the pleasure flowing from what God is, as seen in what God does. Flowing out of Eden, it is one river, and then it flows out of the garden as four distinct heads or streams, so that it points to intelligent influence -- headship; for the word really is "head", not "stream". If it be "main stream", it would mean leading influence.
A.R. Is it more a sphere here? In Ezekiel, it flows out from under the altar; and in Revelation, from the throne. Here, it goes out from the garden.
J.T. It is a sphere, indicating how far God had gone on these lines; Eden itself is wider than the garden. The river flowed out of Eden, so that it is a gathering up, influentially, of what God is, so far, in the way of affording pleasure.
A.N.W. Greater in volume than each of the four heads, I suppose.
J.T. That would be so literally, but they are great enough to be "main streams", each one of them a head, governing a district or point of the compass, so that the whole universe, you might say, is affected.
A.A.T. The last time we were together, we were thinking of a well; this time it is a river. What is the difference?
J.T. What is before us now is a much greater thought than a well. The first well mentioned in the Scriptures is in @Genesis 16. It is a much smaller idea, but each alludes to the Spirit. A river flowing out of Eden carries with it the idea of living water as much as a well or a spring.
C.H.H. Would Pentecost correspond to the main stream, and then the flowing out following that?
J.T. Yes, the Spirit comes, we might say, *fully*. It is not partially. "For God gives not the Spirit by measure", @John 3: 34. The Holy Spirit coming in at Pentecost was not by measure; it was the Holy Spirit
{25}
Himself, and the *parting* would be the universal bearing of His incoming. The persons present in Jerusalem were, you might say, representative of mankind; although they were Jews or Jewish proselytes, yet their languages or tongues represented what was universal, so the Spirit could speak anywhere to men.
C.H.H. So the garden would correspond to the upper room in @Acts 1?
J.T. Well, it would correspond to what was in it; the influence of the persons there. Luke, in @Acts 1, presents those who saw the Lord go up, as coming from Mount Olivet, a heavenly environment. Luke's gospel contemplates widespread influence, and then the beginning of the Acts is specific as to the assembly. Luke presents the truth in that way; the visitation of an angel to Zacharias, and then to Mary -- the same angel -- and then to the shepherds, and then the multitude of the heavenly host. All that points to heavenly influence in a widespread sense, and was carried down to the Acts. At the ascension, two men in white communicated to the disciples. There is a chain of influence from heaven from Luke's point of view, and that takes concrete form in the coming in of the Holy Spirit Himself with the tongues, which pointed to universal communications and influence.
A.N.W. I was wondering whether the one hundred and twenty names (@Acts 1), would suggest skilful planting, such as the garden of Eden.
J.T. Yes; the Father's planting. The Lord alluded to that in Matthew, saying, "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up" (chapter 15: 13). No doubt the allusion goes back to Eden. These one hundred and twenty names are really planted, because life is suggested in the mention of *name*.
W.B-w. Why do you think it says the garden was "planted ... in Eden eastward"?
J.T. The east usually denotes *hope*. Luke carries that thought strikingly. He speaks about "the dayspring
{26}
from on high" (chapter 1: 78): It is a hopeful suggestion of what is coming.
J.S. Would the four gospels indicate the four courses of the river?
J.T. They would confirm the idea, I think. The gospels are not primary from our side; they are confirmatory. The primary thought for us is the epistles. It would be difficult to establish Christianity as we have it without the epistles. Of course, it was inaugurated in the power of the Spirit by the apostles, but the epistles were needed for its establishment and maintenance. The gospels only would not suffice for this. They are wider in their bearing, and deal with other dispensations, whereas the epistles deal with the saints who form the assembly and set us on the right way. What came out at Pentecost was the coming in of the Spirit, and the bearing of this great fact toward Christianity.
J.S. Would the epistles in that way give us the banks of the river?
J.T. They do; the gospels are confirmatory of them. The gospels furnish the full bearing of the incarnation.
R.W.S. The power of Pentecost was irresistible. Would it be right to say that these rivers are irresistible? One river, we read, surrounds the whole land of Havilah, and another river flows forward towards Asshur.
J.T. Yes; the first two *surround*; the third goes forward. As to the first thought, the Lord, for instance, spoke from the standpoint of a *circuit* (@Mark 3: 34). He looked around on His disciples, which would imply that He compassed them, and He pointed out the good that was there in them. All outside of that circle was not good. The going straight forward of the third river would mean that the way is clear, and the end is to be reached definitely.
W.G.T. Would that be Paul's ministry? You spoke recently about his journeys. Would they bear on these rivers?
{27}
J.T. Yes. He says "from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum". The *circuit* corresponds with the first two rivers. I think these points could be worked out from the facts in the epistles and the Acts. The incoming of the Spirit implied unlimited power, first in the form of the breathing. It was, you might say, an inward movement of God Himself. Breathing involves what is inward; an inward mighty movement, not for harm, but for good -- the breath of God. It was by the breath of God that Adam was made a living soul. It was unique. No creature but man is made to live by the breath of God.
W.R. In Matthew's gospel the Lord says, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth", @Matthew 28: 18.
J.T. That is Matthew's point of view -- unlimited power for administrative use. The breath of God is to be specially borne in mind; there is no creature in the universe who is made to live by the breath of God, but man. Man became a living soul by the breath of God, and Pentecost denotes the breath of God in a most powerful way. 'It is not 'wind', but they heard blowing, as of hard breathing' (J.N.D.¬s note to @Acts 2: 2). Yet, we cannot work out from that fact that God breathes as we do. There is no evidence that He does at all; it is a figure pointing to the inward movement of God, inward power affecting the saints.
A.R.S. The Lord breathed into the disciples and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit", @John 20: 22. Has that anything to do with this?
J.T. Well, it has, in that the link is there in the breathing. Christ, the last Adam, a life-giving Spirit -- showing that He is a divine Person; He is God, but as come in manhood; but at Pentecost it is God. Of course, Christ had gone up into heaven, and it might be regarded as the extension of what John speaks of as already referred to. It is a powerful breathing. It
{28}
points to the affections of God flowing out through Christ, expressed in the gift of the Holy Spirit.
A.R.S. Was @John 20 preparatory to Pentecost?
J.T. Well, it would be a pattern of what would happen at Pentecost, only that Pentecost is a much larger idea, and more powerful. @John 20 is *intimacy*, indicating a beautiful link between Christ and His disciples; He breathed into them.
F.H.L. Is there any moral order in the seas coming to light in chapter 1 and then the river here?
J.T. Well, seas convey the most extensive idea of water. The *mist* here is also water, adaptable to certain conditions. It is not rain, it is a mist, and its origin was the earth, showing that the earth itself had this principle of moisture in it; that is what is stated: "For Jehovah Elohim had not caused it to rain on the earth ... But a mist went up from the earth, and moistened the whole surface of the ground" (verses 5, 6). It is a form of water that meets a condition in view of man's formation. It is a moistened earth that is used. This is the order in which the facts are stated. Adam means earthy, but of the earth as moistened.
C.H.H. Is moisture a primary thought of the Spirit?
J.T. I think the Spirit is in mind both in the river and the moisture. The Spirit is first introduced in chapter 1: "And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters" (verse 2). The Spirit hovered, as if to effect something. Now we have the idea of the Spirit carried through in the moisture, as a type -- showing how God can adapt things as He needs them.
C.H.H. Is that why the earth would bring forth fruit of itself?
J.T. Well, for that there must be moisture, otherwise the earth would be dry and unproductive We have things spoken of in the abstract in verse 5: "every shrub of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew". That is, God was taking account of the things before they had actual
{29}
form. The mist would be in view of the earth being fitted to produce fruit; so that the idea of water as a type of the Spirit is present in view of what God had in His mind to develop.
C.N. So that herbs, for instance, were dependent upon the moisture to bring them to fruition. The passage says, "Every herb of the field before it grew, for Jehovah Elohim had not caused it to rain on the earth".
J.T. That is very evident; and the earth had the thing needed in itself, because the mist went up from it. "A mist went up from the earth, and moistened the whole surface of the ground". We have the face of the *waters* earlier, but here it is the whole surface of the *ground*.
C.H.H. Is there an idea in it that these conditions were in view of man? The word *man* appears about eighteen times in this chapter.
J.T. I think that is what is before us. The verses at the end of the chapter bring man before us in the male and female aspects. We have only the male so far in chapter 2, but the primary word denotes both: "Male and female created he them" (chapter 1: 27). So that it is to bring out these great beings and an environment for them. The river, in its four heads, has universal influence; this typically culminating in the woman, that is, the assembly.
A.R. Perhaps the four heads or main streams suggest God's rights on the earth in the way of headship.
J.T. I think that is the way to take it; whether you look at them as main streams or heads, they point to the idea of intelligent influence, and with a purpose, each one named in a certain direction; with a certain thing in view.
A.R. Would it be right to say that God has a standard in the assembly in the way of headship, and that He has that standard for the whole earth?
J.T. Here, it is, I think, controlling influence.
{30}
Ques. In what sense does the river culminate in the woman?
J.T. Well, Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly", @Ephesians 5: 32. If the Holy Spirit is speaking of Christ and the assembly in this chapter, then we must see that the rivers have a bearing on the subject, and there is no doubt about it; Christ and the assembly. The man was made of the ground -- *adamah*. Now he is Adam. It is the same material, only in living form, and God takes something out of that to build a woman; but she is not made of earth. She is taken out of a living person: *Adam* -- not *adamah*. It is very interesting and opens up a good deal as to the formation of the assembly.
Ques. @Psalm 104, "He watereth the mountains from his upper-chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works" (verse 13). Is there a suggestion in this?
J.T. Well, the upper chambers we have been already speaking about -- a wide area called "Eden" which evidently points to heavenly influence, or at least influence governed by the pleasure of God, as it is said, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men", @Luke 2: 14. I believe Luke has the formation of the assembly in mind in the way he speaks of heavenly influence, so that our chapter, including the rivers, culminates in man and woman -- man made out of *adamah*, but moistened; not ordinary ground, but moistened by something of itself; and then the woman is made out of Adam. It is the same word, only denoting a person or living condition; not simply a moistened condition, but a living condition.
C.A.M. Would you say that in regard to the female being contained in the idea of man, that God, in the early part of the chapter, is preparing our minds to realise that there is a wonderful potential thing coming?
J.T. Quite so; what immensity there is in the idea of man -- I mean man in both sexes -- for we are looking at it from the standpoint of Christ and the assembly.
{31}
We must look at it from the top. It is the supreme elevation that we get in the New Testament, that we are dealing with now; the assembly coming down out of heaven. What an immense thought it is! There are incidental things, but it is Christ and the assembly that the Spirit of God has in His mind in this chapter.
A.N.W. Would you say why the woman in chapter 2 is foreshadowed as a female in chapter 1? She is created -- "male and female created he them". Is that different from being taken out of the man in chapter 2?
J.T. Well, the truth stands in relation to the whole system of creation in chapter 1; the two features were there in the word "Man" -- male and female. In chapter 2, you have an immense environment that we do not get in chapter 1. We get man introduced as formed out of the earth; not created, but formed, and what he was to be. He was placed in Eden to dress and guard it, and these rivers are seen flowing out from there. He is already there, but not she, so that we do not have man *fully* yet: the thought in chapter 2 is fullness -- especially Adam's fulness. There are other fulnesses suggested, but the great thought is Adam's fulness. The assembly is Christ's fulness; that is, it is out of Him. It is the working out of what is there already.
W.F.K. Does the river refer to ministry?
J.T. Well, ministry would be included in it, but it is more than that, I think; it is the Spirit as *producing* things; gold, and bdellium, and onyx stones. These are only samples to keep our minds set on what God has in His mind in this wonderful chapter of *Jehovah Elohim*. Remember, it is that compound name that is before us -- God under that designation!
C.A.M. We often refer to the assembly as having its origin in the death of Christ, the deep sleep, but when Christ came into manhood there was that in His own glorious Person great enough to form the assembly.
J.T. Yes; He had it in mind. @Ephesians 5 says He gave Himself for it. And then God "gave him to be
{32}
head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all" (chapter 1: 22, 23). "Fulness" is the governing word, I think, because fulness means what comes out of a person or thing, already there potentially; that is what the assembly is -- it is "of Christ". It is out of Christ, as having died and risen; not what He was here below, but what He is now.
W.G.T. The incoming of the woman is somewhat clothed in mystery here; we are just told that she was taken out of man and presented by God to Adam.
J.T. What she is to be is to be named by him, to bring out his wonderful intelligence; he recognises her as of himself and he uses here a new word to designate her. There is no suggestion that God told him to use it; it is to bring out what Adam was; what resourceful intelligence there was in him. Why should he introduce a new word for man; not *Adam*, but *Ish*, another word altogether? We are now in the world of individualities, of personalities; not simply the word of creatures, as in chapter 1, but a world of persons, and persons with *affections*, with social feelings; that is what we ought to get into our minds, that the Lord Jesus has inaugurated such a world.
R.W.S. What was taken out of Adam was part of his framework, was it not?
J.T. How did he know it? "This time ...", he says. He saw her coming; how delightful it must have been to him as he stood in the presence of a person like himself, that he had never seen before; indeed, could not have seen before! She was only in God's mind before, but now she is there in a concrete form, and Adam names her; gives her a new name, and he gives a reason for it.
A.R. When we see Eve we see Adam; when we see the saints, as formed of God, we see Christ.
J.T. That is the truth; the saints have taken on His character; He says to Saul, Why dost thou persecute *Me*? The saints are His body -- Himself, in that sense.
{33}
I speak of Christ and the assembly, the apostle says: What a realm we are in! What a realm of intelligence; not only intelligence, but affection. When Adam named the cow or sheep there was no question of affection; it was simply intelligence. Now it is intelligence and affection; Adam has a person that he can love; that he can admire; that is the point. We are in a world of personalities now, that is to be expanded infinitely, you might say, but we begin with this. What feelings must have been in Adam's heart as the woman stood before him, and what hers must have been!
A.N.W. It does not say that she, like the animals, was brought to him to be named. The animals were brought to him to see what he would call them, but we read in verse 22, "And Jehovah Elohim built the rib that he had taken from Man into a woman; and brought her to Man", leaving her, evidently, to answer to his affections as well as to challenge his intelligence.
J.T. There is more in it than merely two creatures, or that he should name her as he named the cow; it is more than that. God is dealing not only with Adam's intelligence, but with his affections. Think of the effect it must have had upon him, because his inward feelings would be affected, and God intended that.
W.B-w. Perhaps you will mention what you have in mind as to *Ish*.
J.T. "And Man said, This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man" (verse 23). Those who have the New Translation will see that the word translated "woman" is "Ishshah"; and then Adam goes on to say, "... because this was taken out of a man", which here is the word "Ish". The word is, as we have been remarking, entirely new in the vocabulary; Adam has brought it in and what does it mean? Does it not allude to his affections, that his whole being is affected; that now it is a creature that is like himself that he can admire, and she can admire him? And so, we can
{34}
be companionable to one another. It is the word used for husband later.
C.A.M. "This time it is bone of my bones" -- when was that, historically? Would you put it in @John 20?
J.T. Yes. I think that when the Lord breathed into the disciples they would be in His mind in this way. He showed to them His hands and side: the *side* would imply the origin of the assembly, corresponding to Adam's rib.
Rem. This is very interesting. I have noticed in this chapter that it says, "out of the ground Jehovah Elohim made every tree grow ..." (verse 9); and "A river went out of Eden" (verse 10); and then in verse 19, "And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim had formed every animal"; and then in verse 23, "out of a man", which is a climax.
J.T. Very good -- a totally new matter now, and I believe Adam, in naming her, is entering into the understanding of personality; he could not converse, nor commune with the lower creatures, but here is a person like himself. Applying that to Christ and the assembly, we see that He has genuine affection for us and we have genuine affection for Him. Canticles may be taken as the expansion of this -- what Christ is to the assembly, or Israel, and what we are to Him. We are now in the realm of reciprocated intelligent affection.
A.C. Verse 24 would come as a climax: "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and cleave to his wife; and they shall become one flesh".
J.T. Just so; *therefore* shall a man leave his father and mother; the *therefore* is an allusion to what we have been speaking of, that there are two persons there with mutual affection flowing from admiration, and that is what the Canticles open up to us.
F.S.C. Does the thought of helpmate apply to the assembly? You were speaking about affection and I
{35}
was wondering if the thought of helpmate enters into that.
J.T. I think what underlies the typical truth here is the affinity between these two beings. They are not simply creatures; they are beings. It is a question of personality, and we see what they are capable of being to one another, and how Adam understands that. There were no fathers and mothers yet, so this "therefore" looks forward in the history of the human race. It refers to Christ leaving Israel, and being united to His wife, the assembly, so that there is one flesh.
R.T.M. And is that connected with the new word? You were speaking of the word *Ish*.
J.T. It is; it is the word that enters into the social, or the affection or family side. *Adam* represents the race, but *Ish* and *Ishshah* are names for man and woman that denote their mutual suitability to each other, and all that which the word opens up on these lines.
A.N.W. *Adam* seems to be linked with the dominion side in chapter 1, and *Ish* is on the family, or marital side in chapter 2.
J.T. It is remarkable. God does not here use the word *Ish*; God uses the word Adam, but Adam uses the word 'Ish'. I think the Spirit of God would tell us in this that Adam's affections are brought into play. He sees a new world of mutual affection in relation to the woman.
R.T.M. Is that why the word is used for husband later on?
J.T. Quite so; it governs the marital relation.
C.A.M. Do you think that the reference to a man leaving his father and mother can be read into the expression, "Touch me not", in @John 20? Another world of things -- a heavenly world -- was coming in.
J.T. I think it would agree with it. @John 20 fills out what we are saying; what our relations with Christ are. They are *heavenly*. "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father" (verse 17), means that our relations
{36}
with Him would be heavenly. His word to Mary Magdalene is the germ of the relationship of the assembly. He adjusted her, and she calls him Rabboni, meaning that He was her Teacher. That is for us, as in the last days. John stresses learning from the Lord, and that is the point at this time, to get some further thought of Christ and the assembly.
A.R. Would what you are stressing as regards Christ and the assembly also include our relationships with one another, as understanding that our links are heavenly? So the relationship you are speaking of, would be on a very high level.
J.T. Yes; mere natural things are shut out. It is a question of clothing one another with heavenly thoughts, and hence the message to Mary was sent before the Lord entered into the company. The message was, "go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God", @John 20: 17. And Mary went and told the disciples these things, and that she had seen the Lord. She carried the whole thought into the company, and He comes in after that, and they are equal to the visitation.
A.R. Is that why He stands in the midst in @John 20? There is nothing to rebuke, as if what He has taken on in His own is heavenly, not related to Israel.
J.T. Yes, and not only that, but according to John's report. He *came*, meaning that He was calculating in all this. In Luke, He simply stands in *their* midst, but in John He *came* and stood in *the* midst, implying that He was calculating beforehand.
A.R.C. The apostle Paul, in developing this great truth of the assembly in @Ephesians 5, speaks of @Genesis 2.
J.T. He alludes to this scripture. We have therefore a good warrant for saying the Holy Spirit had Christ and the assembly in mind in these verses.
{37}
C.N. Would you say a word on verse 18? "It is not good that Man should be alone".
J.T. That shows what premeditation entered into the happenings of this chapter. When God said, "Let us make man in our image" (chapter 1: 26), we have no thought like this at all. No doubt there was the need in God's heart to have a creature like Adam to represent Him here, to be His image and His likeness, but now it is a question of man's loneliness and God taking account of that. I do not know how long it was from the time that Adam was actually created out of the earth and Eve's formation, but it could only be a matter of hours, because it was all on the sixth day, but still, if it were only hours, Adam had the experience of being alone, and God sympathises with him as in it. He calculated that it would be necessary to make some one like him. It is touching.
A.B.P. In that connection, would you say that God was behind Mary's being at the sepulchre? The Lord Jesus seeing Mary there, would be something like Adam seeing the woman brought to him and naming her Ishshah.
J.T. I think it would; I think the conversation between Him and Mary takes on the most extraordinary character and you cannot but see that He had in His mind to allure her out of her Jewish setting as the Canticles suggest. And finally, Mary says, "Rabboni", which implies that He had been teaching her. That is so important in assembly formation; that is, to be divinely taught.
A.B.P. And would God's consideration for Christ be seen, too, in her being there early in the morning? He brought the woman to Adam, and I was wondering if God was not behind her being there at that time, to meet a need in the heart of Christ.
J.T. Well, @John 20 is so very like this chapter because it begins with the glory of the Father; Paul tells us that the Lord Jesus was raised by the glory of the Father, so
{38}
that we may say the first day of the week was inaugurated by the Father. How long was that before Mary was there? In the order of one, two, three, the Father was there first. But it was very early in the morning when she came. It was yet dark, so that she was very near the glory.
J.S. What marked her was affection?
J.T. Well, that is what comes out. She was very cloudy, much more so than we are apt to think if we have not looked into the matter. But affection was there and she came in, you might say, as the glory had just been there, and she shared that atmosphere, so to speak, and ran. She is remarkable in this sense -- the hind of the morning, for this is a feminine thought; it is the agility that marked her affection, although she was cloudy.
R.W.S. Would you enlarge on verse 22? -- "And Jehovah Elohim built the rib that he had taken from Man into a woman; and brought her to Man".
J.T. Well, I think one thing that should be said is that in this, 'Jehovah Elohim' is personal. It is God in covenant, not now with the earth, but with Adam; not that the word 'covenant' is there, but He is dealing with man on personal lines; that is, with His great creature, and I think that is why you have this term 'Jehovah Elohim' -- a compound title. He is dealing with the very greatest things, from His own standpoint. It is fulness, and the introduction of personalities with whom He Himself can commune, and who can commune with one another. The next chapter shows that God came into the garden and He was heard walking -- His voice was heard walking in the garden; that means, I think, that He is coming into this personal state of things; He is going to have part in this personal state of things, which is the basis of all peace-offerings; that God can have part in our occasions of joy. Jehovah Elohim taking this rib and closing up the part implies mystery; you cannot look at any man and say, That is
{39}
where the rib came out. God has not left it like that; His own hand closed it up. It is a mystery, but a wonderful person has come out, like Adam, and fit to be his counterpart and companion. That refers to Christ and the assembly; and when you look on it from that point of view you can see what a time it was for Jehovah *Himself* -- Jehovah Elohim.
W.G.T. Is what you said about covenant implied in verse 18? God evidently made a contract.
J.T. Well, He did, in His heart. It says, "And Jehovah Elohim said, It is not good that Man should be alone; I will make ..." -- that, you might say, is a covenant, although it does not say He said it to Adam, but it is very much like the promises of life. In both 2 Timothy and Titus we have the promise of life. To whom did He promise? It is really a matter of His own heart, and so is this. It is the outcome of His own consideration for us, but it is a fixed matter.
R.T.M. Why is it that before the woman is formed the commandment that the man should not eat of the tree of good and evil is given?
J.T. That is how it is stated here. When these things actually took place historically, it is not easy to say. That command might have been given to man after; we cannot be sure. We can be sure of one thing, that the formation of woman was on the same day as the formation of man -- "in the day when they were created", @Genesis 5: 2.
A.N.W. Does that not confirm what we have had before us, that in man the responsible side is stressed; and woman, the subjective side?
J.T. That is true. As it stands here, you would assume the command was given before the woman was made, but you cannot be sure of it. It is simply a fact stated with other facts put down in this chapter.
F.H.L. Would you say a word about the Euphrates?
J.T. There is nothing special said of it here. Evidently it is mentioned as well known. In its prophetic setting
{40}
it is the boundary between the East and the West in Asia. The Euphrates is the dividing line, spiritually anyway. Four angels are said to be bound there, and when loosed, they lead an immense Asiatic army against the western empire. So from the standpoint of prophecy in the book of Revelation the kings of the East came from beyond the Euphrates. The Euphrates was the eastern limit of Israel's territory.
Rem. The gifts in @Ephesians 4 are under four heads.
J.T. Yes; "Some apostles and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers" (verse 11). Shepherds and teachers are one -- those four go together, for the securing of the assembly; "for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ" (verse 12). So that this matter of the Euphrates is worth considering. The ways of God generally are west of that river, but they are going to turn that way presently; they are going toward the East presently, but in the meantime, God is occupied with Christ and the assembly, and whatever is happening must subserve that.
F.S.C. Was Abraham taken out from the region of the Euphrates?
J.T. Yes. The name 'Hebrew' probably refers to that; that he came over from across the river. But you can see the drift towards the West. Some of us have been greatly impressed by the Pacific -- the feeling that when you reach it you are at the *extreme* West. God has reached the extreme West in securing the material for the assembly.
T.D. @Psalm 72 speaks of Christ's dominion being from the river unto the ends of the earth; that would give scope to it, would it not?
J.T. Yes, that is right; that would allude to the river Euphrates.
A.R. What you say about the movement westward would include the work of God in this country?
{41}
J.T. Just so; it has been opened up recently and God is operating in it, which is very touching, that He has followed the movements of peoples to the western hemisphere -- mainly from Europe. God is following it up and is taking out His elect. Wherever they are, He will get them.
W.B-w. According to what you have said, the last section of the chapter seems to be on a higher level than the garden and the river -- the man, in living affection with his wife would be a higher connection.
J.T. Yes, but the river points to the Spirit; the ideas are not detached. The four heads would imply activities of the Spirit universally to take out the assembly. I think that is what is in mind; so that you can connect the idea of Christ and the assembly with the whole chapter in that sense. The chapter culminates in the union of Christ and the assembly.
W.B-w. Is that while we are down here?
J.T. Well, what we are here and what we shall be forever, for we shall always be united to Christ. God gave Him to be Head over all things to the assembly.
{42}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (3)
@Genesis 16: 6 - 14; @Genesis 21: 14 - 21; @Genesis 24: 11 - 27
J.T. Our subject is the consideration of wells and springs which stand in relation to the assembly. We have three in the scriptures read, and we shall need to be attentive to see the relation of each to the assembly. The first two -- in chapters 16 and 21 -- stand in relation to Hagar. How she may be linked up with the assembly will become clear as we proceed. She stands in relation to it negatively, by way of contrast. We learn from Galatians that she is over against Sarah, who may be connected directly with the assembly. Sarah, Abraham's wife, is said to be the free woman. She represents "Jerusalem above ... which is our mother"; that is, the assembly. Hagar is to be looked at as a type of Israel, and as provisionally occupying the place of wife to Jehovah. Israel will yet occupy this place as the earthly bride.
The application of the well to Hagar would be the Spirit as ministered to the Jews, or Israel, through the ministry of Christ, and that of the twelve. Hagar exhibits a certain amount of respect, or regard, for the well, but she is in no way characterised by it. She uses it for Ishmael, her son, but in no way is she characterised by what the well represents; whereas Rebecca, in contrast to her, is remarkably characterised by the features of the assembly, and in the use of the well in chapter 24.
I thought the Lord would help us in understanding the contrast between the ministry of the Spirit to those who are unappreciative of it and fail to take character from it, and to those who do appreciate it and take character from it, who thereby characteristically constitute the assembly. Rebecca represents this in a striking manner.
{43}
W.R. What was in your mind in saying that Hagar was in no way characterised by what the well represents?
J.T. There are many like her today, who do not openly disregard the Spirit, nor the word of God -- for Hagar obeyed the angel's directions to return to her mistress -- but they do not *appropriate* what is of God so as to become characterised by it.
C.M.A. Would the fact that the angel of Jehovah is prominent, stress the earthly side of things? The initiative seems to be taken by the angel. He finds Hagar at the well.
J.T. She is treated as one in relation with God, being of Abraham's household, and is directed to return: "Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands" (verse 9). Throughout these passages she is treated with remarkable consideration by Jehovah, but while she respects the command of the angel there is nothing further to indicate any characteristics produced by the word of God. There are many who outwardly obey and conform to a certain degree to what is of God, but fail in character, and hence disqualify themselves for being regarded as of the assembly.
Rem. In chapter 21, she is given a *flask* of water.
J.T. It is Abraham's provision, but there is a well to which God opened her eyes. "And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a flask of water, and gave it to Hagar, putting it on her shoulder" (verse 14). And then we are told, "And the water was exhausted from the flask" (verse 15). And then, in verse 19, "And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went and filled the flask with water, and gave the lad drink". She availed herself of the well and used the flask too, but there is nothing said of her appropriating it for herself.
W.B-w. Her name is said to mean *flight*. Would that be characteristic of Israel? She is called upon to return.
{44}
J.T. She represents Israel in such circumstances. She is a wanderer, or one who flees. She is governed immediately by what is said to her, but fails to absorb the divine thought; fails to take character from it. There are many like her at the present time.
Ques. If one's tendencies are unspiritual, does this appear in my children? Ishmael takes character from Hagar.
J.T. It is clear enough that he is a mongrel, spiritually; "a wild-ass of a man"; but she is taken account of in these two chapters as a type of Israel; the Israel the Lord Jesus had to do with; to whom He ministered by the Spirit of God. "But if by the finger of God I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Luke 11: 20. She represents the Jews in those circumstances; she flees of her own will and returns at the divine direction, but that is all. Then she becomes an outcast by the authority of Scripture: "But what says the scripture? Cast out the maid servant and her son", @Galatians 4: 30. She is an outcast, with her son, on the authority of Scripture, but yet not disregarded. She is provided with a flask of water and bread, and her eyes are opened to see the well, and she uses the well for her son, but there is no character which answers to it, neither in herself, nor in her son.
J.S. How do you view Abraham here?
J.T. He is in relation with God, and representative of Him; he is spoken of as anointed in @Psalm 105. Ishmael is taken account of because he is Abraham's seed, according to chapter 17. He is like many today that are in relation with those who are of God and are more or less submissive, and observant of what is of God, but fail to take character from it; that is, fail to take character from the Spirit. There can be no features of the assembly without the Spirit -- without the Spirit appropriated -- not merely speaking of Him formally, but appropriating Him.
{45}
F.H.L. In chapter 16, the spring is called a well after Hagar had said, "Thou art the God who reveals himself" (verse 13). Is there any point in that in line with what you are saying?
J.T. "And she called the name of Jehovah who spoke to her, Thou art the God who reveals himself, for she said, Also here have I seen after he has revealed himself. Therefore the well was named Beer-lahai-roi" (verses 13, 14). And then we are told where it was. She knows that she has had to do with God, for He saw her, and the well is recognised, but where is the typical character of the assembly? There is not a trace of it in her.
A.C. Is it not striking that despite Hagar fleeing on the two occasions, she is still the object of angelic care?
J.T. The angel spoke to her in both cases. She is typical of the Jews. What interest was shown in them in the incarnation, as God came into their midst! The Lord goes so far as to say, "I have not been sent save to the lost sheep of Israel's house", @Matthew 15: 24. What attention was paid to them -- but without effect! The nation, as such, was utterly without response to the overtures and favours extended to them. John the baptist said, "He that has the bride is the bridegroom", @John 3: 29. But where was the bride? The Bridegroom's voice was to be heard.
A.N.W. Is the contrast emphasised in Galatians, in that, on the negative side, "Hagar ... corresponds to Jerusalem which is now"? Hagar could be said to personify that, but the positive side is too great to say that Sarah personifies it. It does not say Sarah is the "Jerusalem above", @Galatians 4: 25, 26.
J.T. Galatians says she is the *free woman*, and this suffices for the apostle Paul to connect her with the assembly; he connects her with the Jerusalem which is above. She is the free woman; she is not Rebecca, but still, there is sufficient there to enable the Spirit to speak
{46}
of her as a type of the heavenly city -- as over against Hagar, who is like Jerusalem now. The apostle says, "which is now, for she is in bondage with her children" (verse 25), so it is a question of motherhood really, but motherhood that is identified with the assembly.
W.G.T. Does chapter 16 bring out the thought of elevation; God regarding persons in an elevated way because of outward connections; such would otherwise never come under His notice?
J.T. Hagar and Ishmael are elevated because of their relation to Abraham. This book shows what notice is taken of Ishmael. He had twelve princes, we are told, and God says to Abraham, "... because he is thy seed", @Genesis 21: 13. His mother had her elevation because of her relation with the house of Abraham. She belonged to a believer's household, but failed to take character from the Spirit, which was so ministered to her, in type, on two occasions.
R.W.S. Would the type of the well bring in the thought of our appropriation? We had rivers in the first meetings on our subject -- four main streams. Now it is a small amount of water.
J.T. It is water as of a well or spring. You are dealing with just one person. She has a double testimony rendered to her in the form of a well or spring -- ministered to her by God -- a very remarkable thing. In the second instance, she has a vessel whereby she may appropriate the thing, but failed in characteristic appropriation of it. She did not use it for herself; she used it for her son.
E.McK. Would Israel having the advantage be seen in that this is the first time the well is mentioned?
J.T. That is just what is meant. Israel has the advantage -- what an advantage! In answer to the enquiry "What then is the superiority of the Jew?" the apostle says, "Much every way", @Romans 3: 1, 2. Israel became the object of the ministry of the Spirit in a dual kind of
{47}
way, as seen in the passages before us, and in no case does she avail herself of it; that is, to use it for herself.
W.G.T. Correspondingly, would you bring the gentiles in here where Israel was once? They had the light first. "Arise, shine! for thy light is come" (@Isaiah 60: 1), but there has been no answer to it among the gentiles except in the assembly.
J.T. Hagar is regarded in the Scripture as a type of Israel as under the first covenant, "gendering to bondage". She does not represent the gentiles; she was in relation to Abraham, but as a bondmaid (her son taking character from her) she is a type of Jerusalem as in bondage with her children.
W.B-w. "For Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and corresponds to Jerusalem which is now", @Galatians 4: 25.
J.T. That is very plain, whereas Jerusalem above is free -- our mother; so that, although the mother side is introduced, the heavenly city is the bride of the Lamb.
W.B-w. In the first instance, where the well comes in, Hagar is called upon to submit to her mistress. Would that answer to the Lord's ministry among the Jews while He was here; and then the second well, where she has a vessel, would that correspond with @Acts 2, the giving of the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so; she is called upon to submit, and she acquiesces in a way; she returns to her mistress, but you can see that it is a forced matter; there is no spiritual character in it. Those who heard Peter's preaching at Pentecost, said, "What shall we do, brethren?" @Acts 2: 37. Thus the remnant is different from Hagar, who represents what characterised the nation. Those convicted of sin say, "What shall we do, brethren? And Peter said to them, Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 2: 37, 38. God had promised it. The promise was to them and their children, and to as many as were afar off. So that they come into the truth and avail themselves
{48}
of the gift of the Holy Spirit; the whole nation failed to do this.
W.B-w. Those who were added, submitted to the truth.
J.T. They wanted to know what to do, and they were told what to do and they did it; and it is said, "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers" (verse 42). There are real results, but not in what Hagar represents.
A.A.T. In the early days of christianity, the Hebrews came out into the light, but the epistle to the Hebrews speaks of those who being partakers of the Holy Spirit have fallen away. They came under its influence, but did not come into the good of it.
J.T. That is just the truth. They were actually partakers of the Holy Spirit. Well, you say, They had it. Not at all. There may be many here partaking of the Holy Spirit, that is, as among christians and as sharing in spiritual ministry, but that does not mean they are true christians, sealed with the Spirit. It places them under great responsibility. That was exactly the point with Hagar. Hagar, in type, partook of the Spirit, giving the water to her son, but she never took character from it. It was all a shallow, external matter, whereas the Holy Spirit is in the heart of the true christian, and gives real character to him -- sheds abroad the love of God in his heart.
A.R. Over against those who believed at Pentecost, there were those that were mocking and said that those who received the Spirit were full of new wine.
J.T. They were like Ishmael, mocking as Isaac was weaned. They "insulted the Spirit of grace", @Hebrews 10: 29.
Ques. Would you say Hagar had never judged Egyptian principles although in a position of favour?
J.T. That is quite apparent. In chapter 21, we are told that she "went and filled the flask with water, and gave the lad drink. And God was with the lad, and he
{49}
grew; and he dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer. And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran. And his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt" (verses 19 - 21). Where was there any suggestion of her having any real part in the Spirit? None at all. And yet she sees. She is called by her name and told not to fear. She is wonderfully dealt with, in grace, but fails as to the character which the Holy Spirit personally imparts to a believer.
F.H.L. God even names Ishmael, does He not?
J.T. Yes; the attention paid to him is remarkable; even prophetically. "Twelve princes shall he beget", chapter 17: 20. All is because he stands related to Abraham, but that will not suffice for eternity. The Spirit of grace was operating among the Jews, and it is quite clear that most of them were not permanently affected. Some had part among the real ones and gained in an external way, but did not prove themselves genuine -- did not "go on to perfection". The epistle to the Hebrews deals with all this, warning in the severest terms those who sin wilfully after receiving the knowledge of the truth.
A.B.P. Was there not a lack of true motherhood with Hagar? She cast her child under a shrub, and said, "Let me not behold the death of the child" (chapter 21: 16).
J.T. It is a remarkable passage. It is said first of all that, "Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a flask of water, and gave it to Hagar, putting it on her shoulder -- and the child, and sent her away. And she departed, and wandered about in the wilderness of Beer-sheba" (verse 14). She *wandered about*. That is what she was characteristically -- a wanderer, or a person who flees -- no stability or restfulness about her. And then the passage says, "And the water was exhausted from the flask; and she cast the child under one of the shrubs, and she went and sat down over against him, a bow-shot off" (verses 15, 16). A bow-shot is quite a distance. There is no affection suggested in
{50}
that. Then it says, "for she said. Let me not behold the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lifted up her voice and wept. And God heard the voice of the lad" (verses 16, 17). Notice *that* -- not her voice. God heard the voice of the lad, because he was Abraham's son.
A.R.S. What does the flask stand for?
J.T. Just a drinking vessel. If she were spiritually awakened, as the woman of Samaria was, she would have thought of herself as a vessel to be used of God. That woman *left* the water-pot; henceforth, it was a question of herself. Hagar had no idea of herself being a vessel of the Spirit of God; those she typifies have no such idea.
C.A.M. Do you think she may represent those amongst us who have been delivered from the world in a circumstantial way, and who are thus brought into the blessing that is near them?
J.T. Yes. See what surroundings she is in. What advantages she has had in the house of Abraham, and now with her child Ishmael, whose very name indicates relations with God. God speaks to her, and opens her eyes to see the well, and she uses the flask to appropriate the well, but only for her son. Then, when she takes the initiative, it is not to go back, to be near the household of faith, but in the opposite direction, towards Egypt; and there she secures a wife for her son. She is in no way typically characterised by the presence of the Holy Spirit. One of the greatest questions for us now is, Are we characterised by the appropriation of the Holy Spirit?
C.A.M. If we fail to come under the exercise that this involves, we might fail to reach the assembly altogether.
J.T. We cannot reach assembly conditions, except in an external way, without the Holy Spirit. It is by the Holy Spirit that we arrive at any real assembly impressions and constitution.
{51}
W.G.T. The moral lesson to be learned in Hagar's and Ishmael's experience, seems to be that that which is first is natural, afterwards that which is spiritual.
J.T. Yes. It is really a question in one's own soul of casting out Hagar and her son to make room for Isaac; the true child of promise; and that is what we come to in chapter 21. Hagar and Ishmael are the "natural", and both are to be cast out. Scripture says that they are cast out: "What says the scripture?"; that is, Sarah's word as to it is Scripture.
A.R. The teachers at Galatia were legalising the saints. Were they disregarding the operations of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. That is the point; they were disregarding the Spirit of God. They were perverting the glad tidings of the Christ (@Galatians 1: 7).
A.R.S. If Hagar had drunk of the well, she would have been invigorated. The well was there for her.
J.T. Those whom she typifies do not appropriate what is provided, what is so great and blessed, and hence they never take on the character of the assembly.
F.N.W. What is the characteristic of the two lines set out in @Galatians 4: 29? "But as then he that was born according to flesh persecuted him that was born according to Spirit". That is the Holy Spirit, is it not?
J.T. Yes. Hagar and Ishmael represent the flesh which as regards christians has to be cast out, but, inasmuch as they, standing in relation to the household of faith, represent Israel, God is still owning them, and so the type runs on to the end. God follows up Israel.
W.G.T. The word used there for Ishmael's mocking is *persecuted*. I suppose that is what we all have to accept. If there is going to be any progress on spiritual lines, there will be persecution.
J.T. And that from your most intimate natural relations. They may be the occasion of the persecution.
A.B.P. What does the well in chapter 24 suggest? Isaac was coming from it when Rebecca came into view.
{52}
J.T. I think it is to bring out that what was ministered to Israel -- to the Jews -- was the same as that ministered at Pentecost to the assembly. There is just the one Spirit. It is to bring out the great grace shown to Israel, in the ministry of Christ and the ministry of the twelve. It is the same Spirit. In the first instance, I suppose, it is what came out in the Lord Jesus. The well here, Beer-lahai-roi, is the Spirit, as presented by Christ. Isaac is seen returning from it -- literally "came from coming to", as the footnote reads -- as if with Rebecca coming into view, God would indicate that this must be the prime thought. It is, "Well of the Living who was seen", as the footnote indicates. It is really to bring out the light that shone in Christ among the Jews, involving the Spirit. In @Genesis 24 the bearing of it is toward the assembly.
A.B.P. That would serve to emphasise the matter of appropriation; that Israel had the same opportunity that the assembly has had.
J.T. That is the idea. It is the same Spirit and only emphasises the favour shown to Israel in the ministry of Christ and that of the twelve. The ministry of the twelve might be suggested in the flask, because the idea of the vessel comes in especially in connection with the assembly. While Christ gives the Living Water, what is given after Pentecost was already here in the assembly. @Acts 8 and 9 connect the gift of the Spirit with apostolic ministry.
A.N.W. Was not Israel's sin against the Lord, that, what He did by the Spirit of God, the Jews said He did by Beelzebub?
J.T. That is what brings out the terrible word that a sin against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven either in this age or the age to come. That is what the Jews were guilty of.
A.R. At the present time it seems that God is specially effecting liberty amongst the brethren. Might these references to the well, suggest the need in current
{53}
ministry, not only of right words and the truth, but that what is spiritual should be embodied in the ministry given?
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of whether we are characterised by the Spirit, so that the ministry might be truly spiritual. "He therefore who ministers to you the Spirit", says the apostle Paul (@Galatians 3:5). How is he doing it? "On the principle of works of law, or of the report of faith?" That is, the ministry today is not on the principle of law. It is not exacting. There ought to be reproof and rebuke, of course, but nothing that brings into bondage. Spiritual ministry liberates the saints. The gift of the Holy Spirit, poured out at Pentecost, was most bounteous. "And ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For to you is the promise and to your children, and to all who are afar off, as many as the Lord our God may call", @Acts 2: 38, 39.
J.S. Would the flask and bread in @Genesis 21: 14, represent what was provisional only?
J.T. Yes. It was very limited -- the water soon became exhausted. But the well was there -- God's provision. Hagar appropriated it for her son, which was right, of course, but she gravitated towards Egypt. There is no thought of returning to the household of faith. Hagar and Ishmael got further and further away from God.
J.T.Jr. God had Isaac in mind in chapter 21. He says in verse 12, "for in Isaac shall a seed be called to thee". And then the voice to Hagar is from the heavens. It is the heavenly side of things that is in mind even for Hagar.
J.T. That is very remarkable. The present dispensation, in type, is in mind. God had "heard the voice of the lad", and was with him as he grew. Remarkable grace was shown, but the sequel brought out that there was no heart with Ishmael or Hagar for the realm of faith, or for God and His things.
{54}
A.N.W. You have said there is more to the credit of Ishmael than to Hagar. In chapter 21, we are told that God was with him. Why was that?
J.T. Because he was Abraham's seed. Hagar had no such dignity as that, because she did not have the status of a wife, in the true sense of it. As cast out she is regarded as a handmaid or, according to Galatians, a bondmaid.
W.F.K. Ishmael had mocked.
J.T. Well, he had; but still, he was Abraham's seed, and God showed grace to him, providing for him to a point. It refers to God's patience with the Jews. The history is to show that the flesh turns away from God, even as known in grace. Ishmael dwelt before his brethren, but that does not mean fellowship. It implies that I am just as good as you are. He is in presence of the brethren -- the real children of promise -- but he is not of them. It is no encouragement or advantage to the brethren to have an element like that in their presence.
C.A.M. I suppose that is a thing to be afraid of in our households. We might maintain things on the principle of bondage, and have advanced no further than an appreciation of the providential interventions of God.
J.T. Yes, and having no spiritual character. There may be a nearness outwardly to the brethren -- those who are the children of promise -- because it is quite clear Ishmael dwelt near them. He did not move away out of sight. He kept within view of them, which would mean that he maintained his distinction as of Abraham, with no spiritual correspondence. That is the principle of the flesh, if it is outwardly related to what is of God. Israel was surrounded by that sort of thing, but it was a real opposition. Edom, Moab, Ammon and Ishmael were all related to it, but never subject to God in the midst of His people.
{55}
W.G.T. Joseph's brethren sold him into the hand of the Ishmaelites. Would that fit in here?
J.T. The Ishmaelites used him as a chattel. They bought him and sold him.
A.B.P. Does heaven's regard for Abraham show itself in the Lord's indignation against those who said they were Abraham's seed? He says, "Ye are of the devil, as your father", @John 8: 44. As though Abraham was held in regard and his lineage would be defended by Christ.
J.T. Quite so. It is what they had become, like Edom. God had paid great attention to Edom and refused to let Israel attack him, but in result God said, I hated him. It is the continuance of an attitude that results in being further and further away from God morally, and more opposed to His people and to His things.
W.F.K. Is God's attitude towards Israel expressed by the father towards the elder son in @Luke 15?
J.T. Just so. The father's thought was to have him come into the house, but he would not come in. @Genesis 21 is very instructive in regard of the well, because Abraham is seen there as great enough to reprove Abimelech, the Philistine king, on account of the well. If Hagar is not appropriating it or taking character from it, Abraham is. He must have it, and so secures the well -- the well of the oath -- and he has it abidingly. The Holy Spirit is ours on the principle of the promise and the oath.
J.S. Hagar is from Egypt and of Egypt.
J.T. Clearly. And she gravitates in that direction. She gets a wife for her son from Egypt. The link is very strong. I hope we will see the greatness of Abraham in chapter 21. Before Isaac is offered up, the greatness of Abraham is seen. He is great enough to stand up to the Philistine king and reprove him. In the previous chapter he prays for him, but in chapter 21 he reproves him, as it were, in the power of the well. Abraham gives the Philistine king seven ewe lambs, as
{56}
much as to say, My spirit is not aggressive nor unreasonable. As a type, he is characterised by the Spirit of God. The ewe lambs denote the spirit of moderation -- which believers are to show to all men (@Philippians 4: 5). Abraham had that spirit. That is the point in chapter 21 -- the moral greatness of Abraham as seen in the spirit he shows -- not an aggressive, violent spirit; not a wild ass of a man, but a lowly man, and yet the power of God is with him.
F.H.L. So that after securing the well, chapter 22 follows as the outcome, morally.
J.T. Yes. His relations with God are established on the principle of an oath, so that here it is the well of the oath. It is a *place* in chapter 21, but in chapter 26 it is a city. The place is called Beer-sheba, and Abraham calls on the name of Jehovah the Eternal God. He is coming into an eternal relation with God; it is immutable. That is an immense thing.
W.G.T. Does the Spirit of God move Abraham to have his house circumcised in chapter 17?
J.T. God moved him. He directed him to do it, and he did it, showing how he was characterised by the divine mind, immediately. This point in chapter 21 is immense, and we should get it into our souls -- the greatness of Abraham, before he offers up Isaac -- what he was. Everything is immutably fixed between him and God, so he calls on the name of the Eternal God.
W.B-w. Would God allow the Philistines to take away this well violently to test Abraham and bring out what was in him?
J.T. Abraham stands against that violence, but in another spirit. Seven ewe lambs do not denote violence. The Philistine king says, What are these? Abraham had already given him cattle, showing how great he was. He has already reproved him, but now he asks. What are these? What a fine reply! These, he says, in effect, are to denote that this well belongs to me. I need it if I am to have the spirit that these ewe lambs denote.
{57}
Abraham has the spirit of Christ, and that comes down to christianity by the Spirit "sent from heaven".
W.B-w. The Philistine element that was against Abraham would bring out this great thought in him?
J.T. That is one of the greatest things in the book of Genesis -- what Abraham was in the presence of a great monarch, and yet according to @Psalm 105, he was outwardly of small account. "When they were a few men in number, of small account, and strangers in it. And they went from nation to nation, from one kingdom to another people. He suffered no man to oppress them, and reproved kings for their sakes, Saying, Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm" (verses 12 - 15).
R.W.S. When Abimelech and Phichol returned to the land of the Philistines. Abraham planted a tamarisk in Beer-sheba. What does that denote?
J.T. Evidently a place of worship. Here it is not idolatry. They had no temple. It was his own planting, which indicated his right to the land. He called on the name of the Eternal God; you will notice that. "And Abraham planted a tamarisk in Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of Jehovah, the Eternal God" (verse 33). It is a wonderful finish, because it is an eternal relationship of the man of faith.
J.S. Would Beer-sheba correspond to @John 4, "... neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem worship the Father" (verse 21)?
J.T. Quite so, in the sense that Beer-sheba has a moral and spiritual significance, rather than geographical. It is the place of confirmation, and faith links on with this. The faithfulness of God enters into it, and this is particularly seen as Jacob is there on his way to Egypt (@Genesis 46: 1 - 4). God says to Jacob there, "I am God, the God of thy father"; not Abraham, but Isaac. It is a question of Christ risen, in whom every promise is yea and amen.
{58}
W.F.K. Does digging a well suggest conditions provided for the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Yes. Abraham is virtually saying, I cannot get along without it. We see that more in Isaac (chapter 26).
W.B-w. Will you say a little more about these seven ewe lambs that Abraham brings, "that they may be a witness to me that I have dug this well" (verse 30)?
J.T. It represents the fruit of the Spirit. You say, What is the explanation of a certain person being such a subject, humble, gracious man? What is the explanation of that? A Unitarian may say, I can be just like you; but he cannot. He does not possess the Spirit of God. A Christian Scientist may be very nice, but he does not possess the Spirit. He is only attempting to *imitate*. The true thought is what is here typically. The believer must have the well, and these seven ewe lambs mean I have the Spirit that the well represents. A real christian denotes that. Abraham is saying here, I must have the well. I will be violent like the Philistine if I do not have the Spirit of God. If we do not rely on the Spirit of God each day, we will be just natural. We may come to the meetings, but in a characteristic way we shall not have the spirit of the assembly.
W.G.T. The Lord Said to his disciples, "Ye know not of what spirit ye are", @Luke 9: 55. They were asking that fire be commanded to come down from heaven. Abraham asked for no divine intervention against the Philistines.
A.R. You have been emphasising the idea of the spirit of the assembly. The Holy Spirit helps us in our relations with divine Persons. Then as to our relations with one another, does what John the baptist says help, "*He* shall baptise you with the Holy Spirit and fire", @Matthew 3: 11. Our links with one another would be according to God.
J.T. Quite so. The point in @Galatians 5 is what the Holy Spirit is in its fruit -- love, joy, peace, longsuffering, etc. That is the idea that comes in here. It is
{59}
what characterises us. If we profess to have the Spirit, and profess to be in fellowship, this fruit is what is to characterise us. Without that our profession is futile.
Ques. In @Acts 3 when the opposition begins -- the Philistine element opposing the works of God, seen in Peter and the lame man -- they told him not to carry on this great service of speaking about Jesus. The final issue is, we *obey God*. Would that be the thought in mind as a result of the Spirit of God operating in us, as under pressure?
J.T. Yes. Chapter 5 says God gives the Holy Spirit to those who obey Him. We must obey God. If we do, we are in the power of the Spirit. The Spirit is actually there.
Well now, to go on to @Genesis 24, I think we can see the place the well has in connection with Rebecca. It is a fuller presentation of our subject than we have elsewhere in the book. We have two wells. The first is Beer-lahai-roi; Isaac is occupied with that, but the servant who takes the camels and goes to seek Rebecca, makes the camels kneel down by a well. "And he made the camels kneel down outside the city by a well of water" (verse 11). It is remarkable that he made them kneel down, and then it says, "... at the time of the evening, when the women came out to draw water. And he said, Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, meet me, I pray thee, with thy blessing this day, and deal kindly with my master Abraham. Behold, I stand here by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water. And let it come to pass, that the maiden to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink, and who will say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also, be she whom thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and hereby I shall know that thou hast dealt kindly with my master" (verses 11 - 14). What a beautiful prayer that is. The servant of Abraham is a type of the Spirit Himself in another sense; he links with the well and he makes the camels
{60}
to kneel down; the camels are subject to him. We ask our children in the morning to kneel down to pray. Some may be reluctant and even glad when the prayer is over; these camels had no such spirit as that. They knelt down because he made them to do so. He made the camels kneel down by the well of water. What a fine drink they got! And what a fine giver of the drink. It is no less than the assembly in type. What we get in obeying our parents or whoever it may be when it is a question of kneeling down before God is indicated here. Many children do not kneel down according to order. What is needed is moral power, as seen in Abraham's servant here.
Ques. It was not a casual "*stand*" that the servant took in verse 13. The word seems to indicate that he *stationed himself*. Would it be a characteristic position?
J.T. The same as chapter 18, "And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, three men standing near him" (verse 2). Literally, "stationed themselves". It is deliberate. Everything is in order spiritually. But to return to verse 12, the servant says, "My master, Abraham". What a beautiful tribute by the servant! And he is no less than a type of the Spirit Himself. At the end of the chapter he passes the thought of *master* from Abraham to Isaac, showing that the Deity is in mind. You have the Trinity in the chapter typically, and how perfectly maintained -- the three Persons are One in thought and They recognise each other according to Their positions in the economy! In this setting we have Rebecca coming to light in connection with the well. She has a pitcher. She does not have to be supplied with one. In the servant's prayer, he says to Jehovah, "... and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water. And let it come to pass, that the maiden to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher ..." (verses 13, 14). She has one. That is, she has what is *needed*, not only the water in the well, but the pitcher, and her own strength and energy to use it effectively.
{61}
W.G.T. Hagar seems to have depended entirely upon Abraham for the flask in chapter 21. Abraham brought it to her. Ordinarily as being a servant in the house, she would be accustomed to get the pitcher herself. I was wondering if pride entered into her position.
J.T. She took no furnishing at all. She went out as an outcast; what she had was supplied by Abraham. Here in chapter 24 it is the assembly we are dealing with, which carries supremely the idea of a vessel. Peter saw "a certain vessel descending", @Acts 10: 11. Rebecca has what is needed with which to minister. It is a question of ministry now, and of prayer preceding the ministry. What good meetings we should have if they were opened by prayers like this!
W.F.K. Is Rebecca a type of the assembly as ministering to others?
J.T. Quite so; she is ready for whatever comes -- ministry in a general way -- but she is a subject of prayer. The servant is asking Jehovah about her before he meets her. It is the preceding prayer and as a result, all is perfect. Rebecca is ready with what is needed. This service is needed, and she is ready for it with her pitcher and her energy. We shall see too as we have often noted before, the amount of water she had to furnish was very large, including what the camels drank. But the point, first of all, is this pitcher, and the letting it down from where it should be -- the shoulder.
R.W.S. Why does he ask for just a sip of water? "Let me, I pray thee, sip a little water out of thy pitcher. And she said, Drink, my lord!" (verse 17).
J.T. Do you not think that is a demeanour that should govern us when we are invited into the house of a brother or sister? We should not expect something great, but what is simple. Rebecca gives the servant more than he asks for.
Ques. Is it the Spirit of grace to which you were previously referring?
{62}
J.T. I think it expresses humility in the servant. He is not asking for anything great, but he, is giving her an opportunity to show how liberal she is. It is a question of bringing out the assembly here. It is what the assembly is characterised by.
T.W. Does that explain why she appears to be very free to a mere stranger as he is?
J.T. I think so. She is seemly in every way; there is not a discrepancy in the whole proceeding, except in Laban. Everything is according to God, and all brings out the graces of the assembly, seen typically in this young woman. All is connected with the well, the use she makes of it, and her preparedness in view of this service.
W.R. Peter speaks of showing hospitality to one another without grudging. I suppose that is a feature that is developed here.
J.T. Yes; the liberality with which she acts; the man "was astonished at her, remaining silent, to know whether Jehovah had made his journey prosperous or not" (verse 21). What a beautiful spirit that is! And then it is said, "And it came to pass when the camels had drunk enough, that the man took a gold ring, of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands, ten shekels weight of gold, and said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee. Is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge? And she said to him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor" (verses 22 - 24). Notice that! It is the sisterhood of the house of faith that is in mind. Typically, she understands that. It is to preclude any foreign mixture in marriage among believers. She is of the same family and line as Abraham. "And she said to him, There is straw, and also much provender with us; also room to lodge" (verse 25). She does not even go in to ask her father, mother, or brother. She is quite sure of her ground; that in her father's house can be furnished all that is needed for the servant of Abraham and his
{63}
camels as well. "And the man stooped, and bowed down before Jehovah, and said, Blessed be Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, who has not withdrawn his loving-kindness and his faithfulness from my master; I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren" (verses 26, 27). Well, we touch the top stone now; "my master's brethren"; and all centring in this young woman. It is a question of what culminates in the assembly.
W.G.T. Does this type show how the Spirit of God is the complete representation of the Deity? There is no doubt that the servant here represents Abraham in a very full way.
J.T. We have the Deity in type here. The *servant*; and first, the *master* in Abraham; and after that the *master* in Isaac -- the Father and Son and Holy Spirit. The Spirit thus maintains before us the Deity, either in the Father, or in the Son, or in Himself. He Himself being equal to this service. The great thought of the Trinity cannot be truly maintained, save by the Holy Spirit. It is not a matter of mere doctrine; it can be held and presented rightly only by the Holy Spirit.
A.B.P. The woman of @John 4 said to the Lord that He had nothing to draw with. This type seems to stress not only the means of drawing, but the energy required for our appropriation.
W.B-w. There seems to be quite a distinction between the servant at the well and the servant in the house in this chapter. There is a great deal gone into in the house, which typifies the assembly in another sense.
J.T. "The house of my master's brethren". It involves order and family affection. As to this, Laban fully confirmed what Rebecca had said. He said to the servant, "Come in, blessed of Jehovah! Why standest thou outside? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels. And the man came into the house" (verses 31, 32). The house is very prominent in this section.
{64}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (4)
@Genesis 26: 7 - 9, 23 - 33
J.T. Our subject, which has in mind Christ and the assembly, requires that much place should be given to Isaac and Rebecca; that there should be freshness in the saints as related to Christ. We have previously touched on Hagar and wells which related to her, in chapters 16 and 21, and also on the wells mentioned in chapter 24 in relation to Isaac and Rebecca. But it was only briefly that chapter 24 was considered, and it is one of the most important chapters entering into our subject. It was stressed that Hagar, whilst wells were made available to her, used one of them to minister to her son, but that she is not said to have appropriated them for herself, and in no way is she seen as characterised, typically, by appropriating the wells. Over against her is Rebecca, who represents in the fullest way the assembly as seen in relation to a well, and uses it bountifully in ministering to Abraham's servant and his camels. And then in the close of the chapter, Isaac, as Rebecca is approaching, is seen at the well Beer-lahai-roi. That was the first well that Hagar had to do with. Isaac is seen as coming from it, or as identified with it in a very special way, as if he had it in mind in view of Rebecca's arrival. The Holy Spirit should be appropriated so that the assembly should be in freshness. Our chapter now has in view the continuation of this added feature of chapter 24; and it is well to keep in mind that whilst Isaac is a type of Christ as the heavenly Man, it is *Christ in relation to the testimony down here*, rather than His place in heaven eternally, or even in the millennium.
A.R. Is freshness seen in Rebecca *springing* off the camel? She sprang off the camel and veiled herself. Does that suggest the spiritual agility of which you have been speaking?
J.T. Quite so. It is similar to what is said also of Achsah, denoting agility.
{65}
H.G.H. What is the connection with the subject, in the first two verses we read?
J.T. It is to bring out that whilst Isaac is a type of Christ, he is also a type of those who are responsible in the testimony; the first passage indicates the failure to bring forward the assembly as the bride of Christ. He failed in that. Chapter 24 shows what care was expended on securing her. It is of the utmost importance in the testimony, that the assembly should be recognised by those of us who are of it and in it as the spouse of Christ, not simply as a sister. Isaac only owns Rebecca as his sister, whereas the great point in chapter 24 is that she is his wife.
Ques. Would the failure be a lesson for us that we are not to ally ourselves with the Philistine element.
J.T. Well, Isaac is in a dangerous position here. The chapter shows that the influence was adverse and he was not immune from it; he partially succumbed to it. He denied his wife, like his father; Abraham denied Sarah; he denied her in her wifely relations to him. One of the greatest features of the present testimony is the assembly's relation to Christ. A great many christians do not go that far; they go as far as brethren, or family relationship -- brothers and sisters -- but not to the full thought of Christ and the assembly. Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly", @Ephesians 5: 32, whereas Isaac typically did not.
A.R. Does he represent the responsible element rather than a type of Christ?
J.T. That is what I was remarking. He is not a type of Christ in ignoring the assembly, but he is a type of many of us who are responsible in it; yet we ignore it.
A.N.W. Why do you suppose it is that we are more ready to acknowledge the brotherhood, so to speak, than we are the assembly?
J.T. Well, that is a question to put before each of our consciences. Why is it that we do not come out more completely in confessing our relation to Christ as His
{66}
bride? Not only that we are one of His, or that we are brothers or sisters, but linked up with Him in a marital sense. The enemy is specially against it.
F.H.L. What does Abimelech represent in chapters 20 and 26?
J.T. I think you see that while the Philistines had not come out in open military opposition, they were against Abraham. They had stopped up the well of Abraham. In chapter 21 we are told that: "Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water that Abimelech's servants had violently taken away" (verse 25). And then we are told in chapter 26 that they had stopped up the wells that Abraham dug: "And all the wells that his father's servants had dug in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines stopped them and filled them with earth" (verse 15). That is one element of opposition, a deadly one too, to fill the wells with earth, so that there is no refreshment -- the Spirit is either grieved or quenched.
W.G.T. In what way are we to meet the Philistine element today? It seems as if Isaac had some fear as to it in not coming out fully and declaring his relation to his wife.
J.T. He clearly feared the Philistines. Abraham had contended with Abimelech earlier and Abimelech had said, "I do not know who has done this, neither hast thou told me of it, neither have I heard of it but today" (chapter 21: 26). And then we are told, "And Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the captain of his host, and returned into the land of the Philistines" (verse 32). Abraham's point was expressed in that he gave the king seven ewe-lambs: "And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them to Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant. And Abraham set seven ewe-lambs of the flock by themselves. And Abimelech said to Abraham. What mean these seven ewe-lambs, these which thou hast set by themselves? And he said, That thou take the seven ewe-lambs of my hand, that they may be a
{67}
witness to me that I have dug this well" (verses 27 - 30). That is, Abraham displayed a truly Christ-like spirit -- seven ewe-lambs -- the Philistine was clearly devoid of that. Abraham would have this testimony, in the present he made to the Philistine, that he had dug this well; meaning that the well is the secret of the beautiful spirit Abraham manifested -- typified in these seven ewe-lambs. We need the well to maintain a right spirit. And then he called that place Beer-sheba, which would mean the well of the oath, or of the seven; that is, the well and "the seven" are linked together. It is a question of the spirit we are in, whereas the Philistine spirit is haughty and aggressive and unfair.
Ques. What is the thought of digging the well?
J.T. The removal of the earth. According to @Numbers 21, the princes digged the well at the direction of the law-giver. It means that you remove what is hindering the Spirit. "If, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live", @Romans 8: 13. The Spirit is life in us.
R.W.S. The answer Isaac gives to Abimelech is not exactly untruthful. He says, She is my sister. Is it to avoid reproach?
J.T. Well, he falls short of the full truth. That is always a result of the enemy's working -- that we do not state the full or distinctive truth at any given time. Typically, it was the great truth for the moment. From his father's experience, he ought to have known of this snare, because Abraham did the same thing, or worse, in Egypt, and God told Isaac here not to go into Egypt. He should not be in such a sphere as Egypt, but the Philistine element is as bad. The chapter says, "And there was a famine in the land, besides the former famine which had been in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went to Abimelech" (verse 1). Why did he go there? The link is clearly with the previous failure of Abraham, and yet he goes to Abimelech. Abraham went to Pharaoh. They both put themselves in dangerous positions.
{68}
The lesson is to avoid dangerous positions, which may be too much for us. In a way Rebecca was Isaac's sister, but that was not the whole truth. You do not introduce your wife as your sister when you are with her; it is a denial of the truth of the marital relationship.
J.S. We should know the link of relationship as brethren of Christ first.
J.T. Yes, but the wifely relation was specially important here. The sisterly relation could not cause persecution, whereas the marital might cost Isaac his life.
C.A.M. Do you think when a famine comes along, in any sense, there is a tendency with us to feel that we might get along on what we might call lower truth, whereas what we need is the truth that is nearest to the heart of Christ; that must have first place.
J.T. It is clearly the point here; the marriage had taken place. The whole of chapter 24 is devoted to that subject; the longest chapter, I suppose, in the book, and it is devoted to that particular subject; and now the enemy wants to overthrow that point -- wants to have it ignored -- and antitypically that is a most serious matter.
J.S. He would lower the standard.
J.T. Yes. It is not the whole truth. Anything short of the whole truth at any given time is to give the enemy an advantage.
A.N.W. The lover in Canticles would never stop at saying, My sister; the whole of his bearing is, My sister, my spouse. It is false to stop short of this.
J.T. "Spouse" is stressed; a sister first, meaning that marriage by a christian must be to a christian; between real christians in fellowship. It is important to establish that, that she is a sister; but she is a wife. That is the prime thought.
S.F. Is there anything in the fact that he did not want to die for her whereas the Lord did die for the assembly?
{69}
J.T. It shows that he feared and would evade what Christ underwent in love for the assembly. Thus Isaac is not a type of Christ here.
A.S. Would that be the working of natural instincts?
J.T. Well, it is; it is just cowardice, I would say, and a shameful sort of cowardice, that one denies his relationship with his wife, when it is the point that is stressed; especially the truth of Christ and the assembly.
Ques. Jehovah says, "Go not down to Egypt: dwell in the land that I shall tell thee of", @Genesis 26: 2. If we are subject to God, we will not go into a sphere of danger.
J.T. Quite so; Isaac "went to Abimelech". Why did he go there? Why did Abraham go to Pharoah? Why did David, later, go to the king of the Philistines, to Gath? They are all of a piece. It is a question of cowardice. We do not want to be occupied with any of these honoured men, but to inquire if we are in any way guilty of non-confession of the assembly's marital relation with Christ.
A.R. Do we take on marital relationship at the Supper?
J.T. Yes; that is what comes before us here, that there should be opportunity for what this word 'dallying' means. You would not be so familiar with a sister. It is based on a more familiar relationship; clearly marital relationship. There should be room for Christ in the assembly, in the service after the Lord's supper. The book of Canticles fills out the truth, in the Old Testament types, of what enters into the service of God in this respect; that is, "Go forth, daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart", @Song of Songs 3: 11. There ought to be room for that; you can see it is nearest to the Lord's heart to have His spouse with Him.
It should be known that Rebecca is Isaac's wife. That is where Isaac was failing, and yet the truth comes out.
{70}
The Philistine king sees the relation between them manifested. But this should have been owned in Isaac's public relation. So it is, that Christ's marital relation with the assembly is witnessed at the Lord's supper. This is public, but the private reciprocation of affection between Christ and the assembly is not for Philistine eyes. Rebecca's veil (@Genesis 24: 65), indicates this. Her initial thought is that she is to be exclusively for Isaac.
H.G.H. Is the suggestion in the latter part of this section, that if we hide this relationship there is a danger of losing it?
J.T. Well, we do. Christendom has lost it, so that room is made for another -- the false bride: "Because she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and I am not a widow; and I shall in no wise see grief", @Revelation 18: 7. She has no shame at all, but the true wife is seen typically in Rebecca; she proved her qualities when she drew near to Isaac; she put a veil over her face, as if to reserve her attractiveness for him. But Isaac here is exposed to the Philistine eye; not that the Philistine is to blame, because he is in his own territory, and Isaac had come down to him. But then, if he is going there, why not confess the truth openly? Why use the word "sister" instead of "wife"? It is a matter of cowardice.
W.G.T. How do you place this dallying historically? Would you put that in the movement that commenced a hundred years ago and the increased knowledge of assembly status as believers moved out of sectarian conditions?
J.T. Well, the return to fellowship and the Lord's supper involved the confession of the truth openly. What came out in the revival was the full place of the Lord in heaven and the assembly as united to Him by the Spirit. It was openly confessed. If the dallying were, so to speak, to be seen, people would have to come to the meetings to see what that is, where this sort of thing goes on. It is no place for the Philistine at all.
{71}
C.A.M. Is there not a reluctance with many to make manifest, each in himself, what is so close to the heart of Christ? It is lack of courage, surely, otherwise there are many who would come into the good of the assembly position, do you not think?
J.T. It is lack of courage here, and the dallying goes on in unhallowed circumstances. It was out of its proper realm; he had gone to the Philistine king, so that the blame is entirely on Isaac.
J.S. He comes under the fear of man.
J.T. Clearly. The passage says the men of the place asked about his wife, and he said, She is my sister. When they asked about his wife, why not talk about his wife? If people make enquiry, faithfulness will lead us to state the whole truth. Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly".
E.S. An unbeliever coming in sees the place Christ has with His people and the place they have with Him.
J.T. Well, there it is. In the assembly the relationships between Christ and His own are seen. Rebecca covered her face in chapter 24, clearly to intimate that she was to be for Isaac. Well, why not confess what that implied? They did not ask him about his sister; they asked him about his wife. Clearly they thought she was his wife.
F.H.L. She was "very fair in countenance". The very thing he should have exulted in was the cause of his failure.
C.N. Is there teaching for us in the three persons: Abraham, Isaac, and David, as having failed when it was a question of public testimony?
J.T. Yes. There is a lesson in it as to whether we are cowardly or courageous in this great matter of Christ and the assembly. Paul says, "I speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". It runs through the Scriptures. Isaac failed in that, although otherwise he is an outstanding type of Christ, as Rebecca is of the assembly.
{72}
J.S. Is it failure in headship?
J.T. It is failure in husbandship. The relationship of husband implies headship, too, but the point is whether she is his wife or sister. Many talk about being *brethren*, but how many insist on the relations with Christ and the assembly?
W.G.T. Why is it that this character of cowardice appeared in both Abraham and Isaac?
J.T. I suppose it is innate in all of us. The appeal is: "Be strong and very courageous", @Joshua 1: 7. That is said as Israel was entering upon the territory which the enemy especially claimed. What is specially opposed now is what the assembly is to Christ.
Now we must go on to see how Isaac was supported of God, notwithstanding his failure. We are told about the wells that the Philistines contended for, and that room is made for him. "And they dug another well, and they strove for that also; and he called the name of it Sitnah. And he removed thence and dug another well; and they did not strive for that. And he called the name of it Rehoboth, and said, For now Jehovah has made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land", @Genesis 26: 21, 22. That is, he is now emerging into the clear shining where he can boldly assert the truth. God made way for him, showing that at bottom he was right; but he was not courageous. And what follows brings out the whole truth -- *he went up to Beer-sheba*. Beer-sheba is "the well of the oath" -- involving God's faithfulness, as @Genesis 26 shows. There Abraham called on the name of Jehovah, the Eternal God; he placed himself under divine protection there. The principle underlying Beer-sheba was thus made clear. In spite of his failure, and Abraham's too, God preserves him. Verse 12 says, "And Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year a hundredfold; and Jehovah blessed him". God was with him. And then in this contention about the wells, God makes room for him. If we fail in any way in this
{73}
great point of Christ and the assembly and get right as to it, God will be with us. So we have a hundredfold harvest here -- it is most remarkable!
Ques. Does that result from self-judgment?
J.T. It does indeed. You can conclude that Isaac judged himself, seeing he comes into this great blessing; and then *room* was made for him, because the word *Rehoboth* means *broadways*, that God makes room for us, as we come to acknowledge our faults and own the truth.
Ques. Does the first part of the chapter suggest the grieving or quenching the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Well, if we disregard the assembly, and her relation to Christ, as His bride, I think we shall quench the Spirit; at any rate, He can then only operate on the line of our being brethren to one another, which is not the full level of the truth. The Spirit guides into *all* the truth.
C.A.M. Do you think the crises that come up every now and again, with Philistine elements, result in our getting clear of the conflict? The thing is settled, and the truth of the assembly, the Lord's rights, and what the assembly is to Him, are more precious to us than before.
J.T. Yes. And we see in these verses, how God is coming in and giving him a great harvest, and then giving him room. It is very inspiring. You see that God is for you, in spite of the weakness at the beginning.
A.B.P. Would you say that although Isaac had failed, and in that way left the way open for the quenching of the Spirit by the Philistines, the activities of the Spirit are now seen in using the opposition to bring about full recovery?
J.T. Yes. And what happened shows us the great place the idea of the well has; how much it was in Isaac's mind, and how much it was in the Philistine mind to stop it up. It is a real issue -- a conflict -- and finally Isaac reaches Rehoboth, as he names it; meaning
{74}
that God had given him room. Well, it is most blessed to be conscious that God has given you scope and the Philistine strives no more. And then Isaac moves away (verse 23), "he went up thence to Beer-sheba", and then, verse 33, he is in Beer-sheba. It is territory already secured for him by his father Abraham.
A.B.P. Would it be right to say that though a believer may lose the conscious sense of freshness in his approach to God, the Spirit of God is still active through the very things that seem to be hindering, outwardly, to bring him back to freshness?
J.T. That is the lesson here, I am sure, and we shall see it finally established at Beer-sheba, because great stress is laid on the fact that it was said to Isaac, "We have found water. And he called it Shebah; therefore the name of the city is Beer-sheba to this day" (verse 33). That is the final thing reached in this section, Beer-sheba being a place of divine security. It is known territory as chapter 21 shows. There is no change in the Eternal God. Abraham had called on Him there.
J.S. Is the border suggestive?
J.T. Yes, it is the southern border of the land, but it is in the land, and so Abraham calls it Beer-sheba, the well of the oath; but as "that place". He did not use the word "city", but now Isaac coming to it, suggests that it is a point of great importance that we have arrived at; the idea of a *city*, in relation to the well. It is one of the most distinguished of the cities seen in Genesis.
H.G.H. And as he reached it, "Jehovah appeared to him the same night" (verse 24), as if there is the suggestion that he knew the place. As in such circumstances we know what it is for God to come in, and we know the place of contact with Him is at the well.
J.T. Quite so; the passage says he went up thence to Beer-sheba -- a very definite move -- and Jehovah appeared to him the same night, as much as to say there is not a minute lost when we arrive at the right spot in spiritual progress. "I am the God of Abraham thy father:
{75}
fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake. And he built an altar there, and called upon the name of Jehovah" (verses 24, 25). Now he is on the heavenly line. The worship of God is resumed, as it were, and all is linked with Abraham, the great source of promise. We are on sure ground now. That is what Shebah means; we are on a sure footing, a place of covenant -- the well of the oath.
W.G.T. Did you have in mind the heavenly city when you spoke of Beer-sheba?
J.T. Yes. It is said of Abraham, "he waited for the city which has foundations, of which God is the artificer and constructor", @Hebrews 11: 10. Abraham did not call the place a city; it is not called a city in relation to him, but he had the city in his heart, and Beer-sheba is one of the features of it. The idea of covenant enters into this city; it bears on the heavenly city. Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba after Isaac was received back from the dead, in figure.
W.G.T. Do you have in mind the millennial thought or the eternal thought of the city?
J.T. Well, of the millennial city it is said that God and the Lamb are there. Here the idea of a city is beginning to take form in the heart and mind of faith. The thoughts begin with Abraham; but now they come out in connection with Isaac. And the well is the prominent thought; Beer-sheba is the well of the oath. So that when he comes there he builds an altar, and he calls upon the name of Jehovah, and he pitches his tent there. That is, he is a true pilgrim now. And Isaac's servants dig a well. Notice that; as if the idea of the well is essential to all this. It runs right through, and Beer-sheba is the culminating thought -- we have already touched on it -- the idea of a city in connection with God. We may say that now the idea of the covenant and the oath is connected with God.
{76}
J.S. Would it fit in with @John 4?
J.T. Well, the well is there, as we noted previously. The point to see here is how Isaac is progressing, although having disowned his relations with his wife. If God has recovered us, as having failed, we can go on and He is with us, but we must not lower the standard. Maintain it, and speak of it. Keep on speaking about it, and then speak about it in relation to the faithfulness of God. Beer-sheba represents this, involving His care and protection. It is where God protects us.
C.A.M. I suppose it is necessary for us to understand this wifely idea in the Lamb's wife as connected with the suffering One; otherwise we should never get help on the idea of the city. They are bound up together.
J.T. Quite so; it is the Lamb's wife; He is the Sufferer. The heavenly city comes into view in Revelation. I believe Beer-sheba is this in embryo; because it is typically where God secures everything; where all the promises are secured. So that when Jacob was going down to Egypt he rested in Beer-sheba and offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. And God said to him, "I am the God of thy father". It is Isaac -- not Abraham -- meaning that Isaac represents Christ risen from among the dead in whom every promise is yea and amen. We are not afraid of circumstances any more. It is an immense thing to get hold of. And so, after it is stated that whatever promises of God there are, they are yea and amen in Christ, it is said that He who establishes us in Christ and has anointed us is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts (@2 Corinthians 1: 20 - 22).
Rem. These people are coming to Isaac.
J.T. That is the next thing, showing that he is advancing in strength. "And Abimelech, and Ahuzzath his friend, and Phichol the captain of his host, went to him from Gerar" (@Genesis 26: 26). There are three of them here; the king himself and the captain of his host, and his friend -- the royal side, the social side and the
{77}
military side; they have all come to visit Isaac. But he is man enough for them now. He is not going to be overawed by them any more. So he says "Why are ye come to me, seeing ye hate me, and have driven me away from you?" (verse 27). He is not a bit afraid of them now. He is not afraid to confess that Rebecca is his wife now, showing he has advanced in courage, and strength.
W.G.T. I suppose the enemy had in mind that Gerar should be the city rather than Beer-sheba. The Philistines would like Gerar to be the centre.
J.T. Yes. The point in Beer-sheba is that it is the well of the oath. Hebron refers to what is before the world; Beer-sheba refers to what has come in since the world. It has foundational features which are of God. It is morally greater than the world and it makes the believer greater than the world. I am not afraid of the world. This is seen in Isaac here. The idea of the seven ewe-lambs enters into it. They represent the spirit of Christ in the believer. Isaac is not overcome here.
W.R. Would this be the position of the Philadelphian saints? "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more at all out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God", @Revelation 3: 12.
J.T. That is right; overcoming is a principle in this chapter. Isaac challenges the Philistines -- Why are you come to me? When Abimelech came to Abraham, Ahuzzath was not with him; he had the captain of the host with him then, but now there are two with him -- Phichol, captain of the host, and his friend. Now he is on the social line. The combination of three here is intended to influence Isaac, but Isaac is too great for them now; he has the full support of God. God has made room for him. He has the well and the altar and the tent. So he makes a covenant with them that he will do them no wrong, and sends them away. "And they departed from him in peace" (verse 31). And then (verse 32), "It came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants
{78}
came, and told him concerning the well that they had dug, and said to him, we have found water". This is an additional thought to Rehoboth. This is another well. Isaac is advancing in strength, and God is supporting him. The more we advance, the more we shall realise God's support. That is the way the whole truth is kept in view. We are not ashamed to confess it.
A.R. Would you say that the scripture, "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord" (@1 Corinthians 1: 9) -- expresses the idea of Beer-sheba?
J.T. That is the first intimation you have of it in Corinth, and another is in the second epistle: "Now God is faithful, that our word to you is not yea and nay. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus) did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen", @2 Corinthians 1: 18 - 20. That is Beer-sheba; that is what the Corinthians needed, and that is what we all need, especially if we fail to confess Christ and the assembly. We are re-assured as we come into the sense of the faithfulness of God. He never fails. Let us be overcomers, therefore, in confessing the truth. The newly-dug well (@Genesis 26: 32), is to support us in this position.
Ques. Would you refer to Isaac's servants here as those who are serviceable to Christ in the assembly?
J.T. Just so; typically, they are thoroughly in sympathy with the truth for the moment. They dug the well to support the great principle that had come in; namely, Christ and the assembly, in Isaac and Rebecca.
A.A.T. To whom do we confess Christ and the assembly? On the gospel platform we preach Christ as a Person, as Head.
J.T. To those who may enquire, as instanced in our chapter. The Lord Jesus is our Example in this as in all else. He witnessed "the good confession before Pontius
{79}
Pilate". For this we need the Spirit. The wells stopped by the Philistines, typically point to Isaac's weakness. As a type of Christ, Isaac was making much of Beer-lahai-roi as Rebecca approached (chapter 24: 62), pointing to the need of a well, so that the truth as to her should be maintained; now, as a type of a believer, he is wanting in that, and he denies that she is his wife. Opportunity of confessing comes as a person asks about the meetings, or asks about what you are going on with. Have you a clergyman? Have you a conference to govern you? How are you governed? How do you get on as to judicial matters? well, such enquiry brings up the whole question of Christ and the assembly. Even in regard to money contributed, the assembly is brought in. The messengers are Christ's glory; they are messengers of the assemblies (@2 Corinthians 8: 16 - 24). The assembly comes to light there, like Abigail, who was a woman of affairs, as was Lydia, and Phoebe also. All these instances are to bring out what the assembly is. The husband is known in the gates through her. @Proverbs 31 is to bring this out, what the assembly is in the absence of Christ; that the wifely conditions and relations continue. The household and all pertaining to it manifest that she is the wife, and she has all the means of the husband, so as to have the household in proper condition; to clothe and to feed and to do all that enters into family comfort and dignity. Well, you can tell an inquirer all that. And we do not need a bishop, in the ordinary sense of the word; we do not need a conference, like the Methodists, or a synod like the Presbyterians. We do not need a pope like the Roman Catholics. Christians do not need any of these. It is a question of Christ and the assembly; it is a question of how the assembly can carry on in the interests of Christ. The New Testament -- especially the epistles to the Corinthians and those to Timothy and Titus -- show how the government of the assembly is maintained, and how the gifts for her up-building are furnished. The functionaries and governing
{80}
institutions we have referred to, are not found there at all, and of course, not needed. However we view this great matter, the Spirit is absolutely essential. This is particularly seen in Isaac and Rebecca as types of Christ and the assembly.
C.N. So the locusts have no king, and they go in bands.
A.Cr. Peter says in the first epistle, "but sanctify the Lord the Christ in your hearts, and be always prepared to give an answer to every one that asks you to give an account of the hope that is in you, but with meekness and fear" (chapter 3: 15).
J.T. Just so; you have a right answer for any questions asked; to "every one that asks you to give an account".
R.L.P. What are you referring to as Isaac's confession?
J.T. What he failed to confess, is what we have been dwelling on. They inquired about his wife and he did not confess the truth. If people inquire as to how we get on without the things that other nominal christians have, you confess the whole position of Christ and the assembly. The assembly is well furnished down here in the absence of Christ; she is called His wife in Revelation, one in whom He confides. She carries on in His absence and the truth is maintained; the order of the house of God is maintained. That is what I mean by confession of the truth seen here.
A.N.W. It is a divinely justified position; it is not of man. However showy the human arrangement may be, it is not divinely justified. I am sure nothing but the sense of our relation to Christ in the assembly could hold us in the dignity that is seen in Isaac as these three men approach him. We would go down before the power of the world if devoid of the sense of our relations with the assembly.
J.T. The well is brought forward to show what we need to support us in this position. If we make any statement as to how we get on, someone may say, I will
{81}
come and see. Then, if we are not together in the power of the Spirit, the truth is again denied; hence the well is brought in so that we should not be weak; that we should be in vigour as functioning in the assembly.
W.G.T. Witnessing a good confession before Pontius Pilate would include our brethren who are facing the non-combatant services of all governments.
J.T. Quite so; that is part of it. This is the full truth; the full Ephesian truth we are dealing with bringing out what the position is as over against the false system that Revelation contemplates. Over against the wife of the Lamb, you have the Babylonish system; she says, "I sit a queen and I am not a widow". She is seen in the *wilderness*. What does that mean? That is where there are *no springs of water*; there is no support at all. She has to rely upon human contrivances and human corruption, whereas the heavenly city has the Spirit, hence the wonderful features displayed in her.
A.B.P. Would you say that in @Luke 7, where springs of water are seen as coming from the woman herself, that the Lord Jesus, unlike Isaac, claimed her? The wifely link, so to speak, is publicly acknowledged there.
J.T. Quite so: He says, she *loves*. The assembly is there basically, and so too in the next chapter in Luke -- the woman with the issue -- *virtue goes out of Him* to heal her. That is a suggestion of union; that the assembly is out of Christ, and so fit to be united to Him. He addresses her as "daughter".
W.R. So the position is: "the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth", @1 Timothy 3: 15.
J.T. That is right. How much is essential to maintain that; how necessary that one should know how to behave oneself there! We shall see that confirmed in this chapter, "And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well that they had dug, and said to him, We have found water. And he called it Shebah; therefore the name of the city is Beer-sheba to this day" (verses 32, 33). It is not only
{82}
Shebah; it is Beer-sheba; it is the well of the oath, where we are on sure ground, the ground of God's support. The well is the refreshing side.
J.S. We should say to our fellow Christians, Come and see?
J.T. Well, that is right; the next thing is what *do* they see. If we have not the well, they will not see much. We may go on in a routine way, but it is the well -- the Spirit -- that gives freshness and power to the meetings.
A.R. What you say is practical. We might say we need the Spirit of God for our reading meetings and for assembly service, but really we need the Spirit of God in our care meetings too. It makes it very practical, does it not?
J.T. Quite so, freshness is the point in these readings. It is the well -- the idea of the well running through in relation to the assembly. It is that our meetings are to be fresh; and in view of this, John says, "Come and see". It is a point the apostle makes, and if people come, they see that there is freshness and intelligence and brotherly love amongst us.
Ques. In @Acts 20 it says they went down with him to the ship. Is the full thought seen there, in relation to Paul and the brethren?
J.T. That is the truth. It is a chapter of *love*. The first verse says that Paul embraced the Ephesians and the last verse says that they fell on his neck and kissed him. That shows that there was the reciprocation of holy love, to fill out what we are saying. @Acts 20 is a love chapter and love must be sustained by the Spirit -- 'love in the Spirit', @Colossians 1: 8.
{83}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (5)
@Genesis 29: 1 - 20; @Hosea 12: 12; @Romans 15: 18, 19
J.T. Our present consideration should take us to Jacob. In the last reading it was pointed out that Isaac is a type of Christ as the heavenly Man, but as occupied with the testimony now; Rebecca comes in in that connection, not as taken to heaven literally, but to Sarah's tent. Typically she represents the assembly taking Israel's place in the testimony. Isaac typifies Christ as the heavenly Man, who was not to leave Canaan. Those types therefore contemplate the present time; the testimony standing in relation to Christ and the assembly -- the assembly, herself heavenly, seen as here on earth, but Christ in heaven. So that the dispensation takes on that character -- it is heavenly.
We have now another view of Christ and the assembly. Jacob, who has already left the land of Canaan, took a long journey; according to Hosea, and indeed, according to this section of Genesis, he has taken a long journey for his wife. "And Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep", @Hosea 12: 12. He suggests Christ in activity and in journeyings. It is said he *fled*, which would mean there was hostility; he fled from Esau. Paul said, of himself, to the Thessalonians, that he had been driven out; but, according to @Romans 15, he was journeying to preach the gospel; and this was to secure the assembly for Christ.
Our chapter speaks of a well. It is said that Jacob *looked* -- "Jacob continued his journey, and went into the land of the children of the east. And he looked, and behold, there was a well in the fields", @Genesis 29: 1, 2. Our subject is very much in mind in this section. He looked, and there was a well; he saw the well, and acted in relation to it.
{84}
J.T.Jr. Is the activity you speak of to be in the saints after the pattern of Christ?
J.T. That would be assumed. Paul presented himself as a model. He said, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ", @1 Corinthians 11: 1. So that, as Paul stresses, activity would be in us in the power of the Spirit.
A.N.W. Is there anything in the Lord's personal service here on earth which is akin to Jacob's movement here?
J.T. Matthew, in chapter 16: 13, presents Him at Caesarea-Philippi, where the gentile world would be in mind; there He spoke of the assembly. It carried a wider thought than the remnant of Israel.
J.S. What would the three flocks represent as lying by the well?
J.T. Persons in need of water; but they have to wait for it until others come. So that the need was not immediately met. The scene represents what is current about us -- officialism; the drinking cannot take place until all the flocks come, whereas in the ministry of Christ need was met immediately. "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink", @John 7: 37. There was no delay at all. True service would meet need as it exists. The Jews would limit the Lord's wonderful healing services to the six working days (@Luke 13: 14).
A.R.S. Would the looking around and seeing the well give the idea that we have to use our spiritual eyesight and see where the Spirit is?
J.T. Yes. It seems to fit in accurately, from a spiritual standpoint, with our subject; that is, the idea of wells or springs in relation to Christ and the assembly. In this chapter we see a condition in Syria that Jacob found; the well was there, but under these restrictions. Jacob pays particular attention to it and acts, indeed, *at once*, as Rachel comes with her father's flock.
A.B.P. When the Lord Jesus came into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon (@Mark 7), it would seem as though He
{85}
lifted the stone from the well's mouth, in principle. The woman comes into the blessing ahead of time, in a sense.
J.T. Yes; the prominence of the feminine thought there helps; both the mother and the daughter were affected. The feminine thought there would, I think, convey what is before us; that He had the assembly in mind, only certain conditions were needed, and these conditions were found in the woman. Her faith was great, the Lord says, which idea belongs to the assembly.
A.R. Is there anything in the fact that Jacob was sent by Isaac to look for a wife? Instead of finding a wife immediately, he finds a well.
J.T. Yes. He looked and saw a well. The scripture does not say he looked for *it*, but he *looked*, and that is what he saw, as if that idea must precede the thought of the assembly.
C.A.M. The labours of the apostle Paul in such an extended way were an extension of the journeyings of Christ. Would it be right to say that? And that they come down to the present moment?
J.T. I think that is right. The two instances we have cited bear it out: the one at Caesarea-Philippi, which is a distance out, as you might say, towards the gentiles. Its dual name would indicate that -- Caesarea-Philippi; and then the Syrophenician woman comes into view in the borders of Tyre and Sidon. She was an original Canaanite, but such as would form the assembly.
C.A.M. The apostle functioning among the saints would be the masculine side of the truth, or the ministry side, to secure the feminine side, the assembly.
J.T. That is right. Paul represents the ministry, and he speaks of "journeyings oft". It was the spirit of Christ operating in him with this in view, to secure *what the Lord sought*.
A.N.W. Did he have something of that in mind when he spoke of filling up of the sufferings of Christ for His body's sake?
{86}
J.T. Yes. It would bring in the *fulness* of what the Lord sought. Sufferings in the assembly would be essential to her formation for Him; so that she is the Lamb's wife, which would mean that she is the wife of the Sufferer, and she herself is a sufferer, which is a matter to be taken to heart in these last days; "And I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly", @Colossians 1: 24. What is behind in respect of sufferings is being forced upon many of our brethren, and, perhaps, will be on us through present circumstances. At least, if not literally, it is in spirit, and I think that even in that way the assembly is being prepared for translation.
W.B-w. Do you then look at Jacob as a type of Paul moving in the power of the Spirit here looking for the assembly? I have in mind that scripture in Romans already mentioned: "So that I, from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum, have fully preached the glad tidings of the Christ", @Romans 15: 19.
J.T. Yes, and for that the well is essential. That is what Jacob saw and took notice of, and even admonished the persons there about it. He then watered a flock; but not until Rachel came, meaning that an incentive for love was there, although she is still only regarded as in family relation. She is only treated as a sister or cousin so far, but she is potentially what he was seeking.
W.B-w. There was not much movement at this well until he came.
J.T. No. Our enquiry now is, whether there is movement with us, those of us who are on the main line, so to speak, as has been said; whether we are active in journeyings for Christ's sake.
J.S. Would the anti-type of this be seen in the Acts of the Apostles?
J.T. Yes. It is seen especially in Paul as has been said. He had travelled in a circuit to Illyricum. He purposed visiting Rome and even Spain. Going to Spain
{87}
from Jerusalem was a great journey; indeed, Spain was the utmost limits of the west at that time.
W.G.T. "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" (@Matthew 16: 13), would indicate that the Lord's Person is to be apprehended as the assembly comes into view?
J.T. Just so. Christ and the assembly. Christ *first always*.
A.A.T. What would you say the stone in our chapter represented?
J.T. It is right in its place; it is a protection for the water, but it required to be removed in order that the water should be procured. I suppose it would imply the water was not open or exposed; it was covered; but the point that Jacob makes is, Why do you not remove it *now*? There are flocks right here; why do you not remove it and water them? That is the point he makes. Why is the Spirit of God telling us about Jacob's exercises at this time if it be not to bring before us Christ in this relation? He is before us here in His activities and journeyings, in order to secure what He came for; what He gave Himself for; and we are reminded that the well, that is, the Spirit, must be in the front in our services if they are to be patterned after Christ's. The point is illustrated in Isaac coming from the well Beer-lahai-roi as Rebecca came into view. It is the same thought carried through.
Ques. Is there a correspondence between @Acts 16 and this, when Paul went outside of the gate by the river, where it was the custom to pray? Paul went there soon after reaching Philippi.
J.T. That is it; the river is there, running water. The roots of that assembly would be by the river; a good idea. That is where our roots should be, drawing sap in that way, drawing refreshment from running water.
A.B.P. In each of the scriptures that have been before us, the well seems to be linked on with a locality. Does
{88}
Jacob looking and seeing a well, suggest the place the Spirit has in localities?
J.T. I think the locality is stressed in view of what may be developed there. The assembly in its administrative feature involves localities; so that it becomes a question of how the Spirit operates, especially in view of the assembly here in *testimony*. Hence we have it at Jerusalem strikingly; we have it in Samaria, and we have it at Corinth, and we have it at Ephesus. These are all representative of the local aspect of the assembly's position. The Spirit has to be apprehended in each locality.
F.H.L. It says the well was in the fields. Is that a likely place to look for it?
J.T. I think it would be, because it is a question of where the flocks are. There are three of them here; three flocks of sheep were lying by it. They were there, meaning there was potential fruitfulness there. Only, the water was denied them for the moment, and that fact discredited the service -- the flocks had to *wait*. The gospels show that the Lord always met need promptly.
A.R. Perhaps the conditions that Paul found at Ephesus were like this. He found twelve men there, but they were deficient in relation to the Spirit, and he says to them, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" @Acts 19: 2. He was concerned as to the development of the feminine features.
J.T. That is good. He wanted to bring this out, to bring the Spirit into evidence. He evidently had known that the work of God was in these men, but the point is, Have you received the Spirit? -- that is what we are speaking of. He had the same thought as Jacob. They did not know about it; it was his concern, and he removed the stone, and the Spirit came in; the obstruction was in themselves, in their ignorance, and he removed it. Thus the water flowed.
J.S. What is involved in verse 8 of our chapter: "... until all the flocks are gathered together"?
{89}
J.T. It is the clerical idea; restrictions to *reduce work*. Christ met need at once. There was no delay at all. John says, "Jesus stood and *cried* saying, If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink", @John 7: 37. There was deep feeling in the Lord's *cry*.
A.N.W. Even though He had to say to the woman previously mentioned, "I have not been sent save to the lost sheep of Israel's house" (@Matthew 15: 24), still He waited to bless her.
J.T. That was a question of removing the stone. Her assumption that she could speak to Him as the Son of David meant there was something to be dealt with in her, as there was something to be dealt with in the men of Ephesus and the converts in Samaria. The removal of the stone means that what may have been the hindrance in us is dealt with. From the divine side, the death of Christ had to take place to remove the stone.
C.A.M. "And he looked, and behold ..." (verse 2). Do you think our progress assembly-wise would be according to what we see, in this sense? Indications from God would come to us from time to time if we were really on this line.
J.T. Yes; the idea of divine things coming into our view as we progress, is constant in Scripture. The gospel necessarily enters into the removal of the stone, because the difficulty is likely to be in ourselves, perhaps through defective teaching we have imbibed; that is prevalent around us now; it is like the twelve men in Ephesus. The teaching was defective, and they must have been negligent themselves, because John the baptist spoke about the Holy Spirit, and they said they had not even heard if He was come, so that the difficulty was in themselves.
W.B-w. The Galatians had begun in the Spirit, but there were those who would keep the stone on the well's mouth, but Paul was endeavouring to take it off.
J.T. Just so. Just as the Philistines stopped the wells; bad teachers were doing that. So that you see more and
{90}
more as we look into this matter that, generally, the well is stopped in christendom. People have to wait for the clerical arrangements. They have to wait for the official personage or whatever he may represent.
J.S. So that in @John 7 the stone is removed by the Lord Himself, would you say, and then the rivers flow: "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (verse 38).
J.T. @John 7 is, of course, a counterpart of @John 4. @John 7 adds the word "receive". The Lord, there, speaks about coming and drinking: "But this he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive" (verse 39). Receiving is a very important word in regard of this subject; not whether the Spirit is given to you, but whether you have *received* Him; receiving involves appreciation.
J.H.H. In one sense, would you say, the Lord removed the stone at the pool of Bethesda? The people were waiting until the moving of the waters, but the Lord would present Himself to the man there.
J.T. In that sense, He met the need *at once*; that man had been there thirty-eight years and the angel had come down every year at a certain time and troubled the water, but the man could not get in because he had not power; others got in before him. The man's need is met immediately by the Lord.
R.W.S. The first thing Jacob does after watering the sheep is to kiss Rachel, and then he lifts up his voice and weeps.
J.T. That is a beautiful point reached in the narrative. I think before we reach it and dwell upon it, we ought to note the exercises as to this well and why the persons present were not acting. It is said, "And a great stone was at the mouth of the well. And when all the flocks were gathered there, they rolled the stone from the mouth of the well" (verses 2, 3). Notice, *they* did it; but it *had* to be done; yet not until all the flocks were gathered together. That was the custom that governed
{91}
Syria; there was no question about it; "They rolled the stone from the mouth of the well, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again on the mouth of the well in its place". So far so good, but the sheep had to *wait*, however thirsty they were, until this time came. It was not, so to speak, "the time appointed by the Father"; it was the time appointed by the people of that place; a principle of their own, to save their energy. It was just to save energy. It was not love. And then Jacob said to them, "My brethren, whence are ye? And they said, Of Haran are we" (verse 4). He is identifying them. That is the next thing. Before dealing with defects, we have to know the persons we are dealing with, and what their principles are, and their ways too, which is an important matter. "And he said to them, Do ye know Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We do know him. And he said to them, Is he well? And they said, He is well". Rachel is to be the immediate link. The family link is known to be there, but who the persons of the family are, is not yet known. What answers to this now, is found in a "son of peace"; you get in touch with him and *stay there*. The people knew Laban, which is good, so far. We can see that certain social links exist; whether they are pure assembly links is the point. They knew Laban, and they knew the state of his health, and then they say, "And behold, there comes Rachel his daughter with the sheep" (verse 6). They knew her too. There is a good general condition, potentially. It is an opening for spiritual operations. Then Jacob comes in with his services, for that is how it has to be regarded. He says (verse 7), "Behold, it is yet high day" (that is *noon*); "it is not time that the cattle should be gathered together" (the *cattle* would mean larger beasts), "water the sheep, and go, feed them". He is a real shepherd; he is a live-stock man, which is typically what a man would be who can serve the Lord. The Israelites were that characteristically, and that was an abomination to the Egyptians. So he says, "Water the sheep, and go,
{92}
feed them". That is a word of admonition, for they were defective in their way of doing things. Their principles and methods were not right. That is the ground he takes. It is instructive to see that Jacob was a live-stock man; so was Solomon. Solomon could instruct you about all these creatures; and so could Adam; and, clearly, the Israelites carried down the thought of the importance of cattle. They were shepherds, bearing the character of Christ. The Lord knows the living, their different features. But *they* say in reply to Jacob, "We cannot until all the flocks are gathered together", (they are again asserting their principles) "and they roll the stone from the mouth of the well, and we water the sheep" (verse 8).
And now Rachel comes. That is the crux of the matter. He does not offer to help them at all, or take the stone away, until she comes, because that is what he is seeking, the family connection. So that when Rachel comes, he *moves*; and that brings out what is before us; what the assembly is to Christ. I am not saying that Rachel is exactly the assembly, but she is potentially Jacob's spouse, and hence answers to the assembly here. In result, however, Leah is the type of the assembly.
J.S. What would you say about the fact that she is a shepherdess?
J.T. She corresponds to Jacob. So, "Rachel came with her father's sheep, for she was a shepherdess. And it came to pass when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near and rolled the stone from the mouth of the well" (verse 10). Notice, it is only the family link so far, not marital yet. Rachel is one of his brethren; that is what is meant. It is the family link in activity, which is an immense thing; and we know how enjoyable it is when we really understand our relations to each other in a family sense; that is, as brethren.
{93}
C.A.M. Do you think it would be an encouragement in our local settings that in the unfolding of the truth, the most precious thing does not always appear at the first. You might have a great desire for assembly conditions, but these are reached step-by-step.
J.T. Yes; we learn in part, and 1 Corinthians shows that the state of the assembly affects what is ministered. I think the chapter is most interesting; spiritually accurate as to the Spirit of Christ in seeking what is represented here. Jacob is seeking a wife. He is representative of Christ in seeking the assembly, going for it Himself.
W.B-w. Is it also a question of seeking assembly material in a locality?
J.T. That is how the truth works out. This is seen throughout. As Paul is in Corinth, the Lord tells him He has much people there, and in the course of his ministry, Paul espoused them to one Man -- as a chaste virgin to Christ. The man in @John 9 had neighbours, and he has a father and a mother. That is, there was *social* material there, but before the idea of the sheep comes into evidence he is *cast out*. Well, Rachel here is not cast out; there is no hostility at all to her; it is just a position that is neighbourly. Jacob makes a difference between Rachel and all the others, for when he sees her and the sheep, he removes the stone and waters the flock. His heart is moved in family feelings and affections.
W.B-w. He says, "My brethren" -- that should bring to light something in the locality.
J.T. I think it is a suggestion of the present profession. They are not looked at as heathen. Addressing them as brethren would promote general confidence. They are looked at as his family links, but then there is one man there about whom he is thinking and whose name he mentions. He does not ask after anybody else but Laban. He asks after his health.
{94}
A.N.W. What would you say as to the Lord's supper conducted *only* on brotherly lines, and not reaching the marital side?
J.T. If the state of the meeting were right, the deficiency being due to ignorance, the Lord, I am sure, would accept it; but if there were independency and refusal of the truth of Christ and the assembly, you could not have part in it. If we do not bring the assembly into the Supper, we lose the force of it. It is a question too of the Spirit. If you do not make room for the Spirit, you will never get the right thought of the Supper, or of the assembly.
A.Pf. Does Jacob change the custom of the place?
J.T. That is, in principle, what he does; we cannot say his example was followed. He admonished them, but he also proceeds to do what he indicated should be done as Rachel comes; but he did not water the other flocks; it is a question of the family, and there was no doubt as to this in her case. If persons are christians they are brethren, and they should get the water, that is, get the Holy Spirit.
J.T.Jr. Is there not a connection between the changing of the water to wine in @John 2, and the healing of the nobleman's son in @John 4 as having to do with the family?
J.T. The family thought is clearly in view in the case of the nobleman, and then there is also a connection with the Spirit in that chapter -- the thought of living water comes in before the narrative of the nobleman. The Lord calls his child a *son*, indicating dignity in the family. "Himself and his *whole house*" believed. The water in @John 2 is purifying water, but it becomes wine; what purifies me becomes wine in me; it occasions joy. The *drinking* water affords much instruction as coming between these two signs in Cana of Galilee. John makes more of water than any of the other evangelists.
{95}
C.A.M. As to the matter of addressing people or regarding them as brethren, I suppose when Saul of Tarsus was secured, the way it took place would impress upon him this brotherly idea before he found himself part of the company. Do you think that would be a sort of indication to him as to how to act in his christian days?
J.T. Just so. And then the water of purification is brought in. That is, Ananias says, "Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away", @Acts 22: 16. That is the water of purification; but then he should get the Holy Spirit, which would be drinking water.
C.A.M. That is a great help, because the signal way in which baptism is applied to the apostle Paul might first seem a little strange, but as you look at it in that connection, it all forms part of a whole process.
J.T. It does, indeed. So that the order here is very instructive. As soon as he sees Rachel and her father's flock -- she herself being a shepherdess -- verse 10 says, "Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the mouth of the well, and watered the sheep of Laban his mother's brother". The family link is the point. Then it says, "And Jacob kissed Rachel"; this does not go beyond the family link; brothers and sisters, or cousins. And then it says he "lifted up his voice and wept". He was thoroughly affected. He *fled* to the country of Syria for a wife; he was under pressure at the outset, but now his affections are aroused. He is not now thinking of Esau's hostility; he is affected by what he *finds*, because that is what he is looking for; family affection, which is an immense thing for us to understand. That is what we find in meetings such as these; they involve family affection and then the corporate idea; what we are to Christ. After this strong expression of affection "Jacob told Rachel that he was a brother of her father, and that he was Rebecca's son" (verse 12). He is asserting what he is to them; not to the neighbours, but to them. Typically, he has found christians; that is what is meant.
{96}
The Lord is seeking them today; those that are His own. The Lord knows those that are His; and, as we are usable, He is using us to find them. As in this service these traits of Himself, seen in Jacob, work out through us.
A.R. The Lord Jesus said to Paul, "I have much people in this city", @Acts 18: 10. Paul would have to find them, would he not?
J.T. They were not yet members of the family, so that they were only potentially His people, but there is a real family link here. The stress is on Laban, Rebecca's brother, and that Jacob is Rebecca's son, and Rachel, Laban's daughter. It is a family picture and Jacob is thoroughly in it.
J.S. Does progress in the testimony result from securing material for the assembly?
J.T. Typically, that is the idea here. Jacob informs Rachel about himself, that it may be clear that the family links are there. The next thing is that Rachel ran and told her father, and verse 13 says, "And it came to pass when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his sister's son" (notice these family terms), "that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house; and he told Laban all these things. And Laban said to him, Thou art indeed my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him a month's time", that is, with the family; it refers to what we are to each other as brethren.
W.R. Would you look at Jacob in the light of John's testimony? "He that has the bride is the bridegroom", @John 3: 29. He seems to move in his affections as a bridegroom towards a bride, and he uses the family in that way.
J.T. That is in the distance as yet. This paragraph does not go beyond the family. Rachel is of the same family as Jacob; that is clear. It is most important, in the work of God, to make clear that all true Christians are brethren, whatever their associations; thus the workman
{97}
can say, "Be as I am, for I also am as *ye*", @Galatians 4: 12. As this is understood and accepted, assembly truth can be introduced.
W.B-w. From verse 4 onward, all the questions that Jacob raises are to find the family, and put the Syrians where they should be.
J.T. That is the idea exactly. The Syrians are eliminated, and now it is the family -- Rebecca's brother. And Laban goes so far as to say to Jacob, "Thou art indeed my bone and my flesh". Still, that is not on marital lines, because it is a man and his nephew.
A.R. When we sit down at the Lord's supper, the underlying condition is that we love one another.
J.T. Some say, We are going to meet the Lord, but the fact is, we are going to meet one another first. "We being assembled to break bread", @Acts 20:7.
G.V.D. Is there the family line in @John 1? Andrew first finds his brother Simon.
J.T. Yes. He took him to Jesus.
A.N.W. Our slowness to arrive at the assembly relation is because we do not rightly value the family relation.
J.T. That is the difficulty all around, the want of family feelings. We would speak well of one another if we accepted the family status and the family relation. We are brethren. That underlies unity.
J.S. Do you get the family link in @John 20: "But go to my brethren and say to them ..." (verse 17?).
J.T. That is on a higher plane. That comes in a little later. We are now speaking of what we are as brethren in a public sense as christians. The Lord says, "And all *ye* are brethren", @Matthew 23: 8. That is the position here before the world. We are all brethren.
F.H.L. In chapter 24, Laban ran to the well to meet Abraham's servant, and here he runs to meet Jacob.
J.T. There is not much depth in him, you know, but he represents what is in the mind of the Spirit here. He is a father to Rachel and Leah, and he is a
{98}
brother to Rebecca, and Jacob is Rebecca's son; so that the family link is established. That is all that is necessary.
W.B-w. Verse 9 reads, "While he was still speaking to them ..." The speaking brings to light what is sought.
J.T. Quite so; going to a place you look for this element. We have known of a case where there was some apparent interest and it was suggested that a brother go and stay there, and find what was there.
A.N.W. Perhaps those of the family are not brought to light because the real brotherly link is not recognised.
J.T. That was the real difficulty in all the divisions that have taken place amongst us; the want of reality in the profession of family relationship. Scripture says a brother is born for adversity, and so we ought to afford protection and general care for each other.
A.R. God said to Moses that Aaron, when he saw Moses, would be glad in his heart. When he saw him he kissed him.
J.T. Aaron did the kissing. At that point Aaron led in brotherly love.
R.W.S. Is that a clue to why so many with whom we come into contact, and who come to our meetings, finally disappear? We do not seem to be able to secure them.
J.T. Yes; although soil is very hard. It is very striking how many do pass through, not taking hold of the truth the Holy Spirit is maintaining in the meetings. The well is essential to this. The well is the underlying principle that maintains this, and that is why Jacob, as a type, makes so much of it.
R.W.S. Would you, in such cases, emphasise that we are all brethren? You mentioned a month's time for the family side of things.
J.T. Yes; if you meet one who has the evidences of being a christian, you say, "Be as *I* am, for *I* also am as *ye*", @Galatians 4: 12. But it takes time to gain confidence,
{99}
and that is what the month means here. He abode a month's time; that is the family month, and then the next thing is wages. Laban says to Jacob, "Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou serve me for nothing? tell me, what shall be thy wages? And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger, Rachel. And the eyes of Leah were tender; but Rachel was of beautiful form and beautiful countenance. And Jacob loved Rachel, and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter" (verses 15 - 18). Now this is the consummation of what his journey had in mind. Is there one that can be an object of his affections? It is the Jewish side that is in mind here, because from the standpoint of the Old Testament, Israel would be the most beautiful. The gentiles had no status, in that sense. There was nothing beautiful about them. But Christ received the gentile bride first. That is the position today. Rachel is the future Israelitish bride of Christ.
W.G.T. Referring again to what you were saying about the month's time, would Paul's eighteen months at Corinth fit in here? He stayed with them on brotherly lines, working as a tent maker and formed true bridal affections among them.
J.T. Yes. He was an apostle, but still he was a brother, and he stresses that. He associates a brother with him in each of his epistles to that assembly.
W.R. The Holy Spirit is necessary to love.
J.T. The Holy Spirit is necessary to everything from our side; and therefore we must make much of the Spirit, and if we are to do that we must judge ourselves for all that grieves or quenches the Holy Spirit. We must remove the stone that may, from our side, hinder the water flowing out.
W.B-w. Is the defect stressed here that there was no Jacob to take away the stone?
J.T. Yes. They did not have the true shepherd thought. Each would look after his own flock, no doubt;
{100}
but they all had to wait, however thirsty, until the flocks were all there. It would be a bad case for us, if we had to wait for all the saints in this city to come; we would never get anything. If the Lord said, You cannot meet here until you gather all the saints in this city, we would have a bad time. But Jacob met the need of Laban's flock immediately. "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", @Matthew 18: 20. The Lord met need immediately. It is a question of all Israel that are present. The clerical element hinders the family development as well as the assembly's marital relation with Christ. In some cases true men rise above it, but I am speaking of it generally. So this matter of wages comes up, and brings out what was in Jacob's heart, that he is ready to serve for a wife. It is how Christ served for the assembly; it is the affection He has for the assembly. Jacob had to wait seven years, but they were in his eyes as single days because he loved Rachel. It is the love of Christ for the assembly; not for the family or Laban's house, but for Rachel, and Rachel only. That is what he has in mind.
J.T.Jr. Paul had the family thought in his mind in regard of the Thessalonians -- they were brethren beloved of God. That assembly was marked by affection.
J.T. Yes. They are addressed as "the assembly of Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ". They were taught of God to love one another. But the word is "more and more".
A.B.P. Do you have an answer to this section in the last chapter of Acts? Paul saw the *brethren* and took courage (verse 15); he served the Jews ardently, reflecting Christ's love for them, but he turned to the gentiles. It was as though his love for Israel found its final expression at Rome. Then he had to say, "Be it known to you therefore, that this salvation of God has been sent to the nations", @Acts 28: 28.
{101}
J.T. I am sure that is right. He tells the Thessalonians that he had been driven out, which is what happened to Jacob; he was driven out. That was behind Jacob's journeyings. It was Rebecca's thought first. Later, he was sent to Laban for a wife. Paul had been occupied in Christ's affection for Israel. In his last visit to Jerusalem he carried Christ's affection for Israel; he went to Jerusalem against the testimony of the Spirit, but nevertheless, what actuated him was great affection for Israel. When he comes to Rome the matter is settled, because he says that the salvation of God is sent to the nations.
A.R. @Acts 20 and 21 would be Paul's affections in activity in relation to his brethren generally, I suppose. He embraces certain ones at Ephesus; then he embraces Eutychus at Troas; he is ardently kissed at Miletus, and then, at Tyre, the saints, including the women and children, embrace him.
J.T. The mutual affection that was there is touching. I am sure that is the lesson for us. It is what belongs to *brethren*, and how, as loving one another in this sense, we become delightful to the Lord unitedly, and pleasing to the Father, too.
F.N.W. This would help us in the fulfilment of our services locally. As occupied more in the sphere of the Spirit, and in conditions of affection among the brethren, the Lord would bring in souls.
J.T. I think that is the order of the truth; love amongst brethren; and when the Lord's Day morning arrives -- "we being assembled to break bread" -- we meet one another. It is a real pleasure to meet the brethren to begin with.
A.N.W. It is remarkable that it says in the prophet, "And for a wife he kept sheep", @Hosea 12: 12. He had a wife in mind in the keeping of the sheep.
J.T. There was the fleeing, the long journey, and then the heavy work; it was heavy work to keep sheep as he did. He endured much; the heat in the day, and
{102}
in the night the frost consumed him. It is remarkable, the intensity of his love. Seven years were in his eyes as seven days. It is to bring out the intensity of his love. Seven is a very important numeral throughout Scripture. It is usually what is complete spiritually.
W.B-w. What is the point in the prophet Hosea bringing the verse we have read into chapter 12, where Ephraim's failure is stated?
J.T. I think Hosea directs our minds back to good things in the midst of evil things; the former to be a positive incentive to saints, at any time, to overcome. What Jacob was at the beginning is mentioned. The prophet turns from severest denunciations to the most precious affectionate touches.
W.B-w. A terrible thing is said about Ephraim in that chapter. "All day long he multiplieth lies and desolation" (verse 1). In the midst of all this Jacob is brought in, as serving for a wife.
J.T. That would remind us of true affection, of which Ephraim was then wanting. We are told later on by the prophet, "And by a prophet Jehovah brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved" (verse 13). Verse 12 is the love of Christ for the assembly, and verse 13 is the prophetic ministry. The service of the prophet implies the power of God.
A.R. During this seven years of waiting for the bond to be consummated. Jacob is said to be keeping sheep. I was wondering, in view of that, whether the activity in waiting would keep the brethren together.
J.T. Jacob was occupied with live-stock; that is the idea. There are living conditions among the brethren, and you love them and care for them.
W.B-w. Is there a thought of Moses being linked on with Jacob in the passage in Hosea? Moses was the prophet.
J.T. Yes, clearly. The application today would be the love of Christ constraining us, and the prophetic
{103}
ministry touching our consciences would tend to take us out of Egypt, or if we are out, keep us out.
W.B-w. And the remnant would go on in the midst of all this wickedness of Ephraim.
J.T. That is a characteristic of Hosea's ministry. He brings in positive things to deliver you from the evil you are going on with. The prophetic ministry is doing a very good service, but the love of Christ is the first thing; it *constrains us*. "For the love of the Christ constrains us, having judged this: that one died for all, then all have died", @2 Corinthians 5: 14. That is insisted on; the prophetic ministry will insist on that.
A.B.P. Would the personal experience of Hosea develop the feelings to which you referred as marking his ministry? Would it serve to emphasise in his heart the features of true love, which he would appreciate in Jacob and Rachel?
J.T. Yes; he had to go through extraordinary marital experiences himself, so as to be able to bring out Jehovah's love, patience and faithfulness to Israel. He says a great deal of what Israel was to God as a wife. She was shamefully untrue to Him, and hence His judgments came upon her (chapter 2). But He will allure her into the wilderness and speak to her heart. He tells her, "Thou shalt call me, My husband, and shalt call me no more, Baali" (chapter 2: 16). Hosea is an important book in regard of our subject.
W.B-w. It says of Jacob, "He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and in his strength he wrestled with God", @Hosea 12: 3. He had a good beginning. He began with power at the outset and he carries that through.
J.T. That shows he was of another order to Esau. That is, he was lovable to God from the very outset.
A.R. Is this idea seen in Corinth, where Paul says, "Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly
{104}
united in the same mind and in the Same opinion", @1 Corinthians 1: 10? Would that be the idea of the *brethren*, whereas the *marital* side is seen in the end of the second epistle, where he says, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ", @2 Corinthians 11: 2?
J.T. That is the order of the truth of the position. That is, the first epistle is our public position where we are known as brethren; the second brings in that, too, but it brings in the idea of the bride espoused to Christ; to "one man".
W.B-w. Evidently the Jewish spirit was in Isaac's house before Jacob fled.
J.T. That is the position. He is fleeing; he is driven out, but his heart is on an object which he seeks and finds; and that is what Paul represents.
R.W.S. Would the *circuit* (@Romans 15: 19) link on with the seven-year thought? The patient manner of prophetic service in which Paul finished his journey secures the finished product. There are no loose ends in Paul's service; he secures the bride for Christ.
J.T. Yes. The Lord looked around in a circuit *on the brethren* (@Mark 3: 34).
C.A.M. Peter had a commission as a shepherd and this would necessitate travelling.
J.T. It is remarkable, the journeying that there has been, but it is largely blocked for the moment. The Lord, I believe, will open up the way again for journeying; it was a feature of Christ's service, and is seen in relation to the assembly. Paul's journeyings were Christ's journeyings, and the same is true of the travels of others. Of the overcomer in Philadelphia, the Lord says, "He shall go no more at all out", @Revelation 3: 12.
{105}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (6)
@Genesis 41: 45 - 52; @Genesis 49: 22
J.T. It is thought that we should look at Joseph's history at this time. He, Joseph, is seen in Genesis as a type of Christ, not mainly in relation with Israel -- although of Israel -- but *among the gentiles*, and what He acquires there. The epistle to the Colossians has in mind this part of our subject; that is, "Christ in you" -- Christ among the nations -- "the hope of glory". There is no other hope among the nations. However much has been among them since Nebuchadnezzar's time, there is no "hope of glory". What gives a clue to our subject, principally, is the verse in chapter 49, "Joseph is a fruitful bough; a fruitful bough by a well; his branches shoot over the wall". The word for *bough*, as the note shows, is *son of a fruitful tree*. That is the general thought -- a fruitful bough; and then, "by a well" is a second thought. *Branches* convey a feminine thought -- *daughters* -- shooting over the wall. Fruitfulness is thus linked with the well.
In chapter 41, we see how immense was the fruitfulness. In general, it is seen in the fruit of the land, prior to the famine; but also in his two sons, the name of the second meaning fruitfulness. He says, "God has caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction" (verse 52); therefore, the idea of fruit predominates in his history. Asnath is the link with our subject, as a type of the assembly. Our thoughts, under the Spirit's guidance, should come under the teaching of Colossians -- the assembly's place seen there, and what Christ is as the Centre. His Person comes into great prominence even as to headship of the assembly, it is part of the glory of the Person of Christ that He is Head of the assembly. It is all of Himself, no augmentation from judaism at all; that is rather in the way. There is no idea of Sarah's tent here; it is what arises from Joseph;
{106}
that is, Christ, in type, and what is from himself, rising, as he does, from the position of a slave to lord of all Egypt. It is what Christ is Himself; what comes out in Himself; His position among the gentiles by itself; nothing at all contributed from judaism. It is what arises from him in the land of his affliction.
A.R. Chapter 37 reads, "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph ..." (verse 2). It would seem as if the Spirit of God wants to have the eye fixed on Joseph immediately, and then it says, "And Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons" (verse 3).
J.T. Quite so; the subject runs right on from chapter 37 to chapter 46; it is mainly Joseph right through. We do not get the other sons until Jacob goes to Egypt. It is the Egyptian position, and Joseph in it. The others are left out until they go to Joseph *in Egypt*.
C.A.M. Your reference to Colossians seems to throw light on the line of thought. It says that when the gospel came among them it was *bearing fruit* and growing.
J.T. The name Zaphnath-paaneah is to bring out what he was to be. The idea conveyed, of the *sustainer of life*, would allude to the fruitfulness of the land which was administered through him; the bread that supplies life. Pharaoh therefore had the thought that was to come out in him; the one who could nourish or sustain the life of the world, as it seems to be. Joseph also says to his brethren, "God sent me before you to preserve life", @Genesis 45: 5. From Pharaoh's point of view, he was sustainer of the life of the world, and that was through food. "Pharaoh said to his bondmen, Shall we find one as this, a man in whom the Spirit of God is? And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Since God has made all this known to thee, there is none so discreet and wise as thou", @Genesis 41: 38, 39. So we may connect him with Caiaphas, who, because of the position he held, came into prophetic light. Then he says, "Thou shalt be over my house, and according to thy commandment
{107}
shall all my people regulate themselves; only concerning the throne will I be greater than thou". That is all in accord with Jacob's prophecies; the throne was the one thing that was denied Joseph. It was in the mind of God for *Judah*, who represents another phase of Christ's glory. "And Pharaoh said to Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt. And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it on Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in clothes of byssus, and put a gold chain on his neck. And he caused him to ride in the second chariot that he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee! and he set him over all the land of Egypt. And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I am Pharaoh; and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt. And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnath-paaneah, and gave him as wife Asnath, the daughter of Potipherah the priest in On" (verses 41 - 45). Thus he is honoured, and given a wife by the king. He is second to him; equal to the king except in the throne; therefore, the *position* is typical of what we see in God and Christ. We cannot reverse the position of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. We must put the Father *first*, not the Spirit, nor the Son. The economy of christianity is seen thus; the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. That is the position now. The basis for fruitfulness is thus assured.
A.B.P. Is the picture completed in chapter 47, in Jacob coming in as father? Pharaoh is seen as typical of God, but is not Jacob typical of the Father? So that the fruitfulness in Joseph's sons becomes satisfaction to the heart of the Father.
J.T. That is right. The Father comes in first, really, in the full thought of our dispensation. "I ascend to my Father, and your Father". That is the order of the truth in @John 20; and then, "my God, and your God" is final.
A.N.W. Are these statements in chapter 49 to be considered separately and distinctly? First of all, Joseph
{108}
is a fruitful bough, and then a fruitful bough by a well, as linking him, apparently, with the Spirit; and then, the branches shoot over the wall, as the product of that, which might suggest a link between the Son and the Spirit.
J.T. That is the gist of the matter. It is a very short verse, but it is very full. The fruitful bough is one thing; that is his own distinction. And then, a fruitful bough by a well, is his relative position. Then the feminine idea is in the branches (the footnote says 'daughters') shooting over the wall. It is a sort of evidence of life, going over the wall.
F.H.L. Is there any link with @Luke 3 here? The Spirit comes down, and the Father's delight is expressed; and then it says, Jesus began to be about thirty years of age.
J.T. I have no doubt Luke would help us. It is understood that he was a gentile. At any rate, his treatises develop the truth in relation to the gentiles. He pursues the history until he reaches Rome; Paul in his own hired house in Rome says, "this salvation of God has been sent to the nations; *they* also will hear it", @Acts 28: 28. It is the gentile position that is the great objective in Luke's ministry; and it is for us to be simple and appreciative and appropriative of what relates to us and rise to it. It is what God has now among the nations.
W.R. Does not God hold the gentile world responsible as to what it has done with Christ? Pharaoh says here to all the Egyptians, "Go to Joseph: what he says to you, that do" (verse 55).
J.T. Yes; He is honoured among the gentiles, and this works out now in testimony; it is for us to understand. Of course, the four monarchies were ordained of God to govern the gentile world; that is, the whole world *provisionally*. The throne belongs to Christ, but that is secret, or mysterious. How He is honoured, according to this type, is for us now to understand,
{109}
and what part we have in the distinction He has -- and the fruitfulness. Everything hinges on fruitfulness; so that we have the idea of the fulness of the gentiles coming in, in Romans. That means what Christ has effected among the gentiles. Romans does not develop the assembly, but it does mention the fulness of the gentiles. Christ, in the mysterious position He holds at the right hand of God, is operating here in view of fruitfulness.
A.A.T. In Colossians, Paul speaks about "Christ in you the hope of glory", @Colossians 1: 27, as a mystery.
J.T. That is how the matter stands. It is a question of the mystery involving the assembly. The gospels speak of the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but the passage in Colossians speaks of Christ and the assembly. Romans, as we have said, contemplates the fulness of the gentiles; we are finishing up in this dispensation among the gentiles. Colossians has the assembly in mind, and Asnath here corresponds as a type of the assembly. There is nothing special that is stated as to her personally, any more than in the case of Zipporah -- unlike Rebecca or other types of the assembly. It is just that she is there, so that the marital position is present; and the well is essential; that is, the Spirit is necessary. Joseph is "a *fruitful* bough", meaning, as the footnote indicates, *son of a fruitful tree*; but then he is that *by a well*, and his branches shoot over the wall. It is a living state of things because of the well.
C.A.M. Would it not connect with one of our earlier readings when we were occupied with @John 4?
J.T. Yes. Jacob and Joseph and the well are connected there. I suppose the woman of Samaria might be suggested in the daughters shooting over the wall.
A.N.W. The men in John say, "We know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world". They use the very title which is conveyed in the name Pharaoh gives to Joseph.
{110}
J.T. Yes. So that @John 4 works out into the nobleman and sonship. The Samaritans made a place for the Lord and He abode there two days; and then we get the sign of the nobleman's son, bringing out the development of the truth in the chapter. "Thy *son* lives", the Lord says to the man. The nobleman had said, Come down ere my *child* die. He was not thinking of any dignity; he was just thinking of the child being restored, but the Lord says, "Thy *son* lives". That is also the thought in the fruitful bough. It is the dignity coming out in the development of the truth. Then @John 5 brings out the greatness of Christ in sonship, but in the sense of the dependent One. Much is made of the Son, and His equality with the Father, and yet He says He can do nothing without the Father.
J.S. Do @John 3 and 4 fit in here? In @John 3, in "The Father loveth the Son"; then in chapter 4 you have Him by the well.
J.T. That is right; you see how the truth works out from chapter 4 and how it develops through the nobleman's family, because the Lord refers to the son at once; not that he *shall* live, but he *lives*. It is immediate; and then the nobleman goes down to Capernaum where he lived, and the servants having told him about the child, and the time of his recovery, he remarked that that was the hour in which the Lord said his son lived. Then it is said that he believed -- by himself, as it were. There is the idea again; but the house believed, too. The conjunction 'and' is used -- not 'with'. The belief of the family is by itself as we might say. It is to show the working out of the truth of Christ among the gentiles.
R.W.S. The Lord's supper really belongs to the gentiles.
J.T. It is set down amongst them, according to Corinthians, you might say. The ark was set by itself without any accompaniments; the pot of manna and the book of the law were in it in the wilderness, but
{111}
as placed in the house, by Solomon, there was nothing in it but the tables of the covenant. In this sense it was like the Lord's supper as set down in Corinth. The eliminations bring it into a setting more precious and more fitting to the assembly.
A.R. Joseph calls his second son Ephraim, which means *double fruitfulness*.
J.T. It brings out, I suppose, what Christ is among the gentiles. There are two sons; the name of the first suggests elimination. Just as we have been saying about the Lord's supper -- Manasseh means forgetfulness -- it is a negative thought. God, Joseph says, has made me to forget. This idea of elimination ought to have its place with us too. "For God has made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house" (verse 51); that is the thought to start with. If we are to reach a refined position in relation to the Lord's supper, there must be some elimination of ideas, so as to bring out its entire connection with the assembly. The positive side is *double* fruitfulness. You may be sure that if we do not understand elimination, we shall never get full results. Christendom has brought in so much that is not only extraneous, but corrupting, that we must understand the principle of elimination, so as to have holy conditions.
G.V.D. Is that brought out in @John 15 -- in the purging of the branches?
J.T. That is the principle of it, to purge away what is dead; so that there might be more fruit. I do not know whether the brethren follow this thought of elimination, so as to be suitably in the assembly. We shall never reach the assembly without that negative principle.
A.N.W. Do you mean the *closed door* idea in @John 20?
J.T. Yes. That is shutting out the Jews -- the Jewish element; but there is more than that to be shut out.
{112}
C.A.M. The Lord allowed the truth of the Supper to be given in a setting which would show what had to be eliminated. It is remarkable that it should be given in an epistle to such an assembly as Corinth.
J.T. That is right, as to the things that are wrong. What we are dealing with now relates to things that, in themselves, are right; that is, what attached to Joseph's father's house, as he says, "God has made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house". That is the negative idea in Manasseh; and then the next is, "For *God has caused* me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction". God had done *both things*; showing that what we are engaged with now, as among the gentiles, is the result of God acting for us negatively and positively, empowering us to eliminate what might hold us in a certain way. Years back many things were connected with the Lord's supper -- the forgiveness of sins, for example. The forgiveness of sins is connected with it in the gospels; so that we have to understand the difference between the original institution and what was given from above by the Lord to Paul, with which we are to conform in our assembly service. We often say a horse is a useful creature, or an ass; so they are, but not admissible as sacrifices. We have to learn how to eliminate things that in themselves are right, but unsuitable in certain circumstances. So Joseph, in view of fruitfulness, brings in the thought of elimination in Manasseh; that is, in relation to his father's house. God had caused him to forget. It was an actual state brought about in him by God. How can I, therefore, be in the assembly without the Spirit? It is the power of God that enables me to disallow what hinders.
R.W.S. The part of the meeting where we used to dwell on the covenant has been somewhat modified by the marital thought.
J.T. Yes. We have been helped to give more place to the latter. It is growing on us. Romans speaks of
{113}
our bearing fruit unto God. Joseph has that in mind; and for this the Spirit must be there. The more I think of the service of God in the assembly, the more I see we must come in the recognition of the Spirit, not only to eliminate things mentally, but to do it in power. It becomes my actual state for the moment.
A.P.T. In @John 20, Mary is told, "Touch me not". What would there be in that?
J.T. That is elimination, referring to what the garden stood for. The garden will be all right by and by, but it was not the place for the Lord to be touched *then*. He was bringing in the heavenly side of the truth. He said, "I ascend to my Father and your Father". The connection is to be up there. Christ's brethren, or the assembly, answer to it here.
A.R.S. Did Joseph learn the same as Abram? He was called out from his father's house; then he was hindered a bit, because he waited until his father died.
J.T. That is the principle; whether we can leave things that are in themselves right; that is not merely a mental effort, but a matter of state for the moment. It is an actual state of fruitfulness, and God has done it. It is the Holy Spirit doing it, as we make room for Him. We want to learn how to be in a suitable state at a given time. The power of elimination is by the Spirit.
A.R.S. Does the principle of elimination come in in the word, "that they who have wives, be as not having any", @1 Corinthians 7: 29?
J.T. That is a general principle -- in regard of service, but in the assembly, normally, our wives should be regarded as our sisters. And then in the assembly, on the wholly spiritual side there is neither male or female, bond or free. It is a question not only of a mental effort, but the Spirit of God has *made* me to do it.
J.H.E. Paul says, "forgetting the things behind, and stretching out to the things before, I pursue", @Philippians 3: 13.
{114}
J.T. That is forgetting permanently, and most important, but we are stressing what is to be forgotten when actually in assembly.
A.N.W. "Forget thine own people and thy father's house: and the king will desire thy beauty", @Psalm 45: 10, 11.
J.T. That confirms what we are saying. It is said of Stephen that he was full of faith and the Holy Spirit. That is necessary for a state suitable for assembly service.
J.T.Jr. Would that state develop by feeding on the old corn of the land?
J.T. Exactly. @Joshua 5 brings us into accord with the new place. I am sustained there by the old corn of the land; that is, food that is indigenous to the land; and I am built up constitutionally according to that, making me practically heavenly. Of course, the early disciples realised this. They came into the thing. John says, "I was in the Spirit". Paul says that he was caught up into paradise.
A.N.W. Is elimination brought about by reckoning?
J.T. We begin with that. Reckoning is an act of the mind, as in @Romans 6: "So also *ye*, reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus". In chapter 8 it becomes a real state in the soul, because it is by the Spirit: "but if, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live" (verse 13). @Romans 8 is a great point reached. It is God, by the Spirit, doing things.
A.R. Do you eliminate sins from your mind at the Supper, having in mind rather that the loaf suggests Christ's love for the assembly?
J.T. That is the way we move on until we are in accord with Christ; the marital bond involves that we are in accord with Him; that we are outside of flesh and blood conditions; that we are in a deathless state of things, because the assembly never dies, never will die; it is a living organism. We are to reach that. The
{115}
thing we are speaking about is, with us, largely light, in application, but there is such a thing as that, and the early christians arrived at it. The idea is in the assembly, that it is to be reached outside of flesh and blood conditions. It is the Eve condition -- the primary thought -- it is a sinless, deathless state; it never will die; sin will never be attached to it. Abstractly, there is no sin attaching to it.
J.T.Jr. In @Exodus 24 God did not put His hand on those who went up: there was nothing to call attention to, that was obnoxious to Him; they went up and saw the God of Israel.
J.T. Quite so; they are called the *nobles* of Israel. It is in that elevated sphere.
J.H.E. Would it be Ephesian altitude? They went through the upper districts (@Acts 19: 1), and as in that setting, the Spirit is given through the laying on of Paul's hands.
J.T. That is the idea. We often speak of the two levels -- the Corinthian level is in chapter 18, and Apollos is there holding that lower level, which is our public position; but Paul reached Ephesus on the upper level, which is the heavenly side.
A.R. In our giving of thanks there is a tendency to go over past history.
J.T. Entering on full assembly state and position is a question of spiritual power; it is a question of what God does for you by the Spirit. He makes you to forget and brings you into what you are in the Spirit: "For God has caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction". The conditions outside have not changed; the change is in Joseph -- in the saints.
C.A.M. Would you say that while Joseph's wife is a type of the assembly here, yet on account of the setting, her importance really is in her fruit -- in her sons?
J.T. That is the point that is made, because it fits into the Joseph type. It is fruitfulness; what God has effected among the gentiles. As we look across the
{116}
field from Jerusalem "round about to Illyricum", and now round about to Victoria, B.C. -- the uttermost limit of the west -- what gracious divine activities and results are suggested!
C.A.M. The allusion to the west is very encouraging. It should give us rest in spite of all that is happening.
J.T. Quite so; God is having to say to the matter. God is stretching out His hand in all this war, and it is a question as to whether we can follow Him in faith. "Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm", @Psalm 105: 15. God is working out the fulness of the gentiles; He will not allow any power to interfere. It may bring out what is in the saints, but it will not obliterate what is there.
F.N.W. Do the existing conditions require this power of elimination, that God may not be deprived of what is due to Him from His people?
J.T. Yes. Can we come into the current of God's thoughts as to this great thought of the assembly as in @Colossians 1: 27, "Christ in you the hope of glory"? That is the mystery; what He is bringing out in the gentiles; the whole field is in His mind. He is bringing out the fulness of it; whether it be Europe or this continent. We must enquire what God is getting out of it. God is overshadowing all this territory. He has property in it, and He is going to take it out of it presently, but He is going to keep it here as long as He needs to keep it here. He has caused fruitfulness in the land of Christ's affliction. I think that is the thing to have before us in considering Christ as typified in Joseph; what He has in the whole gentile world. What He has in Australia, for instance -- Australasia is really the south. I have been thinking about some whom God has taken up -- persons of no account at all -- in the cities of Europe and down in the Caribbean Sea. These lands are included in the fulness of the nations. God is there; He has something
{117}
there, and He will see it through. It is a question of the fulness of the gentiles coming in.
J.S. Do you see that brought out in @Acts 13?
J.T. Yes; I think the idea began at Antioch; that is where the disciples were first called christians; that is, entirely distinguished by themselves, no longer Jews.
F.S.C. Is Joseph's land in @Deuteronomy 33 the same thought? It speaks there of the blessings of Joseph's land.
J.T. Well, his land there would be his part in the inheritance among the tribes. The birthright was his. We are seeking to get at the foundational idea in Christ among the gentiles. It is a bough, a fruitful bough. He is a "son of a fruitful tree"; and then he is a fruitful bough by a well; and then his daughters are springing up as seen in the "branches"; the latter is the feminine idea developed. That all comes out in the assembly; the ministry of the assembly among the gentiles. This mystery is among the nations, and God is going to see it through; so that we want to be in the current of His thoughts.
R.W.S. What do you think God has in mind in limiting our travelling now?
J.T. It is discipline. We all feel it. God is looking on, and He is sure to give relief. In view of complete fulness coming out. He is sure to give us relief in time. I do not see anything in it beyond discipline.
H.G.H. In spite of the conditions the brethren are being brought very close together.
J.T. Yes; going over the wall would be the result of the well. The allusion is to a full well and the wall is around; that is, the power of life through the water causes the growth, causing the fruitfulness to go over the wall. Whatever the hindrance might be, or however high the wall might be, the growth of life goes over it. So that God will not shut us up to ourselves, I am certain, because the idea of oneness of the assembly requires that we should visit one another. I am
{118}
certain He will not leave us shut up if He is to go on with His testimony. He will make a way *for love*. It is remarkable, in vegetable life, how you see the force of growth developed through an obstacle. If our affections move toward our brethren (we can keep on writing to them and sending them what we can). God will say, I will let you go there, too. God is fostering the development of life and will facilitate it.
A.N.W. The word is, *shoot* over the wall.
J.T. That shows the energy of life.
C.A.M. Your reference to the south was very interesting. In the beginning of the Acts a man comes from the south, and there was a queen of the south. There seems to be a correspondence at the end with what there was at the beginning of church history in fruit from the south. The Ethiopian eunuch came from the south. He had in mind the worship of God.
J.T. Quite so. The south would be Africa, primarily. Well, Africa has come around to this continent and the Aryan branch of the race has come around by the north. We are all here. God has brought us here. He is working out His great thoughts here. That indicates where America stands in the ways of God.
F.H.L. Israel's position is established in chapter 48.
J.T. Quite so. These two boys come under the hand of the father later, but Joseph is viewing them here as his own product; not helped by any other hand. It is what Joseph is -- a fruitful bough. Ephraim is *double fruitfulness*. He comes in as the first-born in another way, linking on really with the double river in Ezekiel, because in Ezekiel, in that connection, Joseph is to have two portions in the future. But that is Joseph in the millennium, among the other tribes, but now we are dealing with him among the gentiles.
J.S. The springs are just as strong in the south as they are in the north.
J.T. That is right. I think it is remarkable that in the entrance of the gospel into Europe properly, it
{119}
was brought to a colony. Philippi was a colony. Colonization has been a great feature of modern times and God has followed it up to work out His thoughts. Men went to New Zealand and Australia largely to get gold, but God has taken up many there. Thus, "the gold of that land" is not what has been found in the mines; God has taken up men, and it is what God is getting out of His people now.
C.A.M. The treasure, over which the eunuch was placed, must have had a changed value in his eyes when he got back to Ethiopia. He had found greater treasure.
J.T. Quite so; he took it back in his heart. He went away rejoicing. We are not told what he did when he came to the end of his journey. God would say, You ought to know. He was a real christian. Well, I trust that the brethren will get the idea of the position we are in, and what God is doing this very minute; working out the fulness of the gentiles; each one yields to God as he is taken out from among the gentiles.
{120}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (7)
@Exodus 2: 15 - 22; @Exodus 15: 27; @Exodus 17: 1 - 7
J.T. It is thought that we should go on to Moses at this time in pursuing our subject. Moses typifies Christ in relation to the ministry; that is, the truth. There are other features, of course, such as mediatorship and lordship seen in Moses; but in general, it is the ministry, and the assembly seen in type in Zipporah. She is a type of "the assembly in the wilderness", and hence we have some rather ugly features brought out. She is typical of Christ's bride, as are the others that we have considered; that is, Eve, Rebecca, Leah, Rachel, and Asnath. God would allow the ugly features, that is, the features of the flesh, that break out in a scene of contrariety, to come into evidence. We have two persons representing the assembly in the wilderness; the first is Zipporah, in this chapter, and then the Cushite woman in @Numbers 12. She may come in for consideration later, with several features that are found in Numbers and Deuteronomy. God willing, but our enquiry now will be confined to Exodus. The position is very clearly stated in the simple fact that Moses fled from before Pharaoh and went and dwelt in the land of Midian, and *he sat by the well*. This passage really governs the whole subject, for it is a question of how Christ served; and then of those who minister, recognising the Spirit in Its calm, balancing effect; that is, as leading to contentment and quietness until God makes a way for the service.
J.H.E. Prior to this Moses acted in the flesh in seeking to kill the Egyptian; now he is taking refuge in the Spirit?
J.T. He had learned something from his violence and in acting before the time, not in the power of the Spirit, but in his own power, so that he fled from Pharaoh; the effect of his violence had driven him out
{121}
of Egypt; but still, it is under God, and Pharaoh is viewed as the enemy. In this section Pharaoh is said to have died. This made way for Moses to return. God makes way for us, according to this passage; so we have to be quietened and balanced, to wait for God and not force ourselves in any service we attempt. Moses had forced himself, but now he has learned not to do so.
Rem. A right motive alone is not enough in the service of God.
J.T. God has pleasure in those who are subject to Christ; who await their opportunities, and in the meanwhile are content in adverse circumstances. Moses certainly was in very different circumstances from those in which he had been. It says, "And Moses consented to remain with the man" as if the way was opened up for him to lodge there; and then he obtained a wife without his seeking. It is all ordered on every side. He is not seeking anything; it is what comes to him, and he accepts these circumstances. It was not his ordinary circumstances. He is content with the wife that is given to him. It is the idea of subjection, which the Spirit of God enables us to maintain in quietness. A great deal of soul history preceded his lowly attitude in Midian.
A.R. He was sitting by the well. Do you look at the Holy Spirit in this light as an Object of contemplation?
J.T. He is viewed objectively, although He has to be regarded subjectively, eventually, according to @Romans 8, but then, He is to be viewed objectively, that is, as expressed in others. Moses is saying here, in effect, This is for me; this is to be my power henceforth; and that governs the whole chapter.
H.G.H. Moses puts himself in a position where he could receive this refreshment. Would the Holy Spirit come in, in that way, as we are found in conditions where He is available?
{122}
J.T. Yes; in this sense a sitting posture is good. It is not simply a well, but *the* well. There is only one Spirit: "There is one body and one Spirit", @Ephesians 4: 4.
A.B.P. Do you have in mind that the well suggests the Spirit personally, or the measure in which He can be appropriated by us, or is effectual in us?
J.T. He is there. Moses is sitting by the well, vowing, in effect, that he is to be governed by this power. A well, ordinarily, is a spring of water. Moses would appropriate it, of course, and the facts of the chapter show that he had done so, typically, and therefore he is quiet; he is balanced, and receives what comes to him under God's hand -- not seeking out things for himself, but accepting what comes to him. He remains in Midian a long time -- forty years -- in that contented state, consenting, we are told, to stay with the man; with *the man*. I think this is intended to convey the idea of worth in Jethro. The sequel confirms this.
A.B.P. Does contentment come into the soul as we contemplate the fact that this divine Person, the Holy Spirit, has been pleased to take a place in service, to be available to men in this way?
J.T. Yes; that marked the Lord's path and, relatively, marks every true servants path -- to be content. Paul says, "as to me I have learnt in those circumstances in which I am, to be satisfied in myself", @Philippians 4: 11.
A.A.T. His previous training in Egypt did not help him to be content.
J.T. It certainly would be a test to him to eliminate it, because he could not bring it into these circumstances. He would be a rough-cornered man if he were to bring his Egyptian experiences into these circumstances of Midian. He would not be a shepherding man at all. He would be complaining; but he is not complaining; typically, he has come to the truth of the Holy Spirit.
{123}
A.N.W. Does the comment in @Hebrews 11 cover this matter? It says, "for he persevered, as seeing him who is invisible" (verse 27).
J.T. Yes; God is discerned in his path, and that enters into the facts as to the well. It is in the Spirit that God is with us.
A.R. Would the ten days from the Lord's ascension until the Holy Spirit came down, be like this in some sense? They had to wait until they were clothed with power from on high.
J.T. As in that attitude they were not idling; they were in the upper room, suitably occupied; they gave themselves with one accord to continual prayer, showing that they were equal to the incoming of the Spirit. Moses sitting down here signifies intelligent restfulness in the position reached, *by the well*. The next thing is action; the need for action is forced on him. He is not seeking a quarrel; he is not seeking work; need existed, and he would help. The passage says, "And the priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs, to water their father's flock. And the shepherds came and drove them away" (verses 16, 17). It was a worse state of things than in Syria, where there was no violence; but still the water was denied to the flocks by a stone at the well's mouth there. Here, they had the water, but the shepherds came and drove them away; this is thus a serious situation. What will he do now? Will he kill one or more of these shepherds as he killed the Egyptian? It does not say he did anything to them, but he rose and helped the daughters of Jethro, and watered their flock. He is occupied, definitely, in helping others, evidently avoiding to attack the violent people. He is on *positive* lines; you can do things successfully, and yet avoid a quarrel.
J.T.Jr. The enemy would get us off the positive line and occupy us with strife.
{124}
J.T. No doubt Satan would seek to draw Moses into strife here, but clearly he had learned his lesson from his previous experience, when he slew a man. Now the enemy is testing Moses out. What will he do with these shepherds? He is going on positively with the Spirit of God. So the Scriptures urge meekness, as seen in the Lord Jesus: "I am meek and lowly in heart", @Matthew 11: 29.
W.R. Is this meekness of Moses the fruit of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes; there are nine mentioned in @Galatians 5. He is marked by peace; he is a *son of peace* now; he is not a son of quarrel.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that the feminine thought comes in, in connection with the flock at once.
J.T. That is the point; we are speaking of Christ and the assembly in relation to wells, springs or running water, and this is an excellent feature of our subject.
A.N.W. If a young brother were to appeal his case before the military, for example, it would not be to force it, but to avail himself of the open door that God has provided through the government.
J.T. Quite so; and if the way is not recognised by those with whom we have to do at first, it is there, nevertheless, and you would do everything to call attention to it as of God. But then we must also remember the word, "Let your gentleness be known of all men", @Philippians 4: 5.
A.P.T. Does this quietness of spirit, and Moses getting a wife, link on with the great need of patience in assembly matters in the wilderness?
J.T. Yes; the worst side of all of us comes out in the wilderness, because it is a scene of contrariety. God says of Israel, "I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness", @Hosea 2: 14, as if attraction is necessary; we have to be *drawn* into it. The circumstances are contrary, but God says, "she shall sing *there*"; that
{125}
means she is to be superior to wilderness conditions. You can sing in the midst of contrariety.
A.B.P. Does the fact that Moses was content with the wife that was given him, typify Christ in relation to the assembly? He has continued with her in spite of the awful public conditions.
J.T. That is the fact. "For a time of about forty years he nursed them in the desert", @Acts 13: 18; or as the Authorised Version reads, "suffered he their *manners* in the wilderness". He bears with us, and we must learn to bear with one another. We are to reflect the Spirit of Christ there. It was very contrary in the wilderness, especially the western edge of it, after they left Horeb. It was a terrible desert. It is spoken of in that way in Deuteronomy: "that great and terrible wilderness"; as if God brings us into that to test us; and unless we maintain rigid self-judgment, we may be certain that the ugly side will come out. Moses learns, in this chapter, how to be quiet. When the time comes for the wilderness, then we have a variety of ministry, as we shall see in chapter 15 -- twelve wells of water; not *one* well but *twelve*; that is, the idea is extended to the apostles or others, so the furnishing is abundant. Here, the ugliness of the flesh is seen at once in Zipporah; she contended with her husband as to the circumcision. The ministry in the epistles to the Corinthians represents what is before us. The Lord said to Paul in the city of Corinth, "Fear not, but speak and be not silent; because *I* am with thee, and no one shall set upon thee to injure thee", @Acts 18: 9, 10. The Lord knew the situation the apostle had to deal with. The "much people" He had in Corinth must be delivered out of what was in character Egypt. Corinth was a terribly corrupt city, but the Lord had much people there, and Paul was to find them out and deliver them; and so he says, "I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified", @1 Corinthians 2: 2. He says, further, "... that the surpassingness
{126}
of the power may be of God, and not from us", @2 Corinthians 4: 7; that is, he relied on the Spirit of God. He introduced the Spirit at once in Corinth (see @1 Corinthians 2). This involved circumcision, which Zipporah did not like for her son. Corinth is the wilderness position, and the well governs it. It is a contrary situation, and we are to go through it together. We must therefore take note of the examples of the working of the flesh in the types. We have been speaking of Zipporah and there are many other examples. We cannot but recall what has happened in the last one hundred years. Almost immediately after the Spirit began to work, division took place. Let us not forget the ugliness of it. We must face that and see how we may now avoid a repetition of it, or of what happened later, and go through to the end of the wilderness, holding fast the truth.
W.R. Does the Lord exemplify that in @Matthew 4? He "was carried up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted of the devil" (verse 1).
J.T. Yes. Luke connects specially with our subject. He says, "Jesus ... was led by the Spirit in the wilderness forty days, tempted of the devil", @Luke 4: 1. He was led *in* the wilderness; not *into*, but *in*; He went through the thing, by the Spirit. That is the point. Mark says, "The Spirit drives him out into the wilderness", @Mark 1: 12.
C.A.M. The way the Corinthians treated the apostle was part of their *bad manners*. Is this suggestion seen in verse 20 of our chapter, in that Jethro's daughters did not really appreciate Moses?
J.T. Certainly some at Corinth did not care for Paul. They said that his bodily presence was weak and his speech contemptible. People who talk like that about those whom the Lord is using are dangerous.
F.N.W. The appropriation of Jesus Christ crucified would produce this state of contentment.
{127}
J.T. Thus you are not ministering to yourself; you are not overmuch concerned about your present circumstances. You must, of course, make a living for yourself and family, but to improve one's circumstances according to man is not the christian's thought; that is the point that enters into chapter 2. Moses was accepting circumstances very inferior to what he had been accustomed, and he was content in them. There is a danger in one who serves the Lord, capitalising what he has, including the service; but that will never add to spiritual power. A better house, or better car, or anything like that will not add to spiritual power at all. It is a question of what God puts on His servants. We may be sure that if God is going to use a man, He will put things on him governmentally that he will not like naturally. That is the point in this chapter; Moses was content to dwell with the man; he made no objection to the daughter he gave him as wife. It is just what God gave him; God is with a man on those lines.
J.S. Do you think the taking up of the work of the shepherd was evidence of his spirit of subjection?
J.T. Quite; that is the point, passing through the wilderness; what God puts upon you is from His own side. I should not seek anything in a natural sense. I am to take my place there by the well. "Here am I", Isaiah says. Things will come upon you governmentally, that do not add to you at all, in this world, but in accepting them you increase in spiritual power.
C.A.M. The fact of being connected with the Midianites in this way, would be a governmental matter to Moses.
J.T. It would. This is evident by @Numbers 25: 16, 17, and @Numbers 31: 1, 2.
A.R. What would you say about Zipporah calling Moses a bloody husband?
J.T. That brings out the ugly side of our position. The assembly is often marked in that way; how much
{128}
complaint there is against the Lord! It may be indirect; but nevertheless it is against the Lord.
A.R. Is that what you had in mind when you referred to those who spoke disparagingly about Paul at Corinth?
J.T. Yes; they were attacking the minister; so that Paul says, "I think that God has set us the apostles for the last, as appointed to death. For we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and men", @1 Corinthians 4: 9, and again, "we are become as the offscouring of the world, the refuse of all" (verse 13). They did not seek that; God put it on them and they accepted it.
J.T.Jr. We should not be vindictive; that is a feature of the flesh when one is attacked or criticised.
J.T. Just so; it comes up immediately when you are injured. So the point is, "Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall no way fulfil flesh's lust", @Galatians 5: 16. It is the positive side of things here in the well.
He was slow to take up the way of the Spirit; Ananias had to say to Paul, "Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name", @Acts 22: 16. We are not to be slow in removing what would hinder our coming into the blessing of the Spirit.
A.B.P. Would the agility of Moses, in drawing water abundantly, show that whilst accepting the circumstances, he was whole-hearted in them? It reminds us of the activities of Rebecca.
J.T. It is also true for us; there is plenty in the Spirit, as it were, for anyone who wishes to appropriate it or apply it.
A.B.P. In small-meeting conditions there is no need for holding things back because there are but a few. Pouring out of the best would be proper, would it?
J.T. That is the thing; freely ye have received, freely give. Do not hold it back for a bigger meeting; you can use it at a bigger meeting, but you can use it better if you use it at once. Moses drew water for the daughters of Jethro. The attitude of the shepherds there would be a good reason to draw water sparingly, but he drew in
{129}
abundance. I am sure that is what is needed in small meetings.
C.N. The name he gave his son -- Gershom -- would indicate that he must have profited from his experience.
J.T. Yes; meaning, "I have been a sojourner in a foreign land". That is an experience we all need.
W.R. It seems, from @Hebrews 11, that Moses¬ greatness stood over against nature. It says that when he had become great, he refused to be called son of Pharaoh's daughter.
J.T. Yes, if he were pursuing his natural course as a worldly man -- as an Egyptian -- he would wish to blot Midian out of his memory. It was a period of humiliation. No; he is to remember it always, as it were; thus, similarly, in Deuteronomy, the offerer of the first fruits says, "A perishing Aramaean was my father" (chapter 26: 5). Even in view of the land, they were enjoined to remember that; it is to balance us. It does not mean when we are in heaven *literally*; it is when we are in heavenly places, through faith by the Spirit, we do not forget these experiences. They really make men out of us -- these wilderness experiences. That is what Moses meant in naming his son Gershom. "I have been a sojourner in a foreign land". In his house, Gershom would represent that Moses had been in humble circumstances in Midian for forty years.
C.A.M. It is remarkable; it would affect his manner towards strangers, would it not?
J.T. Yes; such experiences make us sympathetic with others. A sensible man will say to one in distress, I have been through what you are going through, and I sympathise with you. It is said that the Lord Jesus was afflicted in all our afflictions.
A.B.P. Is that why He styled Himself a Samaritan in the parable of @Luke 10?
J.T. Just so. He did not tell the woman of Samaria that He was a Samaritan; He told her He was a Jew;
{130}
but in the parable, He was a Samaritan; it implied that He had no status at all with the religious leaders. I think it is one of the greatest lessons for those of us who are in the ministry in any way, to be content with our circumstances, and not aim at improvement in worldly things, accepting everything from God. God gives us temporal things to hold in relation to Himself and His service; not to augment our personal position in the ministry.
J.S. Would you regard the shepherds here as hirelings, as mentioned in @John 10?
J.T. They were unsympathetic and violent. These daughters of Jethro were wanting in gratitude and hospitality to Moses. Jethro said, Where is he? It is remarkable that there is so much indifference. It doubtless alludes, typically, to wilderness features in those who form the assembly. Why are we often so indifferent to Christ? We accept benefits. Why should we be so indifferent? What about the man? says Jethro. Contrary to what might be expected, the women did not evince interest or gratitude. It is a type of those who form the assembly. We accept benefits, but neglect Him from whom they come, not considering for Him. It is remarkable that one of these is given to him as a wife. You may say, he would never choose one so thoughtless, but God gives her to him; at least, that is what the type indicates. In these circumstances, God is not thinking of our natural requirements, but of what works out His own ways in view of His service. Discipline enters much into these matters in the wilderness. There is most important instruction as to marriage in 1 Corinthians; but we are speaking of Christ and of the assembly.
G.H. Do you mean I should not seek to improve myself in my circumstances but seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and these things will be added to me?
J.T. That is the principle.
{131}
A.R. If the things were not adverse, he certainly would never have called his son Gershom; and if the wilderness circumstances are not adverse, we are liable to remain there, instead of going through.
J.T. Moses did not settle down. Joseph settled down in Egypt, forgetting his father's house. Typically, that is Christ among the gentiles, as over against His Jewish relation. Here, Moses does not typify that; he is ever a sojourner in a foreign land. He just went through the experience as God put it upon him. He looks on his wife in that way, evidently, as causing him discipline. Why did not those women consider for this young man? They were indifferent. It is to record, undoubtedly, the indifference of many christians to Christ; they accept the benefits and ignore *His* needs. Did not Moses need shelter? Did not he need food? There are thousands of God's people who accept the benefits and just ignore the needs of the Lord in the testimony. Yet Moses has one of these women as his wife. You may say, He will have difficulties, and that is exactly what he had, and that is what Christ has in the assembly in all its wilderness experience. I am far from saying that wifely affection and other qualities were not there. They certainly exist in the antitype, as in Corinth; but we are remarking on the feature that is more stressed.
A.A.T. At Corinth they left the Lord out.
J.T. They left Paul out too. When they left Paul out, they left Christ out. That is what is meant.
J.T.Jr. Paul's experience at Philippi would be the contrast to this. Lydia says, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there", @Acts 16: 15. Is the wifely side seen in Lydia?
J.T. She is a beautiful type of the assembly *basically* -- all believing women in the Acts point in that direction.
A.R. Pharaoh was instructing the people to destroy all the male children as they were born. God, it seems, was making the circumstances of Moses adverse to fit
{132}
him for the great service of taking the people out of Egypt.
J.T. Yes. The whole history in Egypt and the wilderness is on this line. We are now looking at "the assembly in the wilderness", and we shall have to pursue it until we get to Deuteronomy to get the full instruction out of it. Every time you see these ugly things coming out, you will say, That is just what has often marked me. I believe every one of us here will have to admit that. And yet the foundation exists, as is said of Corinth; also the temple of God, and the body of Christ; and they were unleavened, and regarded as intelligent persons. So that while there was so much to cause pain in Corinth, the assembly was there.
A.A.T. Is that one reason why you read @Exodus 15: 27 -- to bring in the twelve wells, the ministry?
J.T. Yes, the authority of the ministry to meet this condition, and the palm trees to provide shelter; a divine provision for us in the wilderness. Spiritual meetings all effect that; you get relief in them from wilderness conditions. The second chapter, as I might say, is Moses himself; how he starts out, content with the circumstances that he finds, choosing the Spirit. "Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall no way fulfil flesh's lust", @Galatians 5: 16.
A.B.P. There is often quite an exercise in regard to fitting children for their place in business. Is it right to encourage a child in its natural propensities, or should there be rather the waiting upon God to open up a way which, in His wisdom, may even cut directly across the natural ability of the child? What would you suggest?
J.T. Proverbs says, "Train up the child according to the tenor of his way" (chapter 22: 6). It would be the bent of his mind in what is right. "The tenor of his way", is what is according to God. But as to natural matters, if he is qualified for a certain thing, let him go in for that. Generally speaking, what we are saying
{133}
enters into this. As going into business, young people are going into contrariety; instruct them about that; warn them about it. If they are looking for an easy way to build themselves up in this world, they are going contrary to the instruction of Scripture. Accepting wilderness conditions, they get contrariety right away, if they are at all loyal to the truth; they get it at school and in the office, and it is wisdom to accept it. God is putting it on them. The worldly man will revile; if he is a superior he may say insulting things when a stand is taken in confessing Christ; they are thus tested, and if walking in the Spirit they will submit, waiting for God to make a way out. I can say with certainty that those who take up this attitude will prosper in every way.
J.T.Jr. Moses had been forty years amongst the Egyptians, and was instructed in all their arts; yet, at the end of that time he thought of his brethren -- having no help from his mother and father in doing so.
J.T. Moses was brought up in the most dangerous circumstances, and God took him out of them. That is the incentive to keep on praying. He was not wilfully there, of course, but it brings out what God can do.
F.S.C. It is said in @Acts 7: "he thought that his brethren would understand that God by his hand was giving them deliverance" (verse 25).
J.T. Evidently Moses had light from God about that. He went out to look on his brethren; he would not have done that apart from light from God. God can give His children light to govern them even in the most adverse circumstances. Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. We may say that if a young man goes into one of the universities, he is in the greatest possible danger, and it is true; but here is a man whom God put there; he had all the Egyptians¬ advantages; but God worked in him and took him out of it. That is what God *can* do for our children. At the same time faithful parents will strive to keep their children
{134}
out of damaging surroundings. Moses did get light from God in Egypt, though he was out of the way of the influence of his parents. He not only got light but God placed him in circumstances in Midian to make him a competent minister.
J.S. Is that where, typically, he came into fellowship?
J.T. It would be when he identified himself with the Hebrews, "esteeming the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt", @Hebrews 11: 26. He identified himself with the despised race. After forty years he goes back. Pharaoh is removed: "It came to pass during those many days, that the king of Egypt died", @Exodus 2: 23. God has taken him away. Moses goes back now to become the leader of the people; he is subject and God is opening up the way for him. Then it says, "Moses tended the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian. And he led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God -- to Horeb", @Exodus 3: 1. He is moving now into a spiritual region; but he is still keeping an eye on the flock. He gets his commission at Horeb. He has matured; he has developed to that, and now God takes him on, in chapter 3.
Ques. Is that not comforting to us today? There arose a Pharaoh that knew not Joseph; and then that king died. Will there not be an end to all those who oppress the people of God?
J.T. That is right; it is what God does. You just wait on God and suffer in the meantime. So Moses has these forty years of training, and God says, Pharaoh is out of the way; and Moses is commissioned to go back from Horeb into Egypt. He had been to Horeb and now he is to lead the people out of Egypt and the covenant is to be made at Horeb.
A.R. God appears to him now as "I AM" and "Jehovah" which must have affected his service.
J.T. Think of the wonderful time he had, as recorded in chapter 3! The time he had at the bush -- a mile-stone,
{135}
never forgotten; there is "the good will of him that dwelt in the bush", @Deuteronomy 33: 16. Moses did not forget that. He is being impressed with the knowledge of God in that position; that God Himself is in the bush, in keeping with where Moses would be later; a solemn lesson. There he is instructed in Jehovah's new Name; then the glories of Jah, the spiritual mysterious name of God that Moses came into later. Jehovah says, "If there be a prophet among you, I Jehovah will make myself known to him in a vision, I will speak to him in a dream. Not so my servant Moses: he is faithful in all my house. Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly", @Numbers 12: 6 - 8, showing that Moses was distinctly honoured. All this, in principle, comes into each of our histories in the measure in which we take up this attitude.
Ques. The prophet Isaiah says, "Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him, his glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses?" @Isaiah 63: 11, 12. Is that the prophetic view of Moses¬ position by the well in @Exodus 2?
J.T. Just so. Hosea says, "by a prophet Jehovah brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved" (chapter 12: 13). Moses was that prophet.
Now we should go on to chapter 15. It is a question of the people being in the wilderness, and the provision that is made for them: "And they came to Elim; and twelve springs of water were there, and seventy palm trees; and they encamped there by the waters" (verse 27). That is, they were appropriating all this variety. God would thus come before them in a touching way. He is considering for them very fully. They had been drinking the bitter waters, but now there is fresh water in abundance. The assembly in the wilderness is now before us, and the point here is the liberal consideration of God for it at this juncture, and how the people appropriate it. It says, "And they encamped there by the waters". That is an enlargement from Moses sitting
{136}
by the well; here they are encamping. This is one of the *many* encampments recorded in @Numbers 33.
C.A.M. The previous sentence records the name of Jehovah -- God's special name, "I am Jehovah who healeth thee" (verse 26).
J.T. Yes; the brackish waters and the wood are mentioned earlier; "And he cried to Jehovah; and Jehovah showed him wood, and he cast it into the waters, and the waters became sweet" (verse 25). God is now showing how He provides. A real difficulty came up, but God showed him wood, which, as cast into the waters, made them sweet. And the next thing is, "There he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he tested them". Typically, we are now being formed, you might say, in the fibre of our constitution, by coming under the statute: it is a fixed principle. "And he said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and do what is right in his eyes, and incline thine ears to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the complaints upon thee that I have put upon the Egyptians; for I am Jehovah who healeth thee" (verse 26). It is God in His consideration for us in wilderness circumstances, but on the principle of subjection, keeping all His commandments; and then there is this wonderful provision of twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees. The one is the variety of the Spirits ministry, and the other is experience seen in personality. The seventy palm trees would suggest persons of spiritual distinction, whose influence affords protection.
J.T.Jr. It is not a divided ministry. Twelve suggests that the ministry, though varied, is not divided. We have divisions in christendom; various denominations; but this would suggest that the ministry is all one, and what one minister says agrees with another; there is no divergence. Peter stood up with the eleven.
J.T. Yes. The ministries of the twelve apostles were in agreement. We only hear of two or three of them in
{137}
the Acts of the Apostles as actually serving, but we can be sure they all worked according to the disposition of divine wisdom, and that they were united in their teaching and service generally. Their names are on the foundations of the wall of the heavenly city. Victorious persons of experience with God are in view, I believe, in the palm trees; you can safely come under the shelter of a brother who is himself victorious.
R.W.S. Would they be like Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus who preached the "Son of God, Jesus Christ", at Corinth?
J.T. That is right; Paul, Silvanus and Timotheus would be characteristically victorious, for they believed on the Son of God. "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God", @1 John 5: 5. In Luke, the seventy whom the Lord sent out were specifically stated to be additional to the twelve. They were to go before the face of the Lord into every city and place where He was about to come. Local assembly formation is in mind, I believe. They were marked as *possessing peace*, according it to every house they entered -- a son of peace being found there. Peace is founded on righteous victory.
W.R. I suppose you see what is before us in the Lord's appointment of the twelve, giving them power over all demons and to heal diseases in @Luke 9, and then He sends out seventy others also in @Luke 10.
J.T. That is right; the seventy others are additional. There are twelve in chapter 9, and seventy in chapter 10.
{138}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (8)
@Exodus 17: 1 - 7; @Numbers 20: 1 - 13; @Numbers 21: 14 - 18
J.T. The assembly in the wilderness was before us last time, and the wells in that relation; Moses sitting by the well in Midian, and then Zipporah given to him; she is a type of the assembly. The assembly here on earth, in the wilderness, as seen in these types, affords us perhaps the most practical and humbling side of out subject, for in the wilderness the ugliness of the flesh appears. The Spirit of God, in these books, does not ignore the fleshly features that come out and are present always, alas! Hence there is the need of understanding the Spirit in these books as typified in wells or springs, or as coming out of the rock.
The epistles to the Corinthians are especially instructive in this part of our subject: the Lord's supper, the new covenant, government, etc. These are all features of the assembly in the wilderness, and they come before us in our meetings for prayer. Thus we cannot but see the importance of understanding the Spirit. It comes out in these books, too, in @Leviticus 11: 36, that a well of water is immune from defilement when other things are defiled; the well is immune because of the power to throw off evil. "Nevertheless, a spring or a well, a quantity of water, shall be clean". It is important to take that into account in our care meetings when dealing with wicked features. Without this power to throw off evil, even the care meeting would defile us; young brothers especially. The recognition of the Spirit in us in energy enables us to throw off what might defile us.
A.A.T. Is the woman in @John 4 an example?
J.T. She threw off defilement, manifestly in the sense that she could go and speak to the men. She was no longer under their influence. That is a very important side of the matter; the power by the Spirit
{139}
to throw off things that would otherwise defile you, and make you unfit for assembly service.
H.H. You mean that the Spirit, in that way, keeps the saints morally apart from what is unclean?
J.T. Yes; the Spirit, *as active*, in the sense of a well, having scope in us, enables us to throw off a thing that would otherwise defile us. How could we touch these defiling things otherwise and not be defiled?
H.H. There is power; it is a fountain, it is not a mere effort. @John 4 refers to "springing up".
J.T. Yet you are exercised about it, because the Spirit works in relation to our exercises.
Ques. Would the incident in the early part of @John 8 be illustrative?
J.T. The accusers went out one by one; they could not take the matter up; the Lord and the woman alone remain. The whole position was perfectly clear. The light shone and forced out the evil. These considerations are very important. The time was when young brothers were not encouraged to attend the care meeting; some used to say positively that they should not be there. The young brothers are responsible, and as being there they should bear in mind that things may come before us that would damage them unless room is made for the Spirit in them; they are to have power to throw off the thing in self-judgment.
W.Ras. The Lord says in the end of Mark, "in my name they shall cast out demons; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they should drink any deadly thing it shall not injure them", @Mark 16: 17, 18. Would that bear on this?
J.T. Yes; it is power to overcome evil; otherwise, we should be overcome. We are enjoined to overcome evil and not be overcome by it, but we can only overcome it by self-judgment in the power of the Spirit.
Ques. Is what you are speaking of supported by @Romans 8: 13: "but if, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live"?
{140}
J.T. Yes; putting them to death. @Leviticus 11 contemplates the care of divine things, discerning good and evil, clean and unclean, so that we may be holy, seeing that God is holy (verses 43 - 45). The Lord touched the leper *freely*, showing that no evil power can damage Him. The same is true of us relatively by the energy of the Spirit.
J.T.Jr. Joseph would be a type of that in the house of Potiphar. He was able to withstand evil.
J.T. That is the thought. You have *power* to overcome the evil, to flee youthful lusts; that is what he did.
H.H. His brethren were poor things; ten of them were under the power of a lie some twenty years.
J.T. No wonder Jacob said, Why do you look on one another? I suppose they were sly looks of collusion. Our calling is not to look on one another. It is, in this sense, in the recognition of the Spirit, to be active in mutual care and in purity and holiness.
A.N.W. Does that explain why the apostle dwells on the Passover in @1 Corinthians 5? The wicked person has to be dealt with. "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed" (verse 7).
J.T. That is just the point. So "let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth" (verse 8); that is the continuous thing. So I thought it would be well to bring that passage in Leviticus into our consideration now. At the last reading we considered the twelve wells, and I think we saw it was more from the divine side. It is an administrative thought -- the twelve wells and the seventy palm trees -- two numbers that are made intelligible to us in the Lord's use of them; first in regard to the twelve apostles, and then the seventy that were sent out subsequently. Up to @Exodus 15 it is all on the divine side in the way of provision for us, so that we have, as of the assembly, a certain allowance of grace; "Ye are saved by grace", @Ephesians 2: 8. The grace side is stressed -- God did not
{141}
take Israel by way of the Philistines lest they might be afraid and go back. He considered for their youthfulness and weakness spiritually, and so in chapter 15 we have the twelve wells of springing water and the seventy palm trees. These are divine provisions among the brethren viewed as the assembly. We come now to a serious state of things; the ugliness of the congregation; the complaining in spite of the fact that they are where God directed them to be; that is, in the wilderness of Sin. It says, "And all the assembly of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, according to their journeys, at the command of Jehovah; and they encamped in Rephidim" (chapter 17: 1). So that they are where God would have them to be. Many are in fellowship nominally, but of a complaining spirit. The passage says, "And the people contended with Moses, and said, Give us water, that we may drink!" They are in the right position. They are governed by the word of God, the commandment of Jehovah; but they are complaining. Thus, being in the position that is governed by the word of God is not enough. This matter of complaint has to be met. How can you have bridal conditions; how can you have happy services with the Lord, unless the spirit of complaining is met and judged?
C.A.M. The complaining seems to be directed against the leadership.
J.T. Quite so. That is what is stated. "And the people contended with Moses, and said, Give us water, that we may drink!". They were looking to the leader instead of to God and were complaining. How can we have assembly features where there is the spirit of complaint or rebellion? God meets it in grace. He does not say anything against the people. Moses says to them, "Why do ye tempt Jehovah?" and then the passage goes on to say, "And the people murmured against Moses, and said, Why is it that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our
{142}
cattle with thirst? And Moses cried to Jehovah, saying, What shall I do with this people? Yet a little, and they will stone me! And Jehovah said to Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel, and thy staff with which thou didst smite the river, take in thy hand, and go. Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock on Horeb; and thou shalt strike the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink" (verses 3 - 6). God is not taking issue directly with the people, for He is bringing in the death of Christ to meet that; Christ is to be smitten, instead of ourselves. We see therefore, that what is needed, in these circumstances, is a ministry of divine grace to show how the Lord Jesus went down to meet a state that is so abhorrent to God. He has met it effectively in the cross, so that the Spirit comes to us; we have the Spirit through Christ's sufferings. "Moses cried to Jehovah". If the brethren have a crisis on hand, let us get to God. The word "cry" is very suggestive here.
H.H. Does 1 Corinthians show how the complaining man is dealt with? "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified" (chapter 2: 2). God had ended him in the death of Christ.
J.T. They needed that truth in Corinth. The apostle decided in his mind that he would not only minister that, but that he would not know anything more than that; he determined to know nothing "save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". It shows remarkable skill in the minister to conceal all his knowledge and keep to one thing, because it is the thing that is needed.
A.R. This complaint is out in the open. How would you meet complaints that are not in the open?
J.T. It is a question of transparency; it is a difficult matter to meet what you cannot prove. You are conscious that it is there, but you have to wait for the time for it to be brought out. God brings things out in
{143}
time. Prayer is peculiarly needed in such circumstances.
A.P.T. In @John 12, the Lord meets the complaint of Judas with grace, does He not? He says, "Suffer her" (verse 7). It is only a very short time until he is exposed.
J.T. It was not long before it came out. He went out -- the light at the supper table effected this, @John 13: 30.
A.B.P. The question is raised in the last verse of the section, "Is Jehovah among us, or not?" (verse 7). It would hardly be right to say that because the state of a meeting is not good, that the Lord cannot be among us. Paul wrote to the Corinthians, for instance, in the consciousness that the Lord had certain rights there that He would not relinquish. Is it not a leverage in the soul that helps us through lean periods, that we know the Lord has committed Himself to something and that He will bring it through?
J.T. He gives us assurance; if two of us are agreed, we get things done. "Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens", @Matthew 18: 19. If two ask the Father who is in the heavens, the Lord says, it shall be done unto them -- unto those two. So it is manifest that God is with them. The thing is secured in their souls; and then the Lord adds, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them" (verse 20). That is another thing. The Father answers from heaven, but the Lord is *present among us* to do the thing; to help us deal with any difficulty.
A.B.P. The results would not depend only upon the faithfulness of the two. It would rather be on account of Christ, would it not? The rock is smitten.
J.T. That is what touches you in @Exodus 17. It is intended to touch us. If we are not touched by this thought of the smiting of Christ, then there is very little hope for us.
{144}
H.H. The complaining would be met by the death of Christ in view of the Spirit being given?
J.T. That is what is meant. The Spirit is seen here as available. The waters flow as through the death of Christ; through the smiting of Christ. Of course, we must have the resurrection of Christ and the ascension of Christ in order to have the Spirit given, but the point stressed here is the smiting, because Jehovah says, "Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock on Horeb; and thou shalt strike the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink" (verse 6). The rod Moses used was his own rod by which he smote the river; so that the rights and authority of God are involved.
F.H.L. @Psalm 78 speaks of the cleavage of the rock and the great abundance that flows out.
J.T. "Behold, he smote the rock, and waters gushed out, and streams overflowed", @Psalm 78: 20. This is the incident we are dealing with. The plural, "rocks", in verse 15, is more general. It says, "He clave rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the depths, abundantly; and he brought streams out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers".
J.T.Jr. @Psalm 81 has a reference to Meribah, which is one of the names given in our passage: Meribah and Massah. "Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret place of thunder; I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah" (verse 7). Is there an allusion there to the way God met the evil through Moses¬ cry?
J.T. That seems to be the thought. You have a further allusion to it in @Numbers 20. "These are the waters of Meribah, where the children of Israel contended with Jehovah" (verse 13). Massah means 'temptation', Meribah means 'contention'. They are together a land-mark reminding us of the ugliness of the flesh working in the assembly in the wilderness.
{145}
A.N.W. Moses says: "Why do ye dispute with me?" and "Why do ye tempt Jehovah?" (verse 2).
J.T. Contention is a terrible element among the people of God. "But if any one think to be contentious, we have no such custom", @1 Corinthians 11: 16. Contention is very wrong. The school of Tyrannus (@Acts 19) would not admit of that. Learning involves subjection to the truth and to the brethren.
A.A.T. Did the saints have the Spirit, in type, in chapter 17?
J.T. Well, they are not said to have drunk, but the inference is that they did. The psalm would show that they did, only here it is left vague, because things are shallow, and you cannot always be sure about such people, whether they have the Holy Spirit or not. What Jehovah said was, "And thou shalt strike the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink" (verse 6). That they *may* do it. The water is there to drink. In @Numbers 20, it is said, "And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said to them, Hear now, ye rebels: shall we bring forth to you water out of this rock? And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his staff smote the rock twice, and much water came out, and the assembly drank, and their beasts" (verses 10 - 11). They did drink there. Certain elements may hinder you, but God gives you the Spirit in spite of them. The clerical element really interferes with the Spirit, hampers the operation of the Spirit; but God shows, in the second type, that He rises above that and gives plenty of water and the people actually did drink. @Exodus 17 brings out the shallowness of the position, and although the water is there for them, it does not say expressly that they drank. That is a challenge to each of us. Have I taken up what it cost Christ so much to procure for me? The Psalms help us because they are experimental as to these historical matters, so that you learn from them that they must have drunk. If the water was there, you may be sure
{146}
they did, but the Spirit of God is not saying it in Exodus, because it is for me to challenge myself as to whether I have done it. The Lord says, "Come to me and drink", @John 7: 37. Have I done that?
F.S.C. @Psalm 106 says, "they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips" (verse 33).
J.T. Yes; the people are blamed there, but in our chapter. Moses represents those who are responsible as ministers, and he is blamed.
W.R. Paul says to the Corinthians, "For also in the power of one Spirit *we* ... have all been given to drink of one Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12: 13.
J.T. That is to promote unity and satisfaction; that we are together in satisfaction, all having one thing in common, as the Lord says, "Drink ye all of it", @Matthew 26: 27. That is all the persons -- *all* drink of the one thing. One of the greatest things is that we have the Spirit as involving unity; that we think the same thing; not only speak it, but think it, and thus learn together, holding the same truth. Why should we be disunited in any matter? The Spirit of God gives us the same thoughts and the same words.
A.B.P. At some care meetings there is a most definite sense that the conclusion reached is right, particularly when a scripture is brought forward which bears on the situation and gives divine authority for what is brought forward. Is that the kind of thing you have in mind in speaking of having the Spirit in view of unity?
J.T. Yes. Sometimes you wonder how things will go, but the Lord usually comes in and gives something that settles the matter, and you count on that.
H.H. You get that in @Acts 15. A scripture was referred to, which settled the matter. "With this agree the words of the prophets", @Acts 15: 15.
J.T. Turning to @Numbers 20, the sufferings of Christ are not in view. The people had spoken against Moses and Aaron again, and had contended with Moses. And
{147}
then verse 7 says, "And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, Take the staff"; it is not the one with which he smote the river, but *the* staff, as if there was only this one now. "Take the staff, and gather the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes, and it shall give its water" (verse 8). Now, it is *speaking* to the rock. There is to be no smiting; instead of that, Moses smites it twice, as if to bring out the disobedience in the nominal christian ministers; that is, in the history of the public assembly, where, in general, men do as they wish. Instead of speaking only in relation to the rod, which is the rod that budded, that is, Aaron's rod -- the only one now that was of any real value -- Moses uses his own rod and smites the rock twice and calls the people rebels, and intimates that *he* is giving them water. The allusion is to the clerical element that interferes with the action of the Spirit and, in effect, hinders the people getting it. In spite of that, they get it and get it abundantly. God overruling the opposition. Otherwise, where would we be now? Because the recognised religious leaders would not let us go on with a meeting like this were it not for God's over-ruling hand.
C.A.M. You spoke of *government* in connection with Moses¬ staff; this would be an undue infliction of it.
J.T. Yes; the clerical idea is an assumption to authority; whereas *priesthood* is the thing that is needed now, and speaking instead of smiting.
F.H.L. Aaron is not mentioned in this connection in @Exodus 17. The attack in @Numbers 20 began against Moses and Aaron.
J.T. It comes in after Aaron's rod had budded; meaning that grace and life, in the priesthood, had come into evidence. Life goes along with the priesthood. The testimony is that our Priest ever liveth, and He is able to save to the uttermost. You cannot save people by smiting them. It is grace that saves. "For ye are saved by grace, through faith; and this is not of
{148}
yourselves; it is God's gift", @Ephesians 2: 8. That is the point here. God is speaking to the people and giving plenty of water in spite of Moses.
H.H. Moses could never have used Aaron's rod that budded to smite the rock. There was enough evidence to show that he was on the wrong course, was there not?
J.T. He smote it twice. That is remarkable, showing how God exposes man's will, when at work in His things; we see here the length it will go. He did not smite the rock twice in @Exodus 17, and he was told only to speak to it here, but he smites it twice. It is to bring out the innate disobedience in us, unless we judge ourselves.
J.T.Jr. The people had made him irritable. Evidently he is not seen in spiritual energy and the grace that marks it. "And Moses took the staff from before Jehovah, as he had commanded him", but then verse 11 says, "And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his staff smote the rock twice". Do you think he changed the staves?
J.T. Yes; at least, he took his own as well, as if to say, I will not give up my authority; you are rebels. That is what the people were in his eyes; what a change had come over the great servant, for he was the meekest man in all the earth. It is the antitype that is in the mind of the Spirit.
T.W. In chapter 27: 14 Jehovah tells him that *he* rebelled.
A.A.T. Paul in writing the first letter to the Corinthians did not use the rod, did he?
J.T. He said, "What will ye? that I come to you with a rod?" @1 Corinthians 4: 21. He did not want to go with a rod, nor did he. He says, "I have sent to you Timotheus who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord" (he was not a rod man) "who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ". It shows the remarkable skill of Paul as over against what we get here. The
{149}
local men would smite you; get your money out of you, @2 Corinthians 11: 20. These things have largely marked clericalism. Paul was not thus among the Corinthians, but the opposite.
H.H. Constantly having to do with difficulties among the saints may embitter the spirit of one serving, so that this is a plain word for us. We are to take heed how we speak of the saints; they belong to God.
A.R. This chapter brings in the *priesthood* of Christ as He is on high.
J.T. That is it; involving speaking. So the Lord speaks of the Holy Spirit from this point of view: "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" @Luke 11: 13. It is speaking, not smiting. It is christianity. Christ is glorified in heaven and the Spirit is available to us here.
A.N.W. In @Exodus 17 Moses is told to take the *elders* with him. Would that not have helped him in *authority*? He does not do that in @Numbers 20.
J.T. No. Here it is "Take the staff ... and Aaron thy brother, and *speak ye unto the rock*". It is priesthood.
A.B.P. Was there not a much deeper thing than irritability? Jehovah says to Moses and to Aaron, "Because ye believed me not" (verse 12). It was unbelief, evidently.
J.T. Unbelief was there -- for the time, at least. Thus, I think, this is intended to be a type of a much deeper thing which was not characteristic of Moses and Aaron. Thus they, in a way, had to suffer, so that the type should be clearly seen. It refers to the history of christendom, the long course of disregard for the word of God and limiting the Holy Spirit. If it were not for the over-abounding and over-ruling grace of God, there would be no water at all for us today. The commandment was given to speak to the rock, and use a certain rod or staff, and Moses did neither. So that it was out-and-out
{150}
rebellion on the part of the ministers, and that is why God says at the end, "Because ye believed me not, to hallow me before the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land that I have given them" (verse 12). So they are shut out. It is the antitype we have to deal with here and it is most solemn, for the full bearing of the type is towards what is around us today; and this fact, of course, interferes with the freshness and vigour of the assembly, which is in mind in these readings. The Spirit is *speaking*. I think it is one of the greatest things, that God has given the Holy Spirit in spite of the clerical element. Take Rome, which is the very essence of that element; it says that nothing can come to you except through that system. It is the height of rebellion, and what God is saying to us now here is that He has overcome that, and that we can come together in the recognition of the Spirit of God. These men would not let us be here if they had it in their power. Let no one forget it; if the devil gets his way in what is current today, the effort will be to rob the saints of their liberty. The antitype is in mind in @Numbers 20; what has happened in the history of christendom, as seen in the leaders.
A.A.T. Were the Nicolaitanes a clerical element?
J.T. It is generally so understood. It is the clerical element coming in. So we have what was against the *father* in Pergamos: "Antipas my faithful witness was, who was slain among you", @Revelation 2: 13. He was evidently against the *fatherhood* that was then dominant in the christian profession. His name would indicate that. If it were not that God acted sovereignly when the clerical idea took root in christianity it would soon have become wholly apostate, but God acted sovereignly and gave the water in spite of it; hence the continuance of vitality in the saints, eventuating in the remnant, and the revival of assembly liberty and the service of God. If He has His people here. He will stand by them and
{151}
develop in them what is in His mind, however few and feeble they may be. If men rebel against Him, He will show He is greater than they.
F.S.C. Does this, occurring at the end of the forty years, make it more applicable to us at the present time?
J.T. We are drawing near to the land now and God is saying, It is grace that is needed; it is life; it is priesthood; you will never get into the land by the rod. You must get in by the priesthood. That is the point here; it was the priestly rod they were to use, and to speak to the rock. Let us speak to God and not fail in the recognition of the Holy Spirit. Have I direct access to God, which clericalism would deny me? The assembly requires this. There can be no true service God-ward without the Holy Spirit.
C.A.M. It makes what we have very real at the present time. The end of the journey is near, and unbelief will keep us out of the land; this officialism also keeps us out.
E.McK. Is Paul in @Acts 19 the opposite of Moses and Aaron here, as to the certain disciples he found at Ephesus?
J.T. Just so. "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" @Acts 19: 2. It is not "as" but "*when* ye had believed". That is, the Spirit comes in *after* we believe. He had to announce the gospel to them, as the passage says, and then he laid his hands on them, and they received the Spirit. In @Acts 8, it is said that Peter and John prayed for the Samaritans that they might receive the Spirit; that is how the Spirit comes. It is on the principle of speaking.
@Numbers 20 brings out the idea of the collective ministry. God led Israel by Moses and Aaron and Miriam. It is a remarkable thing that Miriam has part in the ministry. Her death is recorded in the beginning of the chapter, and later Aaron dies; that is, the ministry is disappearing, and what is stressed is the priestly rod.
{152}
It is only by a living priesthood that we go into Canaan, for this brings in the power of the Spirit of God, which we shall see in the next scripture we read -- chapter 21: "And from thence to Beer: that is the well of which Jehovah spoke to Moses, Assemble the people, and I will give them water. Then Israel sang this song, Rise up, well! sing unto it: Well which princes digged, which the nobles of the people hollowed out at the word of the lawgiver, with their staves" (verses 16 - 18). That is the thing. This is the manner of going into Canaan. It is the springing well; that is the power by which you go into Canaan; not by the rod of Moses; not by ministerial leadership or ministry, but by the Spirit of God.
<blockquote>'And see! the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heavenly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour <br>When toil shall all be o'er'. (`74:5)</blockquote>
It is the Spirit of God that takes us into heaven now; that is, in the sense of present experience. Christ will come for us and take us there literally.
J.T.Jr. Eleazar takes part with Joshua as leading the people into Canaan. In some respects he took precedence of Joshua. Is that in line with your thought of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes; it is the priesthood in a purely spiritual sense. We have before us now how to get into the land. It is by the springing well. The *lawgiver* is still there, because the principle of rule must always be present. His name is not mentioned; it is the lawgiver. The singing is not to him, but to the well -- the Spirit of God. It was said a moment ago that while in our present condition, we go into heaven by the Spirit, but that means in spiritual power. We will go into heaven physically by and by when the Lord comes for us.
A.R. Is that why Paul says, "I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding", @1 Corinthians 14: 15? That helps you get inside.
{153}
J.T. That is right; so that our hymn singing is very important in assembly service, as helping us in the service to move into the presence of God.
H.H. There is a note in connection with, "Rise up, well! sing unto it". It is response.
J.T. The idea of alternate singing. Miriam represented that as a sort of ministerial side, but she dies; her voice is now silent. It is another voice now -- sing to the Spirit. She sang to the Lord, she and the women of Israel, but she is dead, so it is not objective singing that is in mind here. It involves power in our souls. "I will sing with the spirit". Not by light only, but also with the spirit and with the understanding; that is, in the power of what is known in us.
C.A.M. Speaking of the Spirit in connection with our going to heaven, I was thinking about John in the last book of the Bible; he heard "as of a trumpet speaking with me, saying, Come up here", @Revelation 4: 1. Immediately, he became in the Spirit. His body, of course, was here on earth, was it not?
J.T. Quite so. It shows how we enter into heavenly places now. We do not go into heaven bodily. Paul may have, of course. He says "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows); such a one caught up to the third heaven", @2 Corinthians 12: 2. We may assume that when John says, "I became in the Spirit", it was an inward matter. The idea of singing is very important. We talk much about this because our meetings are often marred by the giving out of certain hymns at the wrong time. Many of our hymns are mixed so that it needs discrimination to use them aright. Therefore, the knowledge of the hymn book is important. I may give out a part of a certain hymn, whereas if I give out the entire hymn I may confuse the brethren.
F.N.W. "Then Israel sang this song", @Numbers 21: 17.
{154}
J.T. *This* is the one -- not another. The very words are given. "Rise up, well! sing unto it: well which princes digged". Clearly the well is the objective in the words that are given -- "... which the nobles of the people hollowed out at the word of the lawgiver, with their staves". The staves would mean experience. The hymnbook is pretty much that. There is ability, of course, in the authors, but experience as well. The book of the Psalms is an experimental working out of the truth, the Pentateuch having a prominent place. We get confirmation of the Pentateuch in the Psalms.
C.A.M. Singing to the well as an objective would not suggest exactly singing to the Spirit, would it?
J.T.<br><blockquote> 'Praises for the Holy Ghost, <br> Sent from heav'n at Pentecost; <br>¬Tis through Him that now we live'. (`191:3)</blockquote>
You feel you cannot say, No, to that. And yet you would seek to be governed by scriptural example. This, however, is sparing. At the same time Scripture is most definite as to the Spirit's equality in the Godhead, and this warrants His being honoured as the Father and the Son are; but, as remarked, we should be governed by the teaching of Scripture and the examples it affords. In @Hebrews 10 we read of those who have insulted the Spirit of grace. He has taken a low place in grace to maintain the truth of the divine economy, and we must be extremely careful not to trench on His deity.
H.H. The recognition of that in our meetings is most important.
A.R. Giving out a hymn should be done in a priestly way. It says here that the princes digged the well and the nobles of the people hollowed it out. That is, it is princely people making room for the Spirit of God.
J.T. That is right. Many of our hymns were written before our time, and we come into the gain of them. "At the word of the lawgiver" would mean that I recognise the will of God in the thing. I am to be always
{155}
governed by Him. The *staves* would probably allude to the princes¬ experience: "which princes digged, which the nobles of the people hollowed out at the word of the lawgiver, with their staves". The book of Exodus stresses the idea of a staff. Jehovah says to Moses, "What is that in thy hand? And he said, A staff", @Exodus 4: 2. That is the point. What experience have you had so far? God says, I can use that, if it is experience with Me; and that is what Moses¬ rod represented; he had experience with God; this is basic as to authority -- in Moses¬ case he was divinely clothed with authority. God appeared to him in the bush, but Moses asserting that the people would not hear him, God inquired, "What is that in thy hand?" Moses answered, "A staff". God could use that. Later it is called the staff of God. It thus became the symbol of divine authority committed to Moses.
Ques. When David delivered the psalm to be sung through Asaph and his brethren, he made a selection from several psalms, making them one (@1 Chronicles 16: 7 - 36). Is that the way we should operate?
J.T. It is a divinely given example for us in the use of hymns. Many of our hymns are mixed and they cannot always be rightly sung throughout in the service of God. In such a case only the portion suited to the moment should be announced. Disregard of this often causes confusion.
A.B.P. Do the addresses to the seven churches indicate it is the mind of heaven there should be equal response to the Spirit's voice all down the church's history?
J.T. I think so. The Spirit is referred to in each address; it is what He says to the assemblies. He is there and active all the time. Let us have an ear to hear what He says.
Now, Israel is going out of the wilderness in @Numbers 21: 19; the Spirit typically having been responded to: "And from the wilderness they went to
{156}
Mattanah; and from Mattanah to Nahaliel; and from Nahaliel to Bamoth; and from Bamoth to the valley that is in the fields of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looks over the surface of the waste". That is, there is definite movement in the right direction. That is what God is calling to our attention now as to Christ and the assembly; the assembly is viewed in the wilderness, and we are to go on until we move out of it into heavenly places.
R.W.S. There are two allusions in the Song of Songs to coming out of the wilderness. Would they fit in?
J.T. Yes; in chapters 3 and 8.
A.R. In Matthew and Mark, it is said that after they had sung a hymn they went out to the mount of Olives.
J.T. Jerusalem, at that time, was indeed a wilderness; everything was against Christ. Going to the mount of Olives refers to the spiritual and heavenly side of the service of God now.
{157}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (9)
@Psalm 84: 5 - 7; @Psalm 114: 8; @Deuteronomy 6: 10, 11; @Deuteronomy 8: 7 - 10
J.T. The assembly in the wilderness has engaged us during the recent readings. It has been pointed out that the ministry of the assemblies thus viewed, typified in Zipporah, contemplates certain fleshly features that have to be owned, that have marked its history, and still mark it. What will come before us in these four scriptures this evening, will give an opportunity to speak of the other side, namely, the gain of the wilderness experience. The two scriptures from the Psalms are significant as depicting certain experiences in the wilderness, not necessarily the actual wilderness of Sinai, but what has this character; and for the christian, the wilderness always exists. The two in Deuteronomy will show how that in the wilderness, we *anticipate* the land of promise; that is, heaven as presently realised, where all is of God. Wells have *not* to be digged there, as in the wilderness. There is plenty of water gushing forth without any toil on our part. These two scriptures, therefore, will help us as to the service of God in the assembly, where we reach a point where all is of God. We are impressed with the bounty of God apart from the product of our own exercises.
@Psalm 84 points to what accrued in the wilderness experience; that is, those who passed through the valley of Baca. They make it a well-spring; *they* make it that. Instead of being overwhelmed by the pressure of the wilderness, they gain in experience, being able to overcome through the well-spring. They are described: "Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee -- they, in whose heart are the highways. Passing through the valley of Baca, they make it a well-spring; yea, the early rain covereth it with blessings. They go from strength to strength: each one will appear before God in Zion", @Psalm 84: 5 - 7.
{158}
J.T.Jr. The title of the psalm is helpful too, is it not? "To the chief Musician. Upon the Gittith". The note refers to @Psalm 8, and says, 'A musical instrument'. The word is feminine as @Psalm 81 and @Psalm 84; from a root meaning *vat* or *press*. Evidently it suggests *pressure*.
J.T. And it is "Of the sons of Korah", which would allude to the sovereign mercy of God.
A.N.W. The meaning of Baca is *weeping*.
J.T. That is very applicable today; there is so much cause for weeping and, indeed, so much weeping. It is not only in the world but among the people of God, too. We have joy, but we have also the sorrow, especially in disrupted families and bereaved persons, and also in some of the young people, and others, too, turning away from the truth. The psalm, therefore, is an encouragement, because it shows that faith, by the Spirit, overcomes.
A.B.P. The altars would appear to be in disuse, if the sparrow had found them as a place for her house.
J.T. The allusion would be to what is *available* there, the Lord using the word *sparrow* as denoting what is apparently insignificant, but yet it does not fall without God. "The sparrow hath found a house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she layeth her young, thine altars, O Jehovah of hosts, my King and my God" (verse 3). The early verses would point to what is available to outwardly small things. "How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Jehovah of hosts! My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of Jehovah; my heart and my flesh cry out for the living God. Yea, the sparrow hath found a house" (verses 1 - 3). I thought it would show how liberal the house is in its receptiveness, and what it avails for such as might be represented in the sparrow and the swallow. In this sense the birds would be typical. They avail themselves of what affords them shelter. The swallow can lay her young on the altars of God. Typically, these creatures represent those who
{159}
do not need to be great outwardly, in order to have a share in the house of God.
R.W.S. Does this psalm represent the secret, victorious side, collateral with the ugly features that are public?
J.T. That is what I thought. We have enlarged on the ugly features of the assembly in the wilderness, but that is only one side of the picture. We saw that in Corinthians, for instance, but even Corinth itself is not without evidence of the delightful side of the truth. The assembly is viewed as *the Christ* in Corinthians -- the anointed vessel of God, typified in @Exodus 40. Abstractly, there is no disparity there. Then, it also says that the saints at Corinth were temple of God, as indwelt by the Holy Spirit. There are many other such expressions in both epistles, but when we come to Ephesians, we have the full thought. We come into the power and gain of the Spirit as in this psalm, and make the wilderness a well-spring. "Yea, the early rain covereth it with blessings" (verse 6). So that the wilderness, according to these two psalms, affords distinct and permanent gain for us, adverse though it be; and that, of course, enhances the assembly in its service.
@Psalm 114 speaks about what Israel was when she came out of Egypt: "When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language, Judah was his sanctuary, Israel his dominion. The sea saw it and fled, the Jordan turned back; the mountains skipped like rams, the hills like lambs. What ailed thee, thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou turnedst back? Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams? ye hills, like lambs? Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob, who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of waters". Faith, in the wilderness; would see these things and understand. They happened in that part of the history when Israel went out of Egypt. So that it was not all sorrow; it was not all
{160}
complaining. Faith could see more than that, and that is the thing for us now to see, whatever there is of God, small though things be, and sorrowful, too. The book of Ezekiel shows that in one sense it was only sin all the way through, beginning with Egypt, until they entered the land, and also in the land; but then there was another side, and these psalms show that. Joshua and others, who saw things spiritually, grow in the truth all the way through. So that Caleb is as able at the end of that journey, as he was at the beginning.
A.R. From @Psalm 84 it would appear as if the service of God goes on uninterruptedly. It says in verse 4, "Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be constantly praising thee. Selah". In spite of the valley of Baca and the sorrow, the service of God goes on.
J.T. That is very beautiful. "In whose heart are the highways" (verse 5). That is, you apprehend the thing, by faith, in the eyes of the heart. The highways are in the heart. You will not turn aside in the wilderness. You will not fall there. You go right through.
A.N.W. Is that why the first part of that verse is in the singular, challenging each one of us individually? "Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee".
J.T. I think that is the way the experience is presented, whatever anyone of us may be. You may not be a Caleb, or a Joshua. Jehovah, at Sinai, began by saying, "... showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me", @Exodus 20: 6. It is not the thousands that *ought* to love Him, but those who do; so that there must have been many in Israel in whose hearts were the highways.
A.R. Thus, in spite of the pressure that is going on all over the world, it must be very pleasurable to heaven to take account of the week-ends in which the service of God goes on in many places. Through grace we have part in it.
J.T. That is a great matter. God begins the wilderness journey with the thousands of those who love Him, and if a man of faith heard that, he would say, 'I must
{161}
find those thousands. He says there are thousands of those who love Him, and He shows mercy to *them*. I would like to find them out'. No doubt there were many who did find them, those who loved Him in the camps of Israel, in the booths; for they dwelt in booths as they started. They were near each other in the exchange of love -- at least, typically. That is the position today; there are those who take sides with the truth, because they love God. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", @John 14: 21. There were the Levites who stood with Moses at the time of the golden calf. They took sides with the truth. Every man slew his brother. "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", @2 Timothy 2: 19. That corresponds with what we have been referring to.
F.N.W. The apostle Paul says, "But if any one love God, *he* is known of him", @1 Corinthians 8: 3.
J.T. Yes; "*he* is known of him". God has His own way of showing that He knows. There are relatively few; but still, there are thousands, and He knows them and would recognise each one. God recognises His lovers. The highways to Zion, for us, involve the wilderness. There were no roads in the wilderness. The tabernacle and the pillar of fire marked the way.
<blockquote> 'Is the wilderness before thee, <br>Desert lands where drought abides? <br>Heavenly springs shall there restore thee, <br>Fresh from God's exhaustless tides. <p>Light divine surrounds thy going, <br>God Himself shall mark thy way; <br>Secret blessings, richly flowing, <br>Lead to everlasting day'. (`76:2)</blockquote>
Those lines are beautiful as marking all this; how the way is made for us by the light of God in the tabernacle. Each one was to keep his eye on the tent of meeting; as it moved, he moved. Thus the way was
{162}
made, but the first movement would be in the *heart*. "This is the way, walk ye in it", @Isaiah 30: 21. So in the Acts, "the way" is, in a sense, a synonym of christianity; it is the way out of the world into God's world.
F.H.L. Would @Isaiah 35 develop it a little? "And the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose" (verse 1).
J.T. The Scriptures are very full of this, affording a way out of the world; *through* the world as a wilderness, but *out* of it into Canaan; the heart is sustained by the well-spring and the rain that fills the pools. The way was marked by the movement of the cloud on the tabernacle. But what comes out is that while the cloud led the people up to the period mentioned in @Numbers 21, then you have the well. The princes digged the well. From that point on, it is a question of the Holy Spirit; the way is by the Spirit. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14.
G.V.D. The sons of Korah had been through the experience of being brought low and got the gain of it.
J.T. I think that is what is meant. The author is not given. It is in relation to the sons of Korah, or for them, but it is definitely called a *psalm*, meaning an experience that some one had. You want to get in touch with the man who has experience in the ways of God, and that is what this psalm means.
W.B-w. The well springs up. It is a well-spring, and the early rain covers the earth with blessing. Does that refer to the ministry?
J.T. The rain is the blessing of heaven, really. The spring is the Spirit in the believer working out through his affections. So that in spite of the pressure there is joyousness and buoyancy. It is what springs up in the inwards. David in @Psalm 103 calls upon all that is within him to praise Jehovah; he taxes his affections to praise God.
W.B-w. How does the early rain fit in with that?
J.T. It would be ministry; there was the early and the latter rain. It refers to the seasons; what, as given
{163}
suitably, promotes growth. The early rain was at the time of sowing; that is, at the beginning of sowing the rains would cause refreshment to the soil.
A.A.T. The assembly at Smyrna (@Revelation 2), went through much pressure. The word to it is, "I know thy tribulation and thy poverty; but thou art rich; and the railing of those who say that they themselves are Jews, and are not, but a synagogue of Satan. Fear nothing of what thou art about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to cast of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days" (verses 9, 10). The valley of Baca.
J.T. Yes; the Lord was pointing out how long it would be; that Satan can go just so far. There would be ten days of suffering. The comfort is that it can only go so far. The devil has not a free hand. Many of them came into the valley of Baca and made it a well-spring. In the history of the assembly we have many illustrations of this very thing. How glorious were the real martyrs, in their testimony and in their enjoyment too!
W.F.K. Would this well-spring be special ministry?
J.T. It would be rather what you make it yourself. They *make* it; that is, the weeping gives place to joy. Our sorrow is turned into joy. The Lord told the disciples that would happen. "Your grief shall be turned to joy", @John 16: 20. "In the world ye have tribulation; but be of good courage: I have overcome the world" (verse 33).
A.R. Perhaps one of the best examples is in @Acts 16. It was certainly the valley of weeping for Paul and Silas, but they were praising and blessing God.
J.T. The rain is additional. The well-spring is what you call upon in yourself. @John 4 points to that, springing up into eternal life; but then there is an additional thing in ministry that comes to us, and you sit down and enjoy it. It carries blessing with it; that is, the
{164}
seed sown develops and grows through it. God's testing discipline goes on in the wilderness through the experience there; the hard experiences that we have. And as you accept it, according to @Hebrews 12, enduring chastening, there is a good result -- partakers of God's holiness. The believer is tested by the experiences of the wilderness, and you will find that you overcome by what is within -- the springing up of the well -- and then the rain is objective ministry that comes to you. You sit down and enjoy it. It brings blessing, for it is the early rain, which affects the sowing. Therefore, you will have a harvest. "Have patience, therefore, brethren, till the coming of the Lord. Behold, the labourer awaits the precious fruit of the earth, having patience for it until it receive the early and the latter rain", @James 5: 7.
A.B.P. Going to the meeting at night and getting refreshed is not all. There would be more for God if there were overcoming in the trying circumstances of the day. Then the meeting at night would be like the rain.
J.T. Just so. Many of us know the care and pressure in the households, and elsewhere, but it is a matter of making it a well-spring. It is the Spirit within. What you receive in the assembly is additional. The latter rain would allude to what would be necessary as the growing time continues. It is not any less in value than the early rain.
W.F.K. It would be like @Romans 7 and 8; the eighth chapter being the operation of the Spirit.
J.T. That is how it works out. @Romans 5 is the acceptance of wilderness conditions. "Knowing that tribulation works endurance; and endurance, experience; and experience, hope; and hope does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us" (verses 3 - 5). That is the secret of the well-spring. Chapter 8 brings out the *well-spring* because it definitely
{165}
treats of the Spirit within us, and what it issues forth in.
A.A.T. Do you connect verse 7 with the service of God?
J.T. "They go from strength to strength; each one will appear before God in Zion". *Strength to strength* here is something like *glory to glory* in @2 Corinthians 3: 18. The next thing is *appearing before God in Zion*. That is, we do not fail to be at the meetings. We do not stop short of the full thought of God to appear before Him. The way into the holiest is open to us, so that, "Let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience, and washed as to our body with pure water", @Hebrews 10: 22. We appear before God in Zion. He loves Zion.
@Romans 7 is what goes on inside the believer in view of the Spirit, so that He may have scope. Chapter 6 is the wilderness, where you are baptised. Baptism brings you into the wilderness publicly, preparatory to the experiences that you have to go through there. Chapter 7 is to develop and to clarify the inwards. Chapter 5 states that "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit". Well then, make room for Him *there*. The heart is one organ. Some of us were saying lately of the two on the way to Emmaus, that their heart burned, but their other organs did not react to that. They did not go back to Jerusalem because their heart burned. That was only one organ. @Romans 7 shows how all the organs are brought into action. Things are cleared away by self-judgment so that there is *deliverance*. That makes way for chapter 8 where you get the full result of the Spirit operating in the believer.
A.R. How would you work out this psalm? It says, "Jehovah, God of hosts, hear my prayer; give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah. Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed" (verses 8, 9). Then
{166}
the psalmist says, "Jehovah Elohim is a sun and shield: Jehovah will give grace and glory; no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly" (verse 11). The use of divine names here is remarkable.
J.T. It is a wonderful psalm, one of the most remarkable of them. Finally it says, "Jehovah of hosts, blessed is the man that confideth in thee!" (verse 12). That is the finish; the blessedness of the man that confides in Jehovah. The psalm depicts that blessedness. It is well worth taking to heart, and being one of those men.
W.B-w. One of the characteristic features of this third book of Psalms is the sanctuary. Does that fit here?
J.T. It does. Asaph is the main writer in the book; most of these psalms are his. Who is he? He is a leading singer. He is a man to follow. He was distressed, according to @Psalm 73, but he says, "Until I went into the sanctuaries of God; then understood I their end" (verse 17). All now is clear to him. Hence these psalms are so full of encouragement to the believer. David, in @Psalm 72, contemplates Solomon in dominance. "The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended" (verse 20). All is well *above*. Everything is secured in Christ; everything of God is yea and amen in Him. Our own state of soul is the difficulty. Asaph is troubled with his inward difficulties, but he gets them clarified when he enters into the sanctuaries of God.
W.B-w. @Psalm 72 ends the second book, and @Psalm 73 begins with the sanctuaries. Is that the thought?
J.T. That is right. The third book is mainly Asaph's book and he gives a good lead, because he shows how you get things clear by entering the sanctuaries of God.
J.T.Jr. Paul was greatly pressed also. He speaks about combats without and fears within, and yet he says that when Titus came he had great joy. The tide was turned; Titus came from Corinth where he had
{167}
been greatly refreshed through what he found there. Is that not the way things work? Localities are judging themselves and thus the position is changed and affords refreshment.
J.T. Exactly. Those who go about seeking to serve the saints have opportunity to see what goes on and are refreshed. They carry tidings back and spread it abroad so that others are refreshed. That is how the work is going on; the joy and the sorrow are mingled. Let us not fail to make the most of the joy!
W.B-w. Does @Psalm 113 suggest power?
J.T. That is the point. First, what Israel was to God. "Judah was his sanctuary" (verse 2). I suppose Judah would represent the full thought of the service of God in David -- David and Solomon are outstanding in the service of God, and that is how the matter stood; although it was not in Judah at first, it was in Levi. It was Moses and Aaron, originally, but ultimately it was David and Solomon. That is the highest part of God's service. It would seem that was in view. "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared", @Exodus 15: 17. All that runs on to David. That is how the matter stood; great power marked Israel from this standpoint. The psalm depicts this, ending with God: "Who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of waters", @Psalm 114: 8. It is the power of God.
W.B-w. I was wondering why he ends up with the rock. He speaks of power at the Red Sea, power at the Jordan, and then he comes back to this rock.
J.T. I suppose @Exodus 17 is in mind. The allusion here is more to the hardness of it -- the flint. In spite of that. God turned it into a fountain of waters. That is what God can do for us.
A.B.P. Does not that verse suggest the complete journey? The sea was at the beginning and the Jordan
{168}
at the end; also the rock is mentioned twice; at the beginning and at the end of the journey.
J.T. That is the idea, I think. It is really wilderness experience; although the psalm would be written in a later day, he is alluding to the wilderness experiences. It is what anyone who had faith could have entered into during the wilderness experience. It is to stimulate us by being reminded of what others realised in the wilderness. Why should I not realise it, too? The last verse would show that God can overcome the hardness: "Who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of waters"; that is, He changed the very hardness, making it yield refreshment.
A.N.W. In @Psalm 84, it is what we should do. "They make it a well-spring". In this psalm it is the power of God turning the rock into the means of refreshment.
Ques. What is the suggestion in the statement that Israel is His dominion and Judah is His sanctuary?
J.T. The idea of the sanctuary is in Judah. The dominion was in Israel. It contemplates an undivided Israel. Division took place later. This is the full thought of God; it is nothing less than Israel, and the sanctuary in Judah. I would take it to represent David and Solomon. They had the sanctuary in Judah, but Israel was the dominion. The full divine thought was there. Dominion alludes to kingship.
W.B-w. There were two rocks in the wilderness, one at the beginning and one at the end. Does this refer to the first rock?
J.T. There are two things to look at; one is that the Rock was Christ who followed them. From that point of view, the two ideas merge; it is one Christ, in @Exodus 17 and @Numbers 20 -- the Rock which followed them. But here the allusion is rather to the hardness of that from which God caused the water to flow.
Ques. Is the word *turning* important -- the way God turns things for us? Sometimes things are very difficult, and they are just turned the opposite way.
{169}
J.T. God "turned the rock"; it is not simply that there were springs in the wilderness, but the thing itself is turned; the hardness is turned into refreshment. The flint, which is an extremely hard substance, was turned into a fountain of water. That is a very great comfort in hard circumstances. Every one of us must have them, but God is ready to change them for us.
Let us now look at the passage in Deuteronomy. It is still the ministry of Moses in the wilderness, but at the end of it. He is talking in the wilderness about what is in the land. He is not going in, but he knows what is there. So it is what we have *anticipatively* in the service of God; the encouragement as to what we are coming into. "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God", @1 Corinthians 2: 9, 10. That is in the wilderness epistle, but it is there to encourage us as to what is beyond. "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory to be revealed to us", @Romans 8: 18. We should have great encouragement in these verses in @Deuteronomy 6. Moses is telling Israel that God "bringeth thee into the land which he swore unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee: great and good cities which thou buildedst not, and houses full of everything good which thou filledst not, and wells digged which thou diggedst not, vineyards and oliveyards which thou plantedst not, and thou shalt have eaten and shalt be full" (verses 10, 11). It is not now that the princes digged the well in the wilderness. That refers to self-judgment in us, under authority; but here it is what we *find*; what is *in the land*. Everything is provided. It is our destiny; and it is mentioned here to encourage us not to stop short of going across the Jordan into the land. Moses is telling them what is there. God honoured him by showing him
{170}
the land; he did not enter it, but he told Israel about it, according to this book.
A.B.P. Did J.N.D. touch on this in the hymn, 'By the Spirit all pervading' (`14:5), and also when he wrote,
<blockquote>And see! the Spirits power <br>Has ope'd the heavenly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour <br>When toil shall all be o'er. (`74:5)</blockquote>
J.T. Quite so. His hymns are full of these great thoughts. We have light brought back to us as to it, and it is to encourage us to go in -- not to stop short of going in. Moses said to his father-in-law, "Come with us, and we will do thee good; for Jehovah has spoken good concerning Israel", @Numbers 10: 29. The whole book of Deuteronomy stresses the good, showing the great and glorious things God is bringing us into. Let us go on and not stop short! Let us not fall in the wilderness! Thus we shall answer to what the assembly is in the wilderness, according to God.
Ques. Paul is ahead of Moses, is he not, in the outshining of the truth? He went up as far as the third heaven. He got into it himself; he was in the land.
J.T. That is right. He could speak of what he heard there. He says that he was "caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter", @2 Corinthians 12: 4.
A.R. Perhaps the book of Hebrews would correspond with it. The Hebrew saints were inclined to be earthly-minded, and Paul says a great deal about Christ in heaven, encouraging the brethren to go in.
J.T. That is the thing. "Let us also therefore ... run with endurance the race that lies before us, looking steadfastly on Jesus the leader and completer of faith: who, in view of the joy lying before him, endured the cross, having despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God", @Hebrews 12: 1, 2.
A.N.W. Can we be rightly in the wilderness, without this view before us?
{171}
J.T. We shall not be there buoyantly. We shall not be saying, 'Come with us and we will do thee good, for God has spoken good concerning Israel'.
D.P. Would Moses on the mount of transfiguration come into the full gain of the land?
J.T. We may say he was in the land. He was in the land talking with Jesus; he and Elias. Still, these great men represent the testimony there. They do not share the full place of the assembly.
A.A.T. Do these verses anticipate the land, and connect with the service of God?
J.T. Yes. Typically, Moses is telling us of what is there. Anyone who has been there in any measure can speak of the place, according to that measure. No one of us can assume to have gone up like Paul, but still there is something that can be said, as already quoted from `74:1. That is something you may understand, and if you have tasted it you can tell others about it. It is a wholly spiritual matter. We encourage one another by what we have experienced, and that is what the Psalms largely signify; telling others about our experiences.
A.A.T. You are speaking of individual experience. Is this not an assembly position?
J.T. It is; but each one of us, according to the work of God in himself, may reach into this. We are not all of the same stature. A person who is just converted can say very little, experimentally; whereas a man who has been on the way for years has experienced things, and the psalms indicate that he can tell you something about them; and it is to encourage you to go on to the same things, because it is open to you. The twelve spies went up to search out the land, and they brought back tidings of it, and that is the idea; you can bring back tidings of what is there if you have enjoyed anything of it.
Ques. How do you regard the resources of chapter 6 -- "oliveyards which thou plantedst not", and so on?
{172}
J.T. The viewpoint is rather what *God* does. The things were all there before them, as they went in. They are typical of what God has for us. He says, in principle, You did not build them -- "Good cities which thou buildedst not, and houses full of everything good which thou filledst not, and wells digged which thou diggedst not, vineyards and oliveyards which thou plantedst not". Literally, men did it, but that is not the point. It is what the believer *finds*. It is what the pilgrim here finds when he gets into the land of promise. God has it all for him. So that our chapter says, "For Jehovah thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of water-brooks, of springs, and of deep waters, that gush forth in the valleys and hills; a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates; a land of olive-trees and honey; a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness", @Deuteronomy 8: 7 - 9. That is what you find in the land. This is a much fuller statement than that in chapter 6, especially as to water; and, of course, this is our subject. It is a "land of water-brooks, of springs, and of deep waters, that gush forth in the valleys and hills". It is most expressive of what is in the land for us.
D.P. Is this the ministry of the new covenant?
J.T. This is not the new covenant. It is the land of promise, of which God had spoken to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. That is what is in mind here, as you will observe in chapter 6: "God bringeth thee into the land which he swore unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee" (verse 10). It is a question of the land of promise which was spoken of before there was any covenant with Israel at all. It was a *promise* to Abraham, and now Israel is going into it. The twelve spies went up and saw these things, and hid them in their hearts; at least Joshua and Caleb did; and now they are going into them. Caleb and Joshua correspond to the Holy Spirit, of whom the Lord says, "The Spirit of truth who goes forth from with the Father, he shall
{173}
bear witness concerning me", @John 15: 26, and, "He will announce to you what is coming" (chapter 16: 13). He would tell them of heavenly things. The apostles could tell of the path of Jesus here below because they had been with Him, but the Holy Spirit brings out tidings of the heavenly land, and that is the ministry of Paul, the heavenly side of the truth. That is what Moses is speaking about here. It imparts a heavenly character to the saints as of the assembly, in view of our translation to heaven.
A.R. When Paul said to the Corinthians, in his wilderness epistle, "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago", it would be to stimulate them to go in, would it not?
J.T. It is like the testimony of the twelve spies. Paul was there and could tell them what was there. No doubt there was much more than was written about that visit by Paul to heaven. No doubt there were things of which he would have spoken in detail to encourage the saints to go in for the heavenly side of the truth.
Ques. Would you link on the thought of the water-brooks with the epistle to the Ephesians?
J.T. Yes; it is what is gushing forth. @Psalm 104 as an analogy helps. It refers to the earth, but it is what God did *creatively*. "He sendeth the springs into the valleys: they run among the mountains" (verse 10). The heavenly land also comes from the hand of God for the saints. Think of the wonderfulness of it -- that "eye hath not seen nor ear heard!" Of course, we have been saying that, typically, the spies brought tidings of it down; but it is really the Holy Spirit that brings it down; no natural eye has seen it. The Holy Spirit reveals it to us, for He "searches ... the depths of God". As we make room for Him, He will bring heavenly things to us so that we may go in for them.
R.W.S. Does the contemplation and enjoyment of this furnish material in the heart for the service of God?
{174}
J.T. Clearly; you become a heavenly man. You take part in it in heavenly power. That is the idea in Ephesians; "And has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus" (chapter 2: 6). The house of God down here is a counterpart of that. "Ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God" (verse 19). That involves the heavenly part of the service of God; we come into what is entirely of God, what He has prepared for us; what we enter into by the Spirit's power.
Rem. In Hebrews, Christ is said to be bringing many sons to glory. Here it is "Jehovah thy God bringeth thee" (verse 7). It is what God has in His mind for us.
J.T. Quite so. He brings us *there*. In the wilderness, it is, "I have brought you to myself". That was at Mount Horeb; but this is the inheritance in the place "that thy" (Jehovah's) "hands have prepared". That is the idea. Moses would say that with great feeling.
Ques. What would the stones of iron suggest?
J.T. Richness; what is so much spoken of today; resources, such as oil, rubber, iron, and everything that man needs, in abundance. That is what you get in certain places on earth, but heaven yields everything that divine love can devise for its objects, and that is what we are to come into. The Holy Spirit is the Earnest of this inheritance, so we have it already, in this sense. Any yield to God is the result of the saints entering into these things. Our service in the assembly requires that we should enter on the heavenly side, so that we should be strong enough to take part in the whole service of God -- "In order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able
{175}
to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God", @Ephesians 3: 16 - 19.
{176}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (10)
@Joshua 15: 16 - 19; @Judges 5: 11; @Judges 7: 1 - 8
J.T. We have in Achsah the assembly typified as in the land, as belonging to heavenly places. Although we are still here on earth, this applies to the saints now, for it is said, "God ... has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 6. This phase of the assembly's position, involving spiritual enjoyment, can only be by the Spirit, because, clearly, it is in heavenly places. The upper springs would allude to that. It is only in the power of the Spirit that we can enter upon this ground consciously; not only having the light of it, but consciously entering into it by the Spirit. It is definitely a heavenly position, so that Achsah asks for springs of water; she had a south land, but she wanted springs of water. The inheritance being south would suggest favourableness. God "has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ", @Ephesians 1: 3. The Spirit is alluded to in the springs.
C.A.M. It was a gift by her father!
J.T. Yes. He had a distinguished history, and her husband, Othniel, was related to him, so that family feeling and spiritual affinity are strong there. We are in the most exalted and blessed environment in this type. The husband is distinguished in his military prowess, the father outstandingly distinguished, and now the spouse is distinguished in her understanding of what is *needed* in the position. This blessing is needed. In addressing her father, Achsah is marked by energy. She sprang off her ass, and she recognised her husband in urging him to ask; she knows what to do. The type is striking as to how she comports herself. She wanted *springs*. She did not say, Give me a spring; but springs, and he designated the upper and nether.
{177}
A.N.W. Does what you have said explain why so much room is given to prayer in the epistle to the Ephesians?
J.T. Yes. The first is in regard to *light*: "Being enlightened in the eyes of your heart", to know what relates to God the Father -- "the hope of his calling", the "riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints" and "the surpassing greatness of his power" (chapter 1: 18 - 20). The second prayer relates to the Father's Spirit working in us, which is what we are considering now: "In order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God" (chapter 3: 18, 19).
A.A.T. To what do the lower springs refer?
J.T. I would connect them with Romans; the Spirit regulating and maintaining us here, in the sphere of responsibility. @Romans 5: 5 says, "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit". That would be the basis of the springs. Then in chapter 8 it is said, "That the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit" (verse 4). The first part of chapter 8 particularly treats of the Spirit, mentioned some thirteen times, running into the thought of being *led* by the Spirit. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God" (verse 14). It would allude to the final stage of the wilderness. Instead of being led by the light of the cloud on the tabernacle, we have the springing well, which alludes to the Spirit, the power by which we enter into Canaan. The upper springs would be the Spirit as viewed in Ephesians. It is the Father's Spirit there. It strengthens us in the inner man.
A.B.P. Is there a parallel with @Acts 19?
J.T. That is a connecting link with what is before us -- Paul's concern as beginning the work at Ephesus. He
{178}
came through the *upper* districts, and having found twelve men there, who evidently were there by divine appointment, he is especially concerned whether they had received the Holy Spirit when they had believed, putting them on their spiritual history. The point is that we should be maintained on the *upper* line. The lower line is Corinth, which corresponds somewhat to what we said about the Spirit in Romans -- the nether springs. Apollos was *there*, and Paul came in on the upper line, and raised this question of the Spirit with these twelve men at Ephesus. He referred to their history; whether they had received the Spirit when they had believed. This is a matter of prime importance to the subject in mind; that is, the assembly which was developed at Ephesus; developed on the heavenly line. It says in @Ephesians 1, "In whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise" (verse 13). They are taken account of as sealed, and the Spirit is the Earnest of the inheritance. The apostle refers to their history as having believed. He says, "In whom we have also obtained an inheritance, being marked out beforehand according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his own will, that we should be to the praise of his glory who have pre-trusted in the Christ: in whom *ye* also have trusted, having heard the word of the truth, the glad tidings of your salvation; in whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance to the redemption of the acquired possession to the praise of his glory", @Ephesians 1: 11 - 14. I think that is linked with @Acts 19 and our present scripture. It is stressing what they came into in the gift of "the Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance".
A.R. In @Acts 19 Paul asked the twelve men as to the Spirit; in the scripture read in Joshua, Achsah does the asking.
{179}
J.T. That brings in the assembly; the feminine side is before us; how she acted and spoke. It is not that anyone had suggested springs to her. The apostle suggested the Spirit in the antitype. He raised that question at once, connecting it with their histories since they had believed, because we can have no part at all in this matter aside from the Spirit.
C.A.M. Would you say that the twelve at Ephesus had not followed the cloud? You said there came a time when the well took the place of the cloud.
J.T. Yes; it is the final part of the wilderness -- from @Numbers 21. It is "as many as are led by the Spirit of God" after that, which @Romans 8 contemplates. It is still a wilderness position, but it is by the Spirit. At Ephesus there were *twelve*, as if specially ordered by God in view of the great work that was to take place there; a complete administrative number, and hence Paul's question as to the Spirit. They said they had not heard whether He had come. So that they were defective as to current light. Apollos, in the previous chapter, was in a similar position, knowing only the baptism of John, but evidently he knew more than they did because he preached in power; he needed some adjustment, but not as much as they did.
C.A.M. Would you say that the cloud was moving, up to that part of the Acts, toward Ephesus?
J.T. Yes. The movement of the cloud is seen after @Acts 7. That chapter is one great landmark, and then in chapters 11, 12 and 13, it is a question of bringing Paul in. It is then the change-over to his ministry, and these men at Ephesus were defective. Although they had light through John, they had not followed up that light. They should have found out that the Holy Spirit had come, but they had not heard. That was no excuse, because it was *to be* heard. From the very outset Peter announced the fact that, "having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear", @Acts 2: 33.
{180}
J.T.Jr. We have what is in Christ up there. According to Ephesians, things are *in* Him: "*in* whom we have redemption through his blood" (verse 7). It goes back to the initial thought of redemption and forgiveness of sins, but as being linked up with Christ in heaven.
J.T. I was thinking just today about the pattern that Moses received. God says, "See that thou make them according to their pattern, which hath been shewn to thee in the mountain", @Exodus 25: 40. So the idea of elevation enters into it. The full thought of Christ is reached as we apprehend Him in heaven; even as to our own transformation, it is according to His "body of glory". The full thought is there, and in resting in anything less than that, we are defective. So John says, "We know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is", @1 John 3: 2. "Even as *he* is, *we* also are in this world" (chapter 4: 17). It is the *full* thought that is to be kept in mind, and what have been our histories since we believed.
A.R. The apostle Paul stresses the idea that God has set Christ down at His own right hand in the heavenlies. We are to apprehend Christ there now.
J.T. Yes. Paul reached the position, because he says that he was caught up to the third heaven, that is, as far as the third heaven (see footnote to @2 Corinthians 12: 2). That is the highest creature point, I should think.
J.H.E. How perfect Scripture is! The upper springs are mentioned first, and then the lower. We should be in the upper realm, but then the spring is available in the lower sphere to help us, too.
J.T. That is it. Apollos, we are told, was at Corinth, as if the lower position is maintained. If we do not maintain the lower, there will be a fall, and that is what happened at Ephesus. We will become unbalanced unless the lower position is maintained.
J.S. Should we go from @Romans 8, spiritually, to Ephesians?
{181}
J.T. That is right. Colossians is a corrective link. But, "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14, connects directly with Ephesians.
A.R. Paul says in @Ephesians 1: 22, "And gave him to be head over all things to the assembly". Is headship operating from Him as having sat down at the right hand in the heavenlies?
J.T. Just so; God having given Him to be Head over all things to the assembly. So that the position is above, clearly, and all is operating from that point of view in Ephesians.
C.A.M. Would the smiting of Kirjath-sepher suggest Christ's greatness in what He has accomplished?
J.T. It is an allusion to His military prowess; Kirjath-sepher is the city of the book; a city of literature.
J.S. Was it not at Ephesus that they burned the books?
J.T. That is the fact. It is a remarkable account of the work of God through Paul. There is no account like it -- the immense power there was. It is said, at that time, that napkins taken from Paul's body effected cures.
A.B.P. What would be the significance of the books, in a practical way, at this high point? It would be easier to understand them as a hindrance to us on a lower level.
J.T. It is worth considering. There are two cities mentioned in this chapter, related to each other: Kirjath-sepher, the city of the book, and Kirjath-sannah, the city of *instruction*. The idea of education enters into both. Such cities, in all times, have leading places in the world. What Othniel overcame would mean the overthrow of the world as it is built up. Education has one of the greatest places in it. Books, of course, go with that, but they are regarded by themselves; so the books were burned at Ephesus.
{182}
J.S. Knowledge puffeth up.
J.T. That is right; but it belongs to this position; it belongs to the Ephesian position. It is Joshua we are dealing with -- the heavenly position. It is the standpoint of christianity fully understood, because the vessel of @Acts 10 came down from heaven. It did not start from the earth; it started from heaven, and man competes with that. That is competed with and overcome in man's idea of things, and that is what the present world is.
A.N.W. Is that why you have the stepping-stone of Colossians between Romans and Ephesians? Is not Colossians to concentrate headship in the Lord Himself outside the range of philosophy?
J.T. That is right Everything must come from the Head who is in heaven, for He is there, sitting at the right hand of God. He is made Head up there; given to be Head over all things to the assembly.
A.B.P. During the period of the so-called Reformation it was definitely of God that there should be many who were highly educated so that the structure of the truth might be unfolded accurately, and we get the benefit of that today. But would it be right to say that is hardly a necessity now that the truth has been opened up, in the ways of God?
J.T. Just so. The languages in which God had spoken needed to be understood thoroughly, and it was right there should be a research into the history of the Bible. That is certainly a history to be considered; the history of the Book of God. Men in those days were raised up and able to do that, and even later than that. But then, that is done, now. Of course, we need education in the ordinary sense, but the two cities taken by the men of faith in Joshua would mean that education as a worldly advantage has been overthrown in the minds of christians, and so, as we have just said, they burned the books at Ephesus -- a very large number of them too.
{183}
J.T.Jr. Would baptism protect us in the matter of education? The household being baptised, education would not be allowed which would damage the children.
J.T. Baptism is the exclusion of the world. That is one principle in it. You do not need the world, as such. Colossians pursues the subject of baptism. Chapter 2 deals with these things; philosophy and vain deceit were to be refused. And so the apostle brings in baptism and carries the thought of resurrection *into* it, which we do not get elsewhere, showing it is an exclusive thought in Colossians, shutting out man's world.
F.N.W. Is the principle of separation essential to divine education? Paul separated the disciples before he taught them in the school of Tyrannus.
J.T. There is a sequence there. Separation from those who were hardened or refused the truth preceded the reasoning by Paul, which was carried on in the school of Tyrannus for a good while. We thus have education in separation, but it is regulated. It is not loose. Baptism enables us to exclude what would be harmful. The school of Tyrannus would mean *authoritative* education. If anyone brings in anything, as in Colossians -- such as philosophy or vain deceit -- there is no quarter for it.
A.R. Education in itself tends to culture flesh; the school of Tyrannus would not do that.
J.T. That is the point in his name being mentioned. He is authoritative and the principle is that he will not suffer what is contrary to this position of education. The world copies what God has brought in. That is a remarkable thing. In the first world, that, the antediluvian world, there were giants, men of renown. They may enter into Greek mythology. You get the acme of education in this world, in connection with Greek mythology and the like. Well now, God takes up the Greek language. He robs the devil, in that sense, by using it especially in the New Testament. It is a remarkable thing. The greatness of those men undoubtedly
{184}
began with their ancestor, Cain; and he named his son Enoch. There were two lines; the line of the children of God running from Adam through Seth. Seth is the link on that line, and he called his son's name Enosh. That is, that he was liable to death. He was not going to build on *that* line; men then began to call on the name of the Lord. Faith was in exercise, culminating in Enoch. Now Cain *began* his line with Enoch; the same name. That means that the devil is taking on anticipatively what belongs to God. It is the same name exactly. So that Cain, or his posterity, would say, We have an Enoch too. We have education too. But there is no idea of the seventh from Adam in that education. The seventh from Adam, as having called his wife Eve, is the line of faith, whereas Cain's son is the line of this world. He calls the name of his son Enoch, and he calls the name of the city Enoch. They would say, This is the idea. This is the city, really, of the book, or the city of education, because all the sciences are in @Genesis 4; they are in Cain's world.
It is of the greatest importance that we should understand this elevation that we have been considering. It is education that comes out of heaven. Paul is the great leader in it. His ministry occasioned the burning of the books at Ephesus. But then *he* writes books; the greatest truths come out in his captivity epistles.
C.A.M. He uses the language which God had taken on. I refer to your remark that He robbed this world in that sense. Would you connect it with the fact that He led captivity captive?
J.T. Yes. God has taken the Greek language. He did not make it. It was part of the world's system, but He could use it, just as in the fall of Jericho certain things were taken on by God -- not everything, but certain metals. They belong to Himself, abstractly, and of course, man's mouth belongs to God. Greek was a human product, but it was a language that God could
{185}
use. They did not mean it for such use, but God used it. The Lord, having come through Decapolis, which is a realm of ten cities, found a man who could not speak right and could not hear, and this caused the Lord great exercise. What could it mean? It is the terrible effect of sin in man's mouth; man's mouth and man's ears and all the organs of hearing and seeing and speaking; but the Lord groaned. "And having spit, he touched his tongue; and looking up to heaven he groaned", @Mark 7: 33, 34. And the man spoke right. That is where it is said, "He does all things well; he makes both the deaf to hear, and the speechless to speak" (verse 37). How is God to be made known, save through man's mouth? It is said of Paul that he took the lead in speaking. Through speaking, the mind of God comes to us.
W.R. Isaiah confesses that he is a man of unclean lips, having heard in the temple, "Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory!" @Isaiah 6: 3. You can hardly reconcile that in the midst of such conditions.
J.T. Yes; and he was purged through the coal applied to his lips. The seraph touched his lips with the coal from the altar and he was purged. So that John says triumphantly, "These things said Esaias because he saw his glory and spoke of him", @John 12: 41. He became qualified to do it.
F.S.C. How would you reconcile Pentecost with the time of the Reformation?
J.T. It was the power of the Spirit there. They spoke with *tongues* at Pentecost, as is emphasised in @Acts 2; the power of speaking with tongues; but there were no such gifts in the days of the Reformation, or later. It is a question of men learning, through ordinary means that God provided, to bring out the Scriptures in the accuracy of the original languages in which they were written. Thus christians may be assured that what they have in their hands as the Bible, is divinely inspired.
{186}
A.B.P. If our young people feel restriction in education because of not being allowed to go to the universities, a study of the sanctified books would be a development in education which would help them in natural things as well as in being approved of God.
J.T. That is so, I am sure. You will find a spiritual, godly brother will get on in anything that is right. Piety is profitable for everything. I think the brethren will see that the education suggested in the cities we have referred to in @Joshua 15 was displaced by education divinely acquired. No doubt all the apostles spoke Greek and other needed languages. It is a matter of divine gift; the gift of tongues. "We hear them speaking in our own tongues the great things of God", @Acts 2: 11. With Paul, however, it was not so primarily; although he had tongues by the Spirit too. He said, "I thank God I speak in a tongue more than all of you", @1 Corinthians 14: 18. But evidently he knew Greek through ordinary education.
A.R. Of the twelve men at Ephesus, it is said they spoke with tongues and prophesied, corresponding with @Acts 2. They got the gift of tongues by the Holy Spirit.
J.T. These things are very practical, arising out of our brother's question as to Pentecost; how language came in then. It was not by education of the schools; it was by the sovereign gift of God by the Spirit; but later on, in the Reformation and in our times, it is a question of ordinary education. God helping certain men in acquiring what was needed for accurately translating the Scriptures. The Bible we have now is a product of that.
A.R. Paul says, "If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, ..." @1 Corinthians 13: 1. Would that show that the Holy Spirit is necessary to every feature of the ministry?
J.T. Just so. Everything must be by the Spirit. I think we all ought to try to get this thought of the heavenly line of things; how we are viewed in Ephesians,
{187}
anticipatively, as raised up together and made to sit down together. The *together* there refers to ourselves in the heavenlies in Christ. It is anticipative of the coming day, but it is also present, as a matter of light, to be taken in by faith, and entered on by the Spirit. That is what the upper springs mean; the power by the Spirit to apprehend and enter into heavenly things.
A.R. The Lord has ascended far above all heavens that He might fill all things; and from there we get gifts.
J.T. Exactly. It is from that point we get gifts. All come down from there.
J.T.Jr. Peter was adjusted on the heavenly side when the sheet came down. He had to be adjusted as to the brethren.
J.T. That is the lesson he had to learn; that the assembly is out of heaven. It is not the historical assembly; it is out of heaven. Peter's name is in the foundation, but the assembly coming down out of heaven involves Paul's line, and Peter had to understand that.
A.R. Would you look for every person who has gift to demonstrate in some way some heavenly feature?
J.T. That is the idea. "*He* has given some apostles". Notice the word *gift* in Ephesians includes the person; not only something in him, or something given to him, but himself. In Corinthians they are set in the assembly, but the gifts in Ephesians are from Christ in heaven to the assembly; the whole man is a gift. "Some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers" (chapter 4: 11). No sign gift is mentioned. It is what is going on today in the building up of the assembly. We do not need sign gifts when the whole truth is out.
Now, as to Judges; it is to be noted that the passage which we have read from Joshua is to be found also in judges; this meaning, I think, that it comes into our own time, the time of failure. Failure had taken place.
{188}
Sign gifts do not come into our times, but all that lies in the Spirit in an ordinary sense of gift to us is available. These springs come into our own times; remnant times; times of failure; and so we get Achsah in the book of judges. It is a question of springs in relation to heavenly places.
Ques. At the end of judges it is said, "In those days there was no king in Israel; every man did what was right in his own eyes" (chapter 21: 25). Does that synchronise with the present situation? Everybody does as he likes, whereas Gideon, in chapter 7, leads on spiritual lines.
J.T. And in Deborah's song we have the word that "leaders led in Israel" (chapter 5: 2). Then our verse reads, "Because of the voice of those who divide the spoil in the midst of the places of drawing water; there they rehearse the righteous acts of Jehovah, his righteous acts toward his villages in Israel. Then the people of Jehovah went down to the gates" (verse 11). That is regulated mutual service, and it is in the midst of the places of drawing water. It is a phase of our subject. It is important as to our Bible readings. It is after a great victory, and the prophetess alludes to persons who divide the spoil. Each one who participated in the battle would have some spoil. The allusion would be to the victory, the spoil, and the voice of those who divide it. How pleasing to heaven it must be at spiritual occasions where different voices are heard; not voices of this world, but those who divide spiritual spoil! Anything anyone has is to be divided. It is not to be his own in any selfish sense, but to be divided in the place of drawing water; that is, where people come to get the water. These voices are very suggestive.
A.R. Verse 10 says, "Ye that ride on white she-asses, ye that sit on carpets, and ye that walk by the way, consider" (verse 10). Does that enter into our Bible readings?
{189}
J.T. Yes; it is an appeal. These are matters for us to consider at the place of drawing water. You go there because you must have the water. But then, it is the voices that you hear there. What kind of voices do you hear at a well where there is nothing else to get but literal water? Usually nothing helpful. But when spiritual refreshment is sought, how different! Judges opens with the brightest days of the book of Joshua; that is, the springs which Caleb gave to his daughter. That is the thing, and it is what came out in the final recovery in the history of the assembly. It is the first thing brought up again; that is, Christ in heaven, and the Spirit here in the assembly. There was not the same outward testimony, for remnant times are in mind, but the general position, in principle, was secured.
A.N.W. That is evidently conveyed in the word "rehearsed".
J.T. I think that is just what has come out in this matter of conversational ministry, so to speak, where we converse with one another, as Paul did at Troas. They conversed after the breaking of bread and then they went away. It was the voices of those who divide the spoil at the places of drawing water; so it is not reformation! It is the revival of the earlier features.
A.B.P. The Spirit of God has allowed us to listen in, as it were, at the place of drawing of water in @John 4. Wonderful things were being spoken there -- "God is a spirit; and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth" (verse 24).
J.T. The whole of John's ministry, especially his gospel, is to bring us back to the beginning in our *consciousness*, and so the Lord says of the Spirit in chapter 14, "And I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter" (verse 16). "He ... will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you" (verse 26). That is, the first things are brought up again. "Remembrance" runs along with the effect of the Lord's supper.
{190}
F.H.L. Would the end of @Acts 2 be included?
J.T. Yes. The whole position is brought back in the way of light, and the Holy Spirit brings back the consciousness of it.
C.A.M. It gives a wonderful meaning to the book of Judges. It is a rather depressing book, but what you are referring to, bringing it into these last hundred years, really gives it a very beautiful link.
J.T. The angel's activity in chapter 13 enters into this. He did "wondrously"; but in that same chapter you have Samson. He represents the underlying thought of God. He *grows*. He grows up and he is blessed of Jehovah, and the Spirit moves him in the camp of Daniel The Spirit moves him; that is the thing. That brings you back to the beginning. It is a question of spiritual movement; "for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14. That is what has come out in our times. It is not great exploits, but it is growing up normally. We are not coming in by short cuts; we have grown up in the position if we are in it according to God, and then the Spirit moves you in "the camp of Dan", that is, your own locality.
F.N.W. Would these references to the places of drawing water, the villages and the gates, have in mind recovery of the local assembly truth?
J.T. I think so. The village would allude to the local assembly, I think. Now things are as they should be. Leaders are leading, and villages are being revived. In earlier days it was not so, Deborah says.
A.R. So that there was a revival according to what she says in verse 12: "Awake, awake, Deborah! awake, awake, utter a song! Arise, Barak, and lead captive thy captives". That is really @Ephesians 4. It is going back to what was at the beginning.
J.T. I think that is the lesson in what we are engaged with now in Judges; the revival of what had ceased. It has come to light again. So you have leaders who led in Israel -- gates and villages that did not exist before,
{191}
but they do now, she says; and this matter of "the voice of those who divide the spoil in the midst of the places of drawing water" is most suggestive. It is like the Bible readings, we may say, because it is through them largely, that the truth has been developed.
T.E.H. In a small local meeting, there are great difficulties in dividing the spoil with so few at the readings.
J.T. The volume may be small, but normally there will be something. A meeting may invite other meetings in a district, but this does not impair its status; but a *district* special meeting would, and should, be avoided. Deborah says here, "In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the roads were unused, and the travellers on highways went by crooked paths. The villages ceased in Israel, ceased until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel" (verses 6, 7). That is what you need in the little meetings; not simply the spoil, but motherly qualities, persons who can provide and convey the mind of God.
J.T.Jr. What our brother suggests in regard to small meetings might come out in chapter 7 where the army was greatly reduced. The fact that they were reduced did not mean there was not enough to carry on.
J.T. There were plenty to carry on; there were too many. That raises another important question as to the use of the water. Do we use the water, taking it lazily or naturally, or taking it with the agility and skill of a dog? The point is to do it in a way that does not involve any loss of time. The battle does not suffer from your natural necessities. So that, "Bring them down to the water" is a remarkable thing, entering into our subject. "And Jehovah said to Gideon, Still the people are many; bring them down to the water, and I will try them for thee there, and it shall be, that of whom I shall say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I shall say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go. And he brought down the people to the water; and Jehovah
{192}
said to Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down on his knees to drink" (verses 4, 5). This is the test. Those who drink like a dog are set by themselves; and the others likewise. And then we are told, "And the number of them that lapped, with their hand to their mouth, were three hundred men; and all the rest of the people bowed down on their knees to drink water" (verse 6). So that the test is there, and the great majority were exposed to be just natural. They are assuming to be with Gideon, but they are exposed as on natural lines.
A.B.P. The water here would be a type of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes. The general position is the spring Harod. It is a spring, the name of which means 'trembling' -- alluding to the state of the people. That is where they were.
J.T.Jr. It is not those who *stay* home here; it is those who are *sent* home.
J.T. They are exposed, and hence under reproach in the eyes of the spiritual. Those who lapped like a dog are mentioned first, and in the eyes of heaven they are taking the water properly. That is, in a spiritual sense; it is not done in a natural way, but in an unnatural way.
A.B.P. We should not say, 'That was a very good meeting', and then promptly forget what was ministered. Rather, we should be moved by what we have gathered up.
J.T. Quite so. You are marked off, set by yourself. Heaven is looking on. The spiritual are looking on. It is *how* you take the water; *how* you attend the meetings; *how* you read the Bible; *how* you appropriate spiritual things.
F.H.L. What would you say about the twenty-two thousand who were afraid to go on?
J.T. They were fearful. It must be borne in mind that this is a divine test. God is not saying they are bad people. He is bringing out one thing. He is going to
{193}
reduce the number lest Israel should vaunt themselves, and God takes this way to make the test -- how we appropriate the Spirit. The test is as to where we are; whether we are doing it on natural lines or on spiritual lines. "And now proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whoever is timid and afraid, let him go back and turn from mount Gilead. And there went back of the people twenty-two thousand; and there remained ten thousand" (verse 3). It is a remarkable process. Now this is going to be very drastic. It was a great test for Gideon and all the spiritual, but gradually they would see the wisdom of God, that this victory is going to be *in the power of God*: "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts", @Zechariah 4: 6; and that comes out in the persons being affected rightly in partaking of the Spirit. We must go on, for whether it is eternal counsel or ministry, it is God's own number, and everybody, in final result -- indeed *everything* must depend on God's number, and He brings out His number here by this test.
R.W.S. It seems to be a secret test. God does not seem to tell Gideon what it is going to be, as if we can be prepared for it.
J.T. It is the test that is going on. There is nothing happening among the people of God that He is not noticing. That is seen here. I will try them for thee, He says. Mark you, it was only when they went down to the water. It is remarkable how the passage reads. God says to Gideon, "Bring them down to the water, and I will try them for thee there" (verse 4). Notice, it is *there*. "And it shall be, that of whom I shall say unto thee. This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I shall say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go". Well, how is it done? God says it is through the way they take the water. He is acting through the way they appropriate the water, showing who the real ones are. "And he brought down the people to the water; and
{194}
Jehovah said to Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth ..." (verse 5). He did not tell him that at the beginning; He kept this back until they were at the water. Jehovah says, "By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and give Midian into thy hand; and let all the people go every man to his place" (verse 7). That is, God is doing it, so that nobody will escape what is going on amongst us. He is dealing with every matter and every person.
C.A.M. I suppose the three hundred must have remained on their feet, or were ready to continue at once. It is quite a test when we are in the presence of spiritual ministry, to be ready to make a move at once.
{195}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (11)
@Judges 15: 14 - 19; @2 Samuel 23: 13 - 17; @Song of Songs 4: 12 - 15
J.T. It is thought that our subject should be linked up with these three well-known servants of God and types of Christ -- Samson, David and Solomon. The link of the assembly with Samson is not so clear as it is with David and Solomon, but I think we shall see that the marital idea, as it stands related to him, reaches out to the assembly, though faintly; and that his ministry involves a type of the Lord's supper in its intended freshness; and in relation to that, the well, or spring, at Lehi. The general idea in Samson is nazariteship; fully seen in Christ, but also seen in all those who are characteristically in the testimony by the Spirit. We can only understand his history by connecting him as a type with the governing or male side in the history of the assembly. It is in that connection that we can link on the marital side, which comes into view at once in his history, vague and obscure indeed; yet God intended to bring about his proposed marriage to do damage to the enemy. Chapter 13 brings in the weakness of the male side in the testimony, and yet it was there; the female side, in Manoah's wife, representing the assembly in some sense, in its instinctive intelligence as to what transpired. Manoah scarcely understood, but was recognised, nevertheless.
What is immediately connected with the passage read, is the delivering up of Samson by his own people -- that is, by Judah -- to the Philistines; so that there we have a clear link with the beginning of christianity, in the betrayal of Christ by the Jews. Then deliverance by what is marked by *freshness* -- the fresh jawbone -- and then the Spirit supporting the position, typified in a spring.
C.A.M. In connection with the marital side, would you say that such a verse as "Jealousy is cruel as Sheol"
{196}
@Song of Songs 8: 6, would be seen in Samson's attack on the Philistines, because his wife was given to another? She had pleased him well, according to chapter 14.
J.T. He clearly had the marital idea in mind, and God was in it. There was opposition to him in it, not only on the part of his father and mother, but on the part of the Philistines; but God acted against them through it. Although this woman never became his wife in the ordinary sense -- God seems to have prevented that -- yet the idea of marriage was there, and an idea by itself may be right, although for other reasons it may fail in application. David had the idea of building the house, which was right so far, but for certain reasons it could not be carried out.
J.S. Do we have a democratic spirit in judges? "In those days there was no king in Israel; every man did what was right in his own eyes" (chapter 21: 25).
J.T. Just so; but Samson is not marked by that. The facts of his birth and childhood are very significant. "And the child grew, and Jehovah blessed him. And the Spirit of Jehovah began to move him at Mahaneh-Dan", @Judges 13: 24, 25. That is a good start, and we must link it on with the abstract idea of nazariteship, which ran through Samson's life, and through which God greatly weakened the enemy's power; that is, in the ultimate result. The general result of a ministry has to be taken into account. Samson generally was successful against the Philistines.
W.F.K. Are the Philistines a type of certain elements in christendom which are opposed to Christ and the assembly?
J.T. They would seek to frustrate whatever is of God, however faint.
W.F.K. The Philistines shouted (chapter 15: 14).
J.T. They were so against him; he was their enemy -- characteristically so. A man is usually judged, as to his fundamentals by the company he keeps, by the
{197}
people he likes or dislikes; and Samson is marked throughout as an inveterate enemy of the Philistines, as they, in their turn, were against him. You can usually tell where a brother is by noting his affiliations.
A.N.W. The Philistines were ruling Israel during his time (chapter 14: 4). "And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years" (chapter 15: 20).
J.T. That is significantly stated in the section before us; that is, after he is refreshed through the well, or spring.
A.B.P. Does Samson, as a type, fit historically into the dark ages when the idea of the assembly was vague?
J.T. Yes, but I think he fits in throughout, as a type, blessed of God. He *grew*, it is said; he was normal. It is nazariteship normally; damaged later, but still there. Abstractly, christendom has never been without the principle of nazariteship, and chapter 16 shows that it revives. It becomes dim, but revives in the regrowth of Samson's hair. Life comes into evidence again, and he slays more in his death than in his life.
L.E.S. Nazariteship is really the test of recovery, and the end becomes morally equal to the beginning.
J.T. That is what I think it means; his hair began to grow, and that pointed to the end of the Philistine domination. He destroyed more in his death than in his life. I think if we look at it in that general way, we shall get help in seeing that the principle of nazariteship runs through. God sees to that. The Holy Spirit being here is the guarantee of it in however few it may be. It is there, and towards the end, it comes out in renewed power. The well is the secret of this. Samson was exhausted in the great effort against the Philistines, and he cried out and God answered. The spring is called 'the caller's spring'; that cry has been heard among the brethren for many years -- expression of need for the power of the Spirit.
{198}
J.T.Jr. Is God's thought seen in chapter 14, where it says Jehovah was seeking an occasion against the Philistines?
J.T. Yes. The remarkable riddle which he propounded drew them into it. He put them in a tight place so that they were reduced morally, as unable to answer the riddle. I think it is to bring out how God takes occasion to expose what is against Him; to bring up issues so as to expose them.
J.S. Is the *little strength* of Philadelphia over against the greatness of the Philistine strength?
J.T. Yes. Samson always had strength until he allowed his secret to be disclosed. So long as he retains his secret, he has power, no matter what else happens.
A.R. What is the difference between the power of nazariteship, as seen in the hair, and in the power of the Holy Spirit? The word 'move' as used in the end of chapter 13 is said to denote powerful emotion. "And the Spirit of Jehovah began to move him".
J.T. The two ideas go together. Nazariteship is the secret of power. You see its full freshness and power in that verse. The next thing is this desire of his; the marital desire brings God into the matter in a mysterious sort of way in order to bring about the defeat of the enemy. God is always against the enemy; however much he may be against God. God never fails to be against him, and uses mysterious methods of exposing him and defeating him.
J.S. Does the secret of our power lie in the indwelling of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes; but associated with nazariteship. Samson's hair was not to be shorn and certain things were to be disallowed in his food, as stated in @Numbers 6. Here it is said that his mother was not to eat of anything "that cometh of the vine, neither shall she drink wine or strong drink, nor eat anything unclean" (chapter 13: 14). Also, verse 5 says, "For lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son, and no razor shall come on his head; for
{199}
the boy shall be a Nazarite of God from the womb; and he shall begin to save Israel out of the hand of the Philistines". Note that it says he shall *begin* to do it. The elimination of certain food is in mind in relation to nazariteship, and the growth of the hair is to mark one off as different from the world. His manhood is different. He does not develop manhood according to the flesh. It is an important matter for young people, because the world appeals to them and stimulates them. What stimulates naturally is to be eliminated from what you feed on spiritually, or mentally. Therefore the importance of young people keeping with God's people and eating the right food.
G.A.T. Would you help me on the thought of the Philistine woman here? You were saying we should keep with the right company.
J.T. Yes; those who are clean, according to the teaching of @Leviticus 11. The Philistines are the opposite to that. They represent men that come into the profession without any godly exercise at all; without accepting the death of Christ. They are walking on natural lines; and this secret of nazariteship is necessary to overthrow them.
T.M. Would keeping the right company be exemplified in Daniel?
J.T. Yes; and the refusal to eat certain food, because, spiritually, food involves the company we keep. So that in the type in Leviticus, certain animals are eliminated because they allude to persons; persons, for instance, who do not chew the cud and have not a divided hoof; that is, their walk is not right; while they may come to the meetings, they do not assimilate the food. We are to choose our company, and the young people ought to be with the Lord's people, instead of keeping worldly company. Nazariteship means that you are *different* from the world. The long hair means that you do not have their manhood, but manhood according to God.
{200}
A.R. John the baptist was a nazarite, but I suppose it is supremely seen in the Lord Jesus. No one understood Him well, not even His own mother.
J.T. Quite so; John the baptist was very remarkable in this respect. Of him the angel said, "He shall drink no wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb", @Luke 1: 15. He was in the deserts, where the flesh would not be nourished, where its growth would be prevented. There is nothing in the desert to minister to the natural. One idea in nazariteship is that God helps us, by our environment, to maintain it; it is not only *one* desert but *the deserts* in the case of the Baptist. In contrast to the cities, he lived in the deserts.
I think we should look at the marital principle attached to Samson. It is seen vaguely, and even wrongly, as carried to consummation, yet God was in it *initially* and was thus *against the enemy*. It is somewhat low ground, but such as God can have part in in a limited way. If God is seeking an occasion against the enemy, then it is well to follow up the line and see how far God has part in it and how far He has not part in it. Discernment is needed.
C.A.M. You were connecting the book of Judges with the last century. Do you not think that one feature of the revival then was that there was something precious in a marital way to be secured from the enemy's camp? At least, that suggestion must have been there before what we know about the assembly now could come to light.
J.T. Yes; the Church of Ireland came into prominence, and the disestablishment of that Church caused deep sympathy in certain ones. Mr. Darby wrote about it as to the place that it had in his own affections. For the moment, God was acting against the enemy through it. It stood against Roman Catholicism. Roman Catholics were being converted in large numbers in those days, and the leading men in the Church of Ireland
{201}
sought the Government's support and the like; they imposed religious tests, and the conversions ceased; thus the enemy got the advantage; but primarily, the Church of Ireland had a place that God recognised, though vaguely. Up to the present day, one believes that the Church of England corresponds with Michal, the daughter of Saul. Saul would do damage to David through her and her sister Merab, but Michal, on one occasion, saved David in spite of that. She did not go very far, nor could God go very far with her. Later, she was disallowed altogether, but she saved David's life, and it is said she loved him. I mention all this to indicate how certain things are taken on by God for a purpose, and to a point, and afterwards refused.
L.E.S. What you are saying would greatly help us in our local difficulties, or in universal matters, in discerning the current mind of God and His activities.
J.T. That is what you get here: "And Samson went down to Timnathah, and saw a woman in Timnathah of the daughters of the Philistines. And he went up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman" (verses 1, 2). That is all very good. Marriage was right, although he was linking on with a forbidden person. But God is a Man of war, and, knowing everything, would use this thought of Samson's against the enemy. "And his father and his mother said to him, Is there no woman among the daughters of thy brethren, and among all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the Philistines, the uncircumcised?" That was right, too, so far. "And Samson said to his father, Take her for me, for she pleases me well. And his father and his mother did not know that it was of Jehovah" (verses 3, 4). That is a matter to be understood; God was acting, and Samson's father and mother, while moving on right principles as far as they understood, did not know all; they did not see the platform on which God was moving in the book of Judges; so that it goes on to say, "Jehovah ... was seeking an occasion against the
{202}
Philistines. Now at that time the Philistines were ruling over Israel". That is the point. The domination of the Philistines was dreadful, and God was going to attack in this mysterious way, and He succeeded. It is a question of the instrumentality that God took up at the time, and how far He could go. J.N.D. spoke of the Church of Ireland with peculiar regard at a certain time, and God used it against the enemy *then*. It was about to be set aside by the civil authorities as a national church and this would make its position more in accord with Christ as rejected. The marital thought was there, but very dimly; the true assembly had already come to light, and no one loyal to Christ, while valuing what was of Him in the system referred to, could identify himself with it.
A.R. What is the idea in the incident of the lion? "And he turned aside to see the carcase of the lion; and behold, there was a swarm of bees in the carcase of the lion, and honey; and he took it out in his hands, and went on, and ate as he went. And he came to his father and to his mother, and gave them, and they ate; but he did not tell them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion" (verses 8, 9) -- as if it were still a mystery.
J.T. It is a remarkable thing that this peculiar figure of the death of Christ should come in here. God is surrounding Himself with facts that preserve the truth, and yet you can see, if you pursue the marital thought here too far, you get into error. The woman never became Samson's permanent wife. God prevented that; but He got a blow at the Philistines. That is the thing to see. God is acting against them. Whenever He can get a blow at them He will take advantage of it. It is striking that, in David's history, this is seen in connection with his marriage to Michal. Saul thought to do him harm, but his proposal involved an attack on the Philistines (@1 Samuel 18: 22 - 30).
J.S. In what way do you bring in the Lord's supper?
{203}
J.T. I was thinking of chapter 15 -- the *fresh* jawbone: the death of Christ is seen there as the means of the overthrow of the enemy. In chapter 14 it is said, "Samson went down, and his father and his mother, to Timnathah; and they came to the vineyards of Timnathah. And behold, a young lion roared against him; and the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and he rent it as one rends a kid, and nothing was in his hand. And he did not tell his father or his mother what he had done" (verses 5, 6). Apparently they were not equal to it; they were running counter to what God was doing, although they had the best of intentions. He is working with God in the thing. "And he went down and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson well". (Now, these are beautiful expressions, *if you have the right woman*. Today, she exists and this is known. This is seen in Philadelphia.) "And he returned after a time to take her, and he turned aside to see the carcase of the lion; and behold, there was a swarm of bees in the carcase of the lion, and honey". That is a *new* principle. It is *mutuality*. And it marked the movement of one hundred years ago. The brethren began to meet *together*. That is mutuality. That is what God is bringing out. It is the means of the overthrow, in great measure, of clericalism. I have in mind what is suggested by the bees. They represent mutuality; life, too, but they are very active *together*. And so we have, "And behold, there was a swarm of bees in the carcase of the lion, and honey; and he took it out in his hands, and went on, and ate as he went" (verses 8, 9). There is something proceeding now; it is life out of death, but it is life in mutuality. The Lord says, "Have ye anything here to eat? And they gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb", @Luke 24: 41, 42. The honeycomb is the product of bees; a mutual product. That will overthrow these big men, because that is the idea. Samson did not completely overthrow them. It remained for David to do that, but Samson *began* to do
{204}
it. He is doing it in this way. Brethren are mutual, and they have something to eat in their mutuality, and can give it to others. That is what Samson's father and mother needed. They needed honey, the Messiah's food; "Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good", @Isaiah 7: 15.
And then it goes on to say, "And he came to his father and to his mother, and gave them, and they ate; but he did not tell them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion" (verse 9). He would let them find out. It is going to be a riddle, and in the anti-type it has tested the whole of christendom. Who can tell what this is? "Out of the eater came forth food, and out of the strong came forth sweetness" (verse 14). The Philistines could not answer that riddle. And Samson said later, that they could not have done so had they not ploughed with his heifer. His wife wept before him for the whole seven days to get this secret. The Philistines could never get it; they are only men, without the Spirit. But true christians have the Spirit, and He searches the depths of God; and it is said that christians know all things, having an unction from the Holy One (@1 John 2: 20). The Lord, it is said, will give us understanding in all things. Thus christians have the means of understanding and need not be baffled by riddles.
L.E.S. Five words with the understanding are better than ten thousand in an unknown tongue (see @1 Corinthians 14: 19).
J.T. The apostle also says, "I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding", @1 Corinthians 14: 15.
J.T.Jr. This incident brings out the true character of the Philistines; the murderous spirit that was in them. They would slay the woman, which they did later. Is that not at the bottom of the Philistine religious element?
{205}
J.T. Quite so. God allows that. She had served a purpose, and that is the end of it. Samson proceeded to further things that were incongruous, but there is a great principle established in chapter 14. It is a secret, and you have to find it out. The Philistines can only find things out by getting them from others. In order to get knowledge of the truth for their own purposes, they have to go to believers, because they cannot get it for themselves from God. They do not know the idea of the temple of God. I know people who would ask you to give them something new; and they would get books to give them something new to preach about. That is the position of the Philistines here. Samson's wife became the discloser of the secret, and she obtained it on natural lines.
C.A.M. "But we speak God's wisdom in a mystery", @1 Corinthians 2: 7.
J.T. The apostle also speaks of the hidden wisdom, which God predetermined before the ages for our glory.
Rem. He also says, "... communicating spiritual things by spiritual means", @1 Corinthians 2: 13.
C.H.H. The apostle would have the Colossians know the mystery.
J.T. Quite so; "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge", @Colossians 2: 3. The angels desire to look into the all-various wisdom of God in the mystery.
W.B-w. The word *explain* is mentioned ten times in this chapter, @Judges 14. Is it a question of opening up the thing, which they could not do?
J.T. Yes, they could not do it. Mr. Stoney used to say to those who claimed assembly status and did not have it, 'Give me one page of notepaper on the church'. They could not do it, because one must have the Holy Spirit in a characteristic way to know the mystery.
W.B-w. Those who have the Spirit may understand.
J.T. That is the idea. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in
{206}
you?" @1 Corinthians 3: 16. So that if we make room for the Spirit of God, we shall know the truth.
A.B.P. The apostle Paul, in speaking of things that it was not lawful for man to utter, did not imply that it was impossible for others to *know* them, did he?
J.T. His ministry would be influenced by the impressions he had, but apparently he did not use the words.
A.B.P. What he said, however, would be a stimulus to others to find out something of those things.
J.T. Exactly; get into heavenly places. That is what I believe would be the impression.
Now chapter 15 brings out further thoughts entering into our subject. There is in it another piece of poetry,
<blockquote> "With the jawbone of an ass, a heap, two heaps, <br>With the jawbone of an ass have I slain a thousand men". </blockquote>
"And it came to pass when he had ended speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place Ramath-Lehi" (verses 16, 17), meaning 'hill of the jawbone'. That is what is intended to be kept in our minds. The jawbone was *fresh*. It is the death of Christ maintained in freshness, corresponding really with the Lord's supper. The men of Judah delivered Samson over to the enemy, and then it says, "When he came to Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him. And the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and the cords that were on his arms became as threads of flax that are burned with fire" (verse 14). All this would be overwhelming to the Philistines. What is all this? Samson is really an enigma because he is a nazarite. The secret of God was with him. It is a question of the elimination of natural stimulants. We have the secret of God by the Spirit. They never could understand it. Samson's life is a hidden matter. The things of God are revealed by the Spirit, and as having the Spirit, believers have the mind of Christ. Paul says, so that real christians can understand. "And his bands loosed from off his hands. And he found a fresh jawbone
{207}
of an ass, and put forth his hand and took it, and slew with it a thousand men" (verse 15). It is not merely a new one but a *fresh* one. I suppose it means the death of the Lord Jesus maintained in freshness, and this by the Spirit. It is thus as fresh to faith as it was when He died. It is the same thing to faith -- the freshness of that precious death of Jesus. The jawbone would mean that Samson had been *assimilating*. He was in the rock, the place of security, before it had happened, we are told. So that he would be assimilating the precious thoughts of Christ's death. The jawbone in the sacrifices, belonged to the priests (@Deuteronomy 18: 3). It is the means of chewing food properly. The appropriation and assimilation of Christ, as in @John 6, enters into all this.
<blockquote> "And Samson said, <br>With the jawbone of an ass, a heap, two heaps, <br>With the jawbone of an ass have I slain a thousand men". </blockquote>
That is in poetry, meaning victory too; the Spirit of God is acting on his mind and affections, so that he is putting the victory into beautiful words for us to retain.
Then he becomes exhausted, showing that he is a real man like ourselves in that sense. We do get exhausted, and thus need refreshment. And if the secrecy of nazariteship is to continue, and the power of God is to continue against the enemy, then there must be the *spring*, and God provides that. "And he was very thirsty, and called on Jehovah, and said, Thou hast given by the hand of thy servant this great deliverance, and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? And God clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi, and water came out of it. And he drank, and his spirit came again, and he revived. Therefore its name was called En-hakkore, which is in Lehi to this day" (verses 18, 19). En-hakkore means 'the caller's spring'. That Samson's judgeship "in the days
{208}
of the Philistines twenty years" is placed here in the history, would be to distinguish it by the great event of the jawbone and the spring -- it enabled him to *continue*. The period of his service is also mentioned after his death, with no reference to the Philistines.
J.S. Is it the secret of assimilating here? We might come to a reading and get no good from it because we do not assimilate the food afforded.
J.T. That is right; and then there is the spring for refreshment, so as to continue in the power that belongs to nazariteship.
A.B.P. Is that an added thought to the Spirit of Jehovah moving him inwardly?
J.T. Well, there is *renewal*, as Paul says, the "renewal of the Holy Spirit". This continues. You realise it; the Spirit comes in in peculiar freshness and power in an emergency. It does not mean the christian would ever lose the presence of the Spirit, but he may lose the *sense* of it, and feel weak, and God refreshes him. It is *the caller's spring*. You know where to go for support. "The Spirit joins also its help to our weakness", @Romans 8: 26.
G.A.T. Had you any thought of his throwing the jawbone away?
J.T. I think it would be that you do not repeat that again. You do not use the same ministry word for word, as having taken on an historical character. If the word has taken on an historical character, it is finished. Others may use it in another way; but that is what is meant, I think. It goes with the idea of freshness in the jawbone. You still keep on masticating, and hence have fresh material in view of further ministry or conflict.
J.S. You would avoid *stock sermons*.
C.H.H. Would there be any similarity in this to what we get in 2 Corinthians, where the apostle Paul defeats the Philistine element, and then he is refreshed in his
{209}
spirit by the coming of Titus, after the victory over what was attacking the assembly at Corinth?
J.T. Just so; also, he says to Philemon, "The bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee, brother", (verse 7). But then it is God doing that here; the believer knowing where he can turn. The power of continuance is in the Spirit.
Ques. The Bereans searched out the Scriptures. Does that enter into this matter of assimilation?
J.T. They would verify things. They did not swallow them without masticating them. The jawbone and the maw were given to the priest. The jawbone is for mastication, and the maw for digestion or assimilation. That is what marks the priest; "that he may stand to serve in the name of Jehovah, he and his sons continually", @Deuteronomy 18: 3 - 5.
W.W.M. Would the putting aside of the jawbone correspond in thought with the manna which was not to be kept to the morning? It was to be fresh each morning.
J.T. That is the idea.
A.B.P. We should not hesitate to use the same scripture time and time again, should we?
J.T. If we could not re-use Scripture, we would need more than one Bible.
A.B.P. It would be terrible assumption for us to think that we had gotten all out of a scripture and could not use it again.
J.T. That would never do. The more you look into any given scripture, and use it, the more it yields.
A.A.T. What did you have in mind about David and the well of Bethlehem?
J.T. That is the next thing. David comes into view now. He stands in relation to the marital matter. Abigail is an outstanding type of the assembly. It is important to keep that in mind. As to the associations at Bethlehem, and the wifely relation entering into it,
{210}
it is first mentioned in relation to Rachel, the first love of Jacob. Rachel died there; a most touching matter. So that evidently we are to think of the Lord Jesus here and certain reflections that He must have in regard to earlier events. What occasions of joy in the history of the assembly! And what occasions of sorrow, too! The ecclesiastical gospel is Matthew, and it begins with "Rachel weeping for her children" (chapter 2: 18).
A.N.W. The Philistines again are in the way here; they still obstruct.
J.T. David defeats them wholly; he subdues them. These mighty men were used in this. But why should he be so concerned about *that* well? His boyhood, perhaps, centred in it, with its associations and affections; but then, in a wider way, Rachel's sepulchre; her death at the birth of Benjamin, and his own ancestry from Boaz and Ruth down to Jesse resided there, whom Jehovah calls, "Jesse the Bethlehemite". Later, Bethlehem is called "the city of David". I think the Lord would bring before us what occasions the joy and sorrow of His heart. It is a question today as to whether there is anything to minister refreshment to Him from it. Can we stop to think of what sorrows and joys the Lord has experienced since Pentecost? Can we go back to the history of the assembly in Palestine, Asia Minor, Greece, Italy, Spain, France, and England? What experiences the Lord has had in all that history! Can we think with Him, and is there any little power to break through and secure for Him some refreshment? "Oh that one would give me to drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is in the gate!" @2 Samuel 23: 15. How sorrowful it was that the garrison of the Philistines was there! But the well, peculiarly known to David, was there. Can anyone give him to drink of it now? Think of the sorrows in our own time through persons who have turned away! They are held by the Philistines. Can the Lord secure refreshment from them again?
{211}
C.A.H. Would it have some answer in the revival under Ezra? Some wept when they remembered the glory of the first house.
J.T. Yes, that sort of thing. I often think of the Lord thus. How can He but remember the first love of Ephesus! He could never forget that. What times He had at Ephesus! Here David is thinking of this well. The Philistine garrison is there, and he wants to drink water out of that well, and he gets it through the devoted affection of the three mighty men.
L.E.S. "Oh that my head were waters, and mine eye a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people! Oh that I had in the wilderness a traveller's lodging-place, that I might leave my people, and go away from them!" @Jeremiah 9: 1, 2. That would be the idea, would it not?
J.T. Yes; it is very beautiful to link the weeping saints of the Old Testament with the weeping saints of the New and see them all centre in Christ. "And the three mighty men broke through the camp of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, which is in the gate, and took it, and brought it to David; however he would not drink of it, but poured it out to Jehovah. And he said, Be it far from me. Jehovah, that I should do this thing! is it not the blood of the men that went at the risk of their lives? Therefore he would not drink it. These things did the three mighty men", @2 Samuel 23: 16, 17. So that not only David -- typically Christ -- is refreshed, but God is refreshed. It is the passing on of great spiritual exploits in their fulness to God.
{212}
WELLS AND SPRINGS (12)
@Psalm 46: 4, 5; @Revelation 22: 1, 2; @Song of Songs 4: 12 - 15
J.T. I think this term, "the river of God", fits into the conclusion of our inquiry. The phraseology in this Psalm is peculiarly spiritual as covering the great thought of a river of refreshing power, symbolical of the Spirit, which runs through the Scriptures. The Psalms being representative of *experience*, the term would flow from that side, coming from a person who had faith: "There is a river the streams whereof make glad the city of God" (verse 4). *There is* a river. This is intended to fit permanently with us, and would come up in doleful times. The river in @Revelation 22 points to its final service in the millennium, showing that the great thought with which we have been engaged will run through to the end of God's testimony. It will be the source of life in millennial times, the tree of life also being seen on either side of it and in the street of the city, bearing twelve manner of fruits. It is a yearly matter, time yet being taken account of. The matter is divided up into twelve months, but extending on to the end of time. The position does not take us beyond that, but it shows that this great principle of the river gives character to the millennial period; and in a monthly way. And finally, it is thought that it is due to the Lord that we should see that what has been before us is held in an exclusive sense for Him, as in @Song of Songs 4.
J.S. Why is it put abstractly in the psalm -- "There is a river"?
J.T. But it is more than that -- *there is* a river. It is information, but clearly of what is known experimentally. In order to determine what it is, you have to understand the city of God, the sanctuary of the habitations of the Most High; so it taxes us as to our experience.
{213}
A.B.P. Did you have in mind to say something further on the Song of Songs?
J.T. Just to bring out the subject; it is due to the Lord that it should reach its conclusion with features which are exclusively for Him; not that it is exclusive, but certain features are so presented here in this book which describes the reciprocated affection between Christ and Israel, or Christ and the assembly. So that the word is, "A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed" (verse 12), and then "A fountain in the gardens, a well of living waters, which stream from Lebanon" (verse 15). It seems the Lord would cherish that thought; that there is something exclusive for Him. But while the exclusive thought is there, verse 16 shows discipline is needed to bring out what is in the garden.
Rem. There is a note which links the title of @Psalm 46 with "virgins" in chapter 1 of the Canticles.
J.T. Yes, "Alamoth", which may mean virgin voices. That is suggestive in regard to our subject, which involves Christ and the assembly. The Lord would leave us with an extended thought of this great subject which we have been considering; it is brought in at the beginning of time and at the end of time; it runs right through, so as to keep everything fresh and fragrant. We read, "Thou wilt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures", @Psalm 36: 8, which would allude to Eden. Eden is pleasure, and the idea is therefore carried on experimentally, covering all time, so as to prevent us from staleness, especially when we get old; that we should be active in freshness and vigour, bearing fruit in old age.
A.B.P. Would there be a link between what you have said and @Revelation 22: 17, where "the Spirit and the bride say, Come", and then the invitation to take the water of life? "He that will, let him take the water of life freely".
{214}
J.T. That is clearly an allusion to what we are engaged with; the water of life is available. The psalmist says, "There is a river". It is no small thought. Its streams "make glad the city of God". We have to understand experimentally how the Spirit of God uses various persons. The streams would allude to persons.
J.S. Is @Song of Songs 5 the undoing of what the serpent did in the garden? "I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse", (verse 1).
J.T. Just so; the Lord is there unhinderedly; there is no serpent there; a very important point.
A.MacN. Would you say something about the streams of that river which have such a wonderful effect upon the city itself?
J.T. It is experimental, as we have said. We have to bear in mind that although the Psalms have the authority of Scripture, yet it is Scripture coming through experience with God. The allusion therefore would be to what was in the garden. The river flowed out of Eden, we are told, which has the idea of pleasure. And then it was parted and became four main streams, or heads. If Adam were to write a psalm, he would tell us something about these streams as well as the main river itself. That is the way to get at these things. The Pentateuch has five books, conveying, generally, the mind of God; the Psalms are divided into five books, but they present the truth in connection with experience. Thus light comes to us as worked out in the experience of men by the Spirit of God; hence the Psalms are a good witness to the power of these streams; the various writers of the five books.
R.W.S. Would this gladness normally be experienced in the meeting for prayer?
J.T. I think it would fit in there. I suppose you are alluding to the book of Isaiah where God makes certain ones glad in His house of prayer. One has been impressed with the idea of gladness in this psalm, because there is so much sadness. There is more sadness than
{215}
there is cause for, because we do not attend to these streams and appropriate their refreshing power. We may get it in these special meetings.
A.N.W. Would the river suggest wealth in volume, and the streams the adaptability of that volume to our needs; the needs of the city?
J.T. I think that is the way it works out. Some of us have been in certain places where there is a variety of streams. The water is caused to come to certain sections of the city for its refreshment. You have, in that way, the suggestion of the adaptability of water. It comes to you if you make a channel for it, and the channels would be persons of ability; persons fitted by God to carry the water, as it were, to the places where it can be used effectively in a gladsome way.
R.W.S. That would be seen at Philippi?
J.T. They had the river, and the apostle began there with prayer with the women, and the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, making her a stream, as it were. The Lord opened her heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul. And in due course she invited the apostle into her house, if he accounted her to be faithful to the Lord. He would find refreshment there. So we are told that when he was about to leave after all his bitter experience, he went to *her*; not simply to her house, but to her. When he and Silas were in the prison they sang praises to God and the prisoners heard them. The prisoners were listening; that is, refreshment was tapped into that prison.
A.N.W. It spread out to the jailer's house. It says that he rejoiced with all his house.
J.T. That is good. It shows just what we are saying. The stream was flowing.
A.B.P. And he used the water to wash them, too. He washed their stripes.
J.T. There was the gladness with which he believed; and he believed *householdly*. He was the stream, through which the blessing was coming in. It came in
{216}
through Paul and Silas first, but his whole house is now being affected by him. He rejoiced with all his house.
A.R. In Genesis, in Ezekiel, and in Revelation, the rivers are extensive in the way of influence. From this psalm it would appear that the only place where it effects gladness is in the city.
J.T. Well, it carries the thought of experience -- and that is what should appeal to all of us. Ezekiel could write a psalm, too. We have been speaking of Adam writing a psalm -- what he could say about the rivers -- but Ezekiel writes a psalm, we may say, for he gives us an account of his experience in the river. It becomes *plural* in his experience! It is a "double river" in his experience, after he was brought back to it. He begins with waters to the ankles, a thousand cubits being measured by the man with the line. How refreshing it would be! Well, he had that in his ankles. It would affect him in his *walk*. The feet and ankle bones of the man at the gate of the temple were made strong. He walked, and leaped, and praised God. Undoubtedly that man got the Spirit at the time, so that he was a perfected christian, you might say. And then the knees (@Ezekiel 47: 4), would allude to dependence on God; and the loins, the seat of diversified affections. All this is experience. You might say Ezekiel is a psalmist in the way he speaks of the river. In the fourth measurement we have a river that cannot be passed over. He came to the point of inscrutability; he came to infinitude; that is, the Spirit of God is a divine Person. It is by experience Ezekiel reached that. He says, "It was a river that I could not pass through, ... waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through" -- by Ezekiel or by anyone (verse 5). That finished one part of his experience. And then the man with the line brought him back again to the river. Now there is more than the prophet had seen earlier. He saw trees on either side of the river. That is remarkable. Apparently he did not see that before. Then he begins to talk about a *double*
{217}
river. The thing is increasing in his mind, and that is, I believe, the point attached to this meeting; what this river is. The psalmist in @Psalm 46 and Ezekiel have the same theme; and so would Adam if he wrote a psalm, and so John, in Revelation.
J.S. Would that fit in with @John 7? "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (verse 38).
J.T. There it is again; rivers flowing out. That is from the belly; from the seat of the affections. It is "as the scripture has said", and this would, no doubt, include the passages we are dealing with. The Holy Spirit in believers is in mind.
A.R. Would the first three verses of @Psalm 46 suggest that things outside are very unstable and apt to cause great discouragement and depression, whereas the only place of real joy is in the assembly?
J.T. That is quite manifest. I felt we would not have time to read the whole psalm, but it really is most applicable at the present time. "God is our refuge and strength, a help in distresses, very readily found. Therefore will we not fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the heart of the seas; though the waters thereof roar and foam, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah". All that is remarkable at the present time. Then our two verses follow, and then verse 6 reads: "The nations raged, the kingdoms were moved; he uttered his voice, the earth melted. Jehovah of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our high fortress. Selah". That is all remarkably applicable to the present time. And then, "Come, behold the works of Jehovah, what desolations he hath made in the earth: he hath made wars to cease unto the end of the earth". That is what we are waiting for and praying for. It is going to happen, but we have to be patient. A long outlook is peculiarly needed. "He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariots in the fire. Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the nations, I
{218}
will be exalted in the earth. Jehovah of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our high fortress. Selah". All that is very remarkable for faith at the present time, because it is sure to happen; it is only a question of patience.
F.S.C. Does the first verse of this book of the Psalms denote a people in captivity? "As the hart panteth after the water -- brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God", @Psalm 42: 1.
J.T. Quite so, you refer to the beginning of the second book. The psalmist is panting after God, as being away from Jerusalem. In @Psalm 84 they are not only wishing for God but for His house, His courts.
A.B.P. I was wondering if this psalm really represents appreciation of our subject in an advanced way, because of the state which is suggested in the title of the psalm, stressing virgin character; the idea of chastity of affections. Does this suggest the formation which the ministry has brought about in the saints with a view to greater appreciation of the blessings there are in the Spirit?
J.T. That is very good. What has already been alluded to -- the title of the musical instrument -- refers to the virgin condition in the plural; that we are more and more weaned away from the world by the present pressure; instead of being conformed to this world, we are to be transformed by the renewing of our minds. It is by the power of the river of God that we are maintained in that.
Then another thing to be noticed here: the psalm is "Of the sons of Korah", but it is a *song*, meaning that it is a celebration involving the Spirit. It is God in the midst of His people, and in this refreshing power.
J.T.Jr. Would the city of God be over against the city of man, in that way -- the assembly known in a practical way as the city?
J.T. Yes. You have to come to Revelation to get it fully. It says, "And no curse shall be any more; and
{219}
the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face; and his name is on their foreheads. And night shall not be any more, and no need of a lamp, and light of the sun; for the Lord God shall shine upon them, and they shall reign to the ages of ages", @Revelation 22: 3 - 5. I think that the Revelation gives a full description of the psalmist's "city of God". It is the sanctuary of the habitations of the Most High. "God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her at the dawn of the morning" (verse 5). That is the coming day. It calls for faith. It is "the dawn of the morning"; God helps us in view of all this. But the place is pure. It is "the sanctuary of the habitations of the Most High". In Revelation, God and the Lamb are there. There is nothing to make a lie or to defile there.
F.N.W. The psalm says, "God is in the midst of her". I was wondering as to the streams of this river, whether the features of the city of God must be present in order to have the streams.
J.T. I think our ministry meetings correspond in a little measure. When ministry is flowing in a prophetic way, the person affected by the stream will say, "God is indeed amongst you", @1 Corinthians 14: 25. That is important, because so many claim He is with them. Lately it has been said by some that the Lord can be with groups of people opposed to each other. It is a dishonour to the Lord to say that. He is in the midst of those gathered together unto His name, but this involves what His name implies and that those gathered are in accord with it. Those who name the name of the Lord are enjoined to withdraw from iniquity, and to pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, (@2 Timothy 2: 19 - 22). Ignoring these great truths, unrighteous persons have imitated those seeking to walk in the truth and claimed He was with them. This is manifestly wrong, and deceptive.
{220}
A.R. The tree in @Revelation 22 is in the midst of the street and on either side of the river.
J.T. We must understand what is presented in a spiritual way. There is only one street mentioned in the city. There is no aristocratic street, as in contrast to one of less repute. There is only one street, so that *all* are there, and the tree of life is in the midst of that street. How delightful it is! Instead of the cinema and other corrupting things, we are all delighted together by the presence of the tree of life! It is available everywhere. It is the power of eternal life in the millennial day; it has its residence in the city of God. It is "in the midst of its street, and of the river, on this side and on that side", @Revelation 22: 2.
A.P.T. In that regard the application you are giving @Revelation 22 is more the administrative side, corresponding to this river operating among the brethren now.
J.T. Yes. It goes out of the throne of God and of the Lamb, bright as crystal. That is the idea of administration. There are no dark parts. The Holy Spirit will be in operation there in a most remarkable way. It is going out to the whole millennial area. Things are under divine control, as in the Acts. It is the same idea. The river flowed out in the book of Acts, but everything was ordered and under control; and there was plenty of life. "On this side and on that side" of the river means that the river causes no restriction, in that sense. Wherever life is, there is plenty of room for its expression.
W.R. Would you say that this thought appears in @Revelation 2: 7, where the Lord says, "To him that overcomes, I will give to him to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God"?
J.T. There is a connection there. The word "overcome" is a key word throughout the whole book. And the tree of life is given there as a special favour to those who overcome.
{221}
A.R. Does it suggest that in the assembly where the Spirit of God is active, Christ is available everywhere? He is in the street and on either side of the river, and then there is fruit every month. There would be something fresh every month under such circumstances.
J.T. That would show we are still in *time* limits. It is not the eternal state, but every month has its own peculiar fruit; I think the Lord has been directing us to freshness. Our subject is to stress freshness, so that we are fresh in our ministry, and generally. I think the point as regards the river in Revelation is that God is bringing out His last testimony in man in flesh and blood condition. It is not flesh, morally, but in the actual physical condition in which man is, eternal life is available. God does not intend to continue this, but He is showing that He can keep man alive in flesh and blood condition in the millennial day. Finally, all that is of Him will merge into what is spiritual; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. I mean to say, flesh and blood has no heritage, for the condition is to cease. But God is showing what He can do in spite of what Satan has done to man in flesh and blood condition. But flesh and blood does not really inherit anything. The thing itself ceases. There is no use attaching any inheritance to a thing that, in itself, ceases. If a man wants to save his estate, and give it over to another person -- which is according to law -- that other person has no licence to live either. So that you see there is very little protection for estates, for heritages, because flesh and blood condition is not morally able to accept a heritage. The inheritance is not to that condition, but to the condition now seen in Christ; but still. God is saying in all these facts about the millennium that He is making a man in flesh and blood condition to live. He is not to continue in that state, but to show that God can do it. And so what we are at now, in chapter 22, shows that even the nations as such, which, of course, will not continue, come into life. They are only provisional;
{222}
but the very leaves of the tree heal them, and they shall walk in the light of the city. Their glory and honour shall be brought to it.
J.T.Jr. Would there be an analogy in @Revelation 22 to the old economy -- what Israel had in the wilderness -- maintained through Eleazar? That is, what belonged to the land before the children of Israel actually went into it? I thought the character of service set up in the wilderness showed what God could do as based on redemption, but then the actual or final position was in the land. All the people who were responsible, as coming out of Egypt, had died. It was a new generation that went into the land.
J.T. Yes. In the wilderness, Eleazar and Joshua represent, anticipatively, a risen condition. I think that may be applied in the millennial day, that men will come into eternal life. It is there in a provisional way. The Lord says, 'These shall go away into eternal life'. But where is it? In whom is it? Is it in Israel, or in some particular nation, or is it in the heavenly city? This river, I think, makes it effective and available to the nations, and men generally.
A.R. So that any healing that the nations will enjoy, in extended life, will be from that tree?
J.T. That seems to be the way it is set, because the Lord says that they go into it. Where is it seen? Where did the Lord command the blessing? In Zion -- "life for evermore". That would be His purpose. The one hundred and forty-four thousand in @Revelation 14 might be a suggestion of Israel's particular part in it, but the heavenly city is the inner basic thought. That is, the river flows out under control. It is from the throne of God. That governs the whole position. I believe that is how the matter will be in the millennial day.
Ques. Do the conditions prevailing among the nations now show the futility of trying to bring in living conditions among men by their own means?
{223}
J.T. Just so. There is, no doubt, a certain amount of hopefulness that there will be a Utopia set up after this war, but evidently great military institutions will be needed. @Ezekiel 39 points to immensity of men and munitions -- especially munitions. After the great battle "they shall make fires with them seven years". And as to the slain of Gog, it will take seven months to bury them. It is remarkable that the prophetic word should have anticipated the magnitude of modern military establishments. But God will bring in peace. So this psalm says, "He hath made wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariots in the fire" (verse 9). That is the suggestion of the destruction of munitions, and we know from other sections of Scripture that they beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks. People will say, These are the instruments we need; for the land must be tilled. But there must be a moral change to correspond with that. There is bound to be a keeping on of the supply of soldiers and munitions as men remain unregenerate, for wars result from lust -- the joy men have in gratifying their lusts (@James 4: 1, 2). War will continue until men are changed by the gracious work of God, and that is what will happen. This psalm and many other scriptures prove this is what will happen.
Ques. In @Matthew 19, one asked the Lord what he must do that he might have eternal life, and the Lord raised the question of the commandments. The first one the Lord mentioned was, "Thou shalt not kill". Would that enter into this chapter: that the killing of men might all be set aside?
J.T. Quite so; if you have the new man, it ceases. The law will be put in the inward parts; written on the heart. If you have a propensity to be militant, the law will be on the part bearing that fruit. And so with all the organs: what marks each in the unregenerate will be the opposite in the truly converted man. Thus, instead
{224}
of killing a man, you would save him. "Thou shalt not kill" settles that matter; that is the end of war. The Son of man acted like that; He saved men's lives.
Ques. That is good, because you can see there is an apparent difficulty in the mind of many as to whom that injunction, given to Moses and reiterated by the Lord Jesus, refers. Does it refer to those who have links with God, or does it refer generally?
J.T. The reproach attached to those who seek to walk in the truth at the present time, is peculiar. One on a military board said to a young brother lately, 'Do you want other people to fight for you?' He evidently had no idea of the principle of Scripture involved. We are surrounded by millions of people who have no idea of the spiritual teaching of Scripture. They profess to go to church, but they have no knowledge of the spiritual teaching of Scripture. The Lord said to Peter as he used the sword, "Put the sword into the sheath; the cup which the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?" @John 18: 11. The average man on a military board does not understand that. Perhaps he has not read the Bible. The believer is under reproach in his eyes because of his ignorance. He thinks you are more or less fanatical and unreasonable because you say that. And we have to suffer; but that is to bring out the heavenly kingdom, as the Lord says, "My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought", @John 18: 36. The kingdom of David is not the heavenly kingdom; that is another thought. When the Lord comes out from heaven to deal with this wicked world, He will have the sword. I mean to say that He will come out in a military way, and His garment will be "dipped in blood", @Revelation 19: 13, but not *now*. The present period is a mystery to persons who do not have the Holy Spirit, and we have to *suffer* as knowing what they do not know.
A.N.W. Another official said to a young man that his views were not practical; and yet when put into
{225}
practice by the Lord Himself the greatest blessing that could ever come to man came that way.
J.T. Quite so; redemption came that way. Peter used the sword. The Lord says, "Return thy sword to its place", @Matthew 26: 52. The Lord did not say to throw it away, or destroy it, or turn it into a pruning-hook, but put it into the sheath. It will yet be used.
A.B.P. Is it not important to see that, in @Romans 13, it says that the authorities bear not the sword in vain; the sword is in use there.
J.T. Quite so; it is taken out of its sheath for that purpose . The Lord owned that Pilate had power from above. That power required the sword, which makes the power very clear; so that our position is anomalous, and we have to suffer, but it is that we must correspond with Him; follow Him. We are fools for Christ's sake. We have to accept that, and the foolish, of course, are under reproach.
J.S. Will the nations have to come to the fact that salvation is of the Jews?
J.T. They will, indeed; "In those days shall ten men take hold, out of all languages of the nations, shall even take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew", @Zechariah 8: 23. That will be a changed position. Our position is different. It is mysterious, and we have to suffer in it. "The world knoweth us not, because it knew him not".
A.B.P. In principle, speaking after the manner of man, war is necessary, is it not?
J.T. Yes; it is necessary in the sense of restraining evil. In this sense, policemen are necessary, and the jail is necessary. How could we live here without such restraint? So we pray for the authorities and trust that God will use what He has to keep down evil for the sake of the testimony.
F.N.W. Does the fear of God teach us that it is God's own prerogative to order as to those who take life, and our position is otherwise, being heavenly?
{226}
J.T. It is the mysterious position we are in, and the suffering that attaches to it, so that we are fools for Christ's sake. The Lord's conversation with Pilate (@John 18: 33 - 37), and also @Romans 12: 9 - 21, and chapter 13: 1 - 10, make the position clear.
G.H. Make it a little clearer why war is necessary.
J.T. The power of the devil is loose on the earth yet, and to maintain order, police and general government powers are needed. This requires the use of the sword, which is not to be borne in vain. And we are to be subject to rulers for conscience¬ sake. They are ministers to us for good. The Lord said to Pilate, "Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above", @John 19: 11. We must recognise that.
A.R. A policeman may police a street or other limited area, whereas a nation might be appointed by God to police the world. Certain nations may be given power to hold lawlessness in check and do what is right in a governmental way.
J.T. Quite so. If God puts it into the heart of a ruler to be favourable to His people, we can thank Him. We have illustrations in Scripture of how God makes men favourable to His people.
The final word at this time is in the Canticles, which I think ought to touch us as regards the claims of Christ over us. There should be something exclusive for Him in every one of us, and certainly in the assembly. So that we have in verse 12: "A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed". Then in verse 15: "A fountain in the gardens, a well of living waters, which stream from Lebanon". Other thoughts enter into this passage, but it seems to suggest that in our assemblings there should be the sense that there is something exclusive for Christ; verse 12 would be abstract, for verse 16 shows that discipline was needed to bring out the fragrance of the garden.
{227}
A.R. Like @John 20, I suppose, where the doors were shut for fear of the Jews when Jesus came and stood in the midst?
J.T. Just so. The Lord regarded the disciples just in this way. "My brethren", He had said; John gives the abstract view. Luke's account of the Lord "in their midst" after He rose gives the concrete conditions, and they needed correction.
A.McN. It speaks here of a fountain being sealed. Does that imply that it shuts out everything that is alien to the object of her affections?
J.T. I think so. It is not common. People often treat what is for Christ as common.
G.H. Would eternal life in the millennium be different from the way we enjoy it at the present time?
J.T. Their capacity for enjoying it is not equal to those who belong to the assembly and have the Holy Spirit. It is a state of things set up here into which they move; nations, as nations. "These shall go ... into eternal life", @Matthew 25: 46.
A.B.P. Would you say that the word in @Revelation 22, "*I* Jesus" (verse 16), and then the response, "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come", would be what you have in mind in the Canticles? The idea of what is wholly responsive to Him is seen there.
J.T. Yes. It is a question of the Lord's personality, fully appreciated by the Spirit and the bride. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". They are ready for Him.
Ques. @Psalm 45 speaks of the royal apartments; is that like @Song of Songs 4?
J.T. Pretty much. A building is alluded to there. Here it is a garden. It is a place of pleasure in @Song of Songs 4. It is a garden; an *outside* scene. The idea is most attractive from that point of view, whereas @Psalm 45 is in the king's apartments. It is more private and secluded and, you might say, affluent. It is the richness of the king's apartments. She is all glorious within; that is, inside. She is equal to that position.
{228}
You may not need the same clothing in a garden that you would in a palace. In the latter, "her clothing is of wrought gold".
A.R. The garden is a place for Him to come to. She says, "Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat its precious fruits" (verse 16). And then he says, "I am come into my garden"; as if there is plenty of fruit now -- not exactly as found in the tree of life, but in the saints.
J.T. Yes. I think the terms in this book apply to Israel, primarily. It is really an earthly scene that is depicted. But @Psalm 45 is inside; it is more magnificent, and the richness of the sphere is stressed.
J.S. Is God reverting to His initial idea in the garden in Canticles?
J.T. That is right. "And thou wilt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures", @Psalm 36: 8. This alludes to Adam's paradise.
E.McK. This thought of what is exclusively for Christ does not hinder the service of God, but fosters it.
J.T. I think the Lord would greatly value the thought that the brethren consider for Him at the present time; that they have something for Him; that they have been considering for Him in all the current pressure.
A.N.W. It is not a river now, but a spring, as in @John 4.
Rem. Is it like what Mary kept for the Lord in @John 12? She had a fountain sealed in her heart.
J.T. That is right; she *kept* the precious ointment for the day of His burial. There is no box mentioned. The allusion is to incorruptibility in her; loving the Lord Jesus in incorruption.
J.S. It was an intelligent act, would you say?
J.T. Just so; and an exclusive one. No one else would ever get that ointment; "pure nard", it is called. She did not use it with second thoughts. It was only for Him, and she got the opportunity to use it before the time, and took advantage of the opportunity.
{229}
R.W.S. @Song of Songs 4 alludes to a great variety of spices: "Henna with spikenard plants; spikenard and saffron; calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices" (verses 13, 14). Is that an allusion to the variety of fragrance that Christ finds amongst His people?
J.T. That is what I would think. There is remarkable stress laid on these things. "Thy shoots are a paradise of pomegranates, with precious fruits" (verse 13).
Ques. The thought of water seems to begin with "A spring shut up, a fountain sealed", and then goes on to "A fountain in the gardens, a well of living waters, which stream from Lebanon". What does the latter mean?
J.T. The use of Lebanon elsewhere would help. The idea widens out. I think it is moral dignity and elevation.
J.T.Jr. The exercise would work out individually as to our having something special for Christ. It merges with the collective idea as together in the assembly -- a chaste virgin for Christ.
{230}
Pages 230 - 372 -- "Headship". Reading and Addresses, U.S.A. and Canada, 1941 - 42 (Volume 157).
HEADSHIP (1)
@Ephesians 1: 19 - 23; @Genesis 1: 26 - 31
J.T. *Headship is* in mind for this series of readings. The first feature to be considered is headship in Christ *to* the assembly; not His headship *of* it but His headship over all things *to* it. Then we have His headship *of* it, mainly what He is as source of supply for it; then what He is in relation to the service of God as Head; and finally what He is in the public sense -- Head of every man according to the order of God in creation.
Beginning at the top, we shall work downward. In what we read in @Ephesians 1 and in @Genesis 1 we shall get the leading features of the matter. The usual way to learn is to begin at the initial thought of a subject; but as what is in mind now is a general view of headship it is thought that we shall obtain this more quickly by looking at it from the top. Paul said to the Corinthians, "I speak as to intelligent persons", and that is what is in mind, a general knowledge of the subject already existing amongst us. @Ephesians 1 presents it in its most exalted bearing, corresponding with @Genesis 1. We have in the latter the divine thought before sin came in, and God had in mind to carry wisdom into creation as already inaugurated. According to Proverbs wisdom was there as creation took form; whatever was done, wisdom was there, entering into it. It is obvious that as creation was finished wisdom must continue in order to maintain what had been inaugurated, and the verses read indicate this. The same is true of the assembly; not only authority, but also wisdom is essential to its maintenance.
The great display of it all will be when Christ comes in glory with the assembly, when the headship
{231}
of Christ will appear, the assembly having part in it. The all-various wisdom of God is operative in the assembly now; it will also be operative in the millennium, and in the final or eternal state. These remarks will help us to see the place of the assembly in the divine scheme, and the need of coming into the light of divine purpose so that we may be in the place assigned to us. In @Ephesians 1 we have a great prayer by the apostle Paul relative to this subject, and in chapter 3 we have another one. In the latter he desires "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". What a prayer this is! What has been read in chapter 1 is a prayer involving the great thought of headship to the assembly; not 'of' it, but 'to' it.
A.N.W. Will you distinguish between head 'to' the assembly and head 'of' it?
J.T. In our verses headship includes the assembly; she has part in it as Eve had part with Adam in dominion over the lower creation. In chapter 5: 22 - 24 Christ is Head *of* the assembly, and in @Colossians 1: 18 "*he* is head of the body, the assembly". The assembly already knows her relation to Him. In @Ephesians 2: 21 the assembly is said to increase to a holy temple in the Lord, which means a place of acquiring His mind. In the millennium the assembly will afford wisdom to the universe.
A.E.H. The thought of being Head to the body involves something of the character of Christ worked into the saints by the Spirit of God; His feelings and thoughts are now expressed in the assembly.
J.T. Yes. The assembly, being of Him, is great enough for this. It "increases to a holy temple in the
{232}
Lord"; it is thus the vehicle of His mind. The whole administration of the millennium will be according to wisdom, for no matter how general subjugation is effected, what is done must be done in wisdom.
A.N.W. So that the result of the subjugation in 1 Corinthians is that God is intelligently known in everything, "God ... all in all".
J.T. That is right; so that we have the headship of God in David's ministry. In eternity there will be no need of subjugation; "the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him, that God may be all in all". The whole scene shall be in intelligent subjection.
C.H.H. Would the administration of wisdom in the assembly bring in that thought?
J.T. That is part of what we are considering; in @Ephesians 3: 10 that great fact is stated. Already wisdom is seen in the assembly by the principalities and powers above; it is not simply that we are learning -- though I trust we are -- but it is for other eyes, and that brings out what a wonderful vessel the assembly is.
Ques. Are the saints viewed here as God's inheritance?
J.T. Yes. There must be the thought of intelligence in us to be worthy of being in the inheritance of God. His inheritance in the saints implies that we are like Him morally, partaking of the mind, the thinking faculty, of Christ.
A.B. What you say here in regard to creation is most interesting, that the wisdom required in creation is for its maintenance; and that this also refers to power.
J.T. The power that works in us (@Ephesians 3), is the power that wrought in Christ's resurrection. If we get these two thoughts we shall get the bearing of the whole matter, especially that of wisdom entering into the question of creation. Everything was delightful before it; wisdom's presence implies that all was perfect;
{233}
it has functioned ever since in the creation, and it is continuing to do so. There is no discrepancy in the motions of the heavenly bodies, and the effect of wisdom is seen down to the minutest part of creation. God has done all in wisdom. It is especially seen in man and the place assigned to him in creation. Dominion, involving headship, is vested in him. In speaking of man before his creation God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion", @Genesis 1: 26. That is how the matter stands, and as seen in the next chapter man is tested as to his qualifications for headship. In verses 19 and 20 we read, "And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim had formed every animal of the field and all fowl of the heavens, and brought them to Man, to see what he would call them; and whatever Man called each living soul, that was its name. And Man gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the heavens, and to every beast of the field; but as for Adam, he found no helpmate, his like". This passage should be borne in mind in considering the thought of headship in creation: man was to qualify in regard of what he was set over as head; and he qualified in being able to name the creatures as the Creator brought them to him.
L.E.S. Would Proverbs fit in with what you are saying as to image and likeness, that there should be correspondence, that man might have part in the headship? I am referring to the 'image' and 'likeness' in @Genesis 1 in the working out of the economy.
J.T. Yes. Man as created was like God. Paul said to the Athenians (@Acts 17: 28, 29), "For in him we live and move and exist; as also some of the poets amongst you have said, For we are also his offspring. Being therefore the offspring of God, we ought not to think that which is divine to be like gold or silver or stone, the graven form of man's art and imagination". We are His offspring, and hence men convey *some* idea of God. Correspondingly, christians are like Him in a
{234}
greater sense. For "the new man ... according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness", @Ephesians 4: 24. There is thus in the new man likeness to God and consequently representation of God. 'Image' implies representation.
A.E.H. Does the phrase, "the spirit of wisdom", connect with that, showing that wisdom is not just a collection of ideas, but is actually a quality in the saints?
J.T. Yes; through it headship works out; and the Head knows that of which He is Head. It does not go the whole way in Adam. Solomon *speaks* of the creatures (@1 Kings 4: 33); "And he spoke of the trees, from the cedar-tree that is on Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall; he spoke also of cattle, and of fowls, and of creeping things, and of fishes". Speaking of the creatures, as seen here, goes further than merely naming them. Thus in Solomon there is progress in qualification for headship in man. In Christ we have the full thought, and the assembly has part in this, for it has "all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge". Christ is Head over all things to the assembly.
A.E.H. So that the eyes of the heart enter into the matter too. Are these qualities of headship?
J.T. They are. The affections should be brought into the matter. The natural man is not concerned about affections in investigating the creation; with him it is just knowledge; but the christian brings the heart into it. If we are to influence the persons with whom we have to do we must know them. Christ knows the persons over whom He exercises headship.
H.B. Would @John 1: 42 fit in in some measure? It says, "Jesus looking at him said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas; thou shalt be called Cephas (which interpreted is stone)".
J.T. Yes; that is John's line. Matthew says, "*Thou* art Peter", but John says, "Thou shalt be called Cephas".
{235}
That is, the quality in mind would work out in him and be manifested in time. The Lord Jesus knows, and He deals with us according to His knowledge. He knew how to deal with Peter.
S.W.P. Has the word 'called' in @John 1 the same force as in @Genesis 2: "whatever Man called each living soul, that was its name"?
J.T. Adam says of one creature, "Lion"; that is its name. In Proverbs Solomon says, "The lion ... turneth not away for any". Solomon enlarges on what Adam said, but what he says as referring to the character of the lion is the same in principle as Adam's word.
A.N.W. The apostle does not say the assembly *should be* subject to Christ, "the assembly is subjected to the Christ", @Ephesians 5: 24.
G.A.T. Will you say a word as to where man got his intelligence in giving names to all the creatures?
J.T. He had no one to imitate; most of us are imitators, but Adam was not one. He was endowed by God with the intelligence he had. God knew it was there and He brought the animals and fowl to Adam *to see* what he would name them. This would bring out what God had placed in him, showing what wonderful intelligence he had.
G.A.T. Would you say that the assembly acting in the light of headship today is able to name things?
J.T. Yes. I should like to have a judgment of every brother and sister and to value rightly what there is of God in each; all else must go. Adam did not speak of the vegetable kingdom; he named the animals and the birds. "And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim had formed every animal of the field and all fowl of the heavens, and brought them to Man, to see what he would call them", @Genesis 2: 19. He did not name the fishes. God worked in this respect in a limited way, having the creatures immediately connected with man in mind. Adam's supremacy was worked out there. The
{236}
sovereignty of God is thus seen. He worked on Seth's line, and after the deluge He worked in Shem's line, while Japheth is specially in view in the gospel through Paul. The east will have its visitation through a particular testimony presently (@Revelation 14: 6, 7).
W.G.T. The moral superiority seems to be brought to light prior to the introduction of the woman. Headship must be entirely seen in the man before the woman is brought into view.
J.T. He is qualified for headship before she comes into view, but when she comes she is his 'counterpart'. Jehovah does not ask Adam to name her; God is, in effect, waiting without saying anything to see what the reaction will be in Adam's mind as the woman appears. Adam has seen nothing like her before (verse 20). He had evidently been looking, and there was undoubtedly a void in Adam's heart. Eve is needed to complete the man. She is not merely a 'help', but his complement. The assembly is Christ's body, His fulness.
W.G.T. Has not the preposition 'to' peculiar moral value: "head to the assembly"? What was in Adam's mind as to the woman would correspond with what the assembly is to Christ in His headship.
J.T. Yes; the woman was Adam's counterpart, not simply his helper. She would be joined with him as of him, "his like". He had a mind capable of appreciating such a creature. He could distinguish the lion and such animals, but here is a being entirely different from any yet brought before him. Jehovah brought her to the man, which is most touching. He had been dealing with material things and the animals and birds, but now He is working with the *human heart*; He would bring in affection. Adam would see a creature like himself. God formed her while Adam was asleep, but there must be a heart matter in relation to this personage, and God knew that. He said nothing, but Adam said, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh". We have no instance of a reason for the names
{237}
of the other creatures, but Adam gives his reason for the name given this one. In the millennial day there will be a reason for everything, all will be divinely right and intelligibly so. The temple of God will be there, that in which His mind will be made known.
A.E.H. Is there any sense in which the heart matter, the affections, enter into the naming of the other creatures? I wonder if Adam did not have them in mind as bearing the stamp of life.
J.T. His affections may have been active, but there is no indication of it. In fondling cats and dogs we do not express spirituality. There is, however, a link of sympathy between man and certain land animals and birds which is indicated in Nathan's parable (@2 Samuel 12).
T.W. God says, "Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea", and so on, @Genesis 1: 26. I was wondering if this would fit into what is before us?
J.T. That verse belongs to our subject. It refers to rule in which the woman had part with man. The thought of naming enters into this; I am qualified for headship as I am able to name things with which I have to do. It is seen in Adam.
W.G.T. Does not Adam's statement, "This time", have great significance at this point?
J.T. Yes. He could have said, I call this animal a lion because of its propensities; but he did not go to that length. He just named the lion. But when the woman comes into view God does not enquire, What do you call this creature? He waits to see the reaction; He is bringing out what is in Adam. And Adam says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman" -- Ishshah -- which is a new word. That brings language into view; this word was not used before. God knew the intelligence of Adam, that he had power to formulate words and sentences expressing reasons for things. This incident
{238}
brings out the power of language by which men convey thoughts.
W.G.T. Does not verse 20 suggest that the naming of the animal kingdom was a finished matter? The helpmate was not found in that order of creature.
J.T. That is right. Adam must be alone if there is no creature like himself. And so God builds the woman and brings her to Man, and he is able to name her.
L.E.S. @Psalm 139: 14 would bear on this: "I will praise thee, for I am fearfully, wonderfully made. Marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well". And then David goes on to speak of his "bones" and his "unformed substance".
J.T. That fits in with what we are saying; a human being is in mind. Eve had a peculiar formation, and she is standing before Adam now; what will his reaction be?
S.W.P. There was no established precedent for this.
J.T. No, but what a creature Adam was! His qualities were brought out by circumstances; he says, "This time".
A.N.W. When he calls her name Eve he gives, another reason for doing so: "And Man called his wife's name Eve; because she is the mother of all living", @Genesis 3: 20.
J.T. Just so. That comes in after sin had come into the world; but here it is his bone and his flesh. You can visualise him saying, See what I have! Adam was asleep when she was made, but he discerns her and without having seen her before he can name her, 'Ishshah'. He is now in the social world, not among cattle, but in a world where there is one whom he can love and who can love him. In type, Christ and the assembly are before us.
A.B. It is remarkable that verse 21 comes in following the statement at the end of verse 20. It says there that he found no helpmate, his like, or counterpart;
{239}
so that in the animals there is no response to him, and now Jehovah Elohim comes in to meet his need.
J.T. That is right. The word 'found' there would mean that there was a longing in Adam's mind, there was a void.
A.B. We discern in this that intelligence is developing in Adam in looking for this response.
J.T. Yes. All the animals are brought to him but there is no response of affection in his heart. There was no one his like.
S.W.P. What God has in mind is that this faculty of understanding in Adam should have affinity in another.
J.T. Yes, Ish and Ishshah. These names refer to man and woman as exercising mutual affections, mutual regard, developing family feelings. Ish will be head of Ishshah, and also head over all things *to* her. Adam used such discernment in naming the woman as shows that he was progressing in intelligence. And correspondingly if we are to have part in headship we must know what we are head to.
H.B. Does the word 'therefore' in verse 24 show progress in intelligence too?
J.T. Yes. 'One flesh' involves the mystery; it is the union of the assembly with Christ. The assembly has part in the headship, being Christ's body, the fulness of Him who fills all in all. It is of Him and so possessed of His faculties and sensibilities as Man. The assembly is thus capable of having part in His headship over all things, expressing Him in the universal position accorded to Him by the Father of glory.
W.G.T. There is no conversation about the matter between Jehovah and Adam, but there is immediate response from the heart of God to Adam, that he should have a helpmate. God acted immediately.
J.T. There is no conversation between God and Adam in verse 22, but the reaction in Adam is perfect as the woman is brought to him.
{240}
W.G.T. I was thinking too of Jehovah Elohim causing a deep sleep to fall upon Man; He used this method to bring into being a helpmate for him in answer to his need.
J.T. God is thinking of that; there is no helpmate for Adam. It was not good for him to be alone, and God said, "I will make him a helpmate".
G.A.T. Had the woman to be brought in before the full thought of God could be brought into view?
J.T. That is the point. Christ is Head over all things to the assembly. Man, including male and female, was to have dominion; they were to influence the whole earth.
C.C.T. Is that why Adam brings in that this time it is bone of his bones, in verse 23? Does this bring out the true import of headship?
J.T. It brings out his qualifications for it. What intelligence he had, even in language! Later he called his wife's name Eve, "because she is the mother of all living". This is evidence of his intelligence, even after sin came in. The man of Decapolis in @Mark 7 was deaf and could not speak right, and the deep feelings the Lord expressed as to him are most remarkable. They show the great importance of the faculties in men of seeing and hearing according to God. These faculties are essential to the great place man has in the counsels of God.
A.E.H. As to Adam having found no helpmate, his like, I was wondering if we lay hold of the full meaning of that. Would what you are saying help us in *variety* in the service of God? Is there not a certain essential need as to language in answering to the revelation and full knowledge of Him, so that service to God should become fuller through the power of language?
J.T. I am sure that is right. I think the power of speech, expressing thought, is the most remarkable of the works of God in man; and it is essential to what we have before us. Headship requires it. Christians
{241}
are said to have the mind of Christ, which implies that we can think as He does; and our speaking is to be with understanding (@1 Corinthians 14: 19). These things characterise the assembly as Christ's body. *She is His fulness in His heavenly dominion and headship*.
C.H.H. What would be seen in distinguishing between bone and flesh?
J.T. "Bone of my bones": by enlargement this would mean the framework. Look at any other creature as compared with man: there is none other comparable with the human frame. Darwinism is absolutely false; there is no such thing as development from a monkey to a man. Adam had seen the giraffe, the ape, the monkey; there was in them no "bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh". There was no correspondence between Adam and the other creatures. The man's name is Ish, the woman's Ishshah, because she was taken out of Ish.
C.H.H. Would the flesh refer to feeling?
J.T. Yes, and ornamentation. In @Ezekiel 37 the bones are all there; bone comes to bone, and then sinews, then flesh, skin and breath. Ornamentation enters into flesh and skin. Ish and Ishshah imply persons in mutual attractiveness, a state of relationship and being where love will prevail.
C.H.H. Would you say, applying that to the assembly, that there is a need of stability of principles, and yet balanced with feelings of affection?
J.T. Yes. There are two general thoughts: 'bone', that is, the framework, involving dignity; and 'flesh', filling out that and implying ornamentation, as already said. To keep to our subject, the position in Adam and his wife here foreshadows Christ and the assembly in @Ephesians 1. They have dominion over all the creatures on earth. Adam knows the names of these animals, the designations of the things he and his wife are head to. Other features would be discerned and Eve would have part in this; she had intelligence corresponding with
{242}
that of her husband. They were not carnivorous yet, so the idea of food in @Genesis 1: 29, 30 would govern them. Adam and Eve would not be inactive; they were to be in the garden in intelligence as to these creatures around them, and they would know what to do as matters needing attention arose. "Jehovah Elohim made every tree grow that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food", @Genesis 2: 9. All was for the comfort and pleasure of the man and his wife.
L.E.S. Referring to the word 'Ish', would the full result of the recovery of the truth climax itself in that? In Hosea the word is used, and in a social setting, where it is said "Thou shalt call me, My husband", which is Ish (chapter 2: 16).
J.T. That is beautiful. Earlier Jehovah had rejected this claim, verse 2; now she has been allured into the wilderness and caused to sing there by Him, and Israel takes the place of wife, calling Jehovah Ish -- My husband. This has its fulness in Christ and the assembly.
W.G.T. Would headship come in too in regard to Noah? There were Noah and his wife, his three sons and their wives, and the animal kingdom.
J.T. The animals came to Noah, which is very remarkable, showing that headship was there; they came to him and he would be tested as to what to do with those creatures. The ark was a figurative order of things. In all these things we are instructed that we are to have intelligence as to those over whom we have influence. 'Ishshah' is simply a feminine extension of Ish; she has his faculties and instincts and hence is fully capable of having part with him. The assembly corresponds with this perfectly. She is Christ's body, the fulness of Him who fills all in all.
{243}
HEADSHIP (2)
@Ephesians 5: 22 - 33; @Genesis 2: 10 - 14, 21 - 25; @1 Corinthians 24: 61 - 67
J.T. As indicated by what was said this morning and by the scriptures just read, the phase of our subject for this afternoon is Christ as Head of the assembly, involving *who* He is, and what marks Him in headship in the way of affection. We shall have to pursue this phase a little in Colossians at another time to bring out how the assembly functions through what flows out from the Head as the Source of supply. At this time we should seek to confine our remarks to what He is to her in the manifestation of affection. The passage in Ephesians helps particularly in this sense because of the recurrence of the word 'love'. Several times we have love mentioned; it is worked out in what is very well known in human affairs, in relation to man and wife.
I thought it well to revert to @Genesis 2 because of the prominence of the idea of headship in that chapter, not only in Adam and Eve, as in chapter 1, but in the *river*. It is said to have flowed out of the garden and to have taken the form of four *heads* (see @Genesis 2: 10, note): two of them indicate the influence of what *surrounds*, and two of them point to what goes *forward*. Eve is brought into this state of things, surrounded in the garden with the idea of headship in an influential sense, which would enhance the intelligence that Adam and she had. The rivers would promote wealth in the true sense of gold, bdellium and the onyx stone. That is to say, the man and his wife are now in the realm of qualities. If we bear in mind the names taken on by them, Ish and Ishshah, as pointing to family relations, marital and otherwise, I think we shall more readily see that here we enter into the world of superlatives.
{244}
C.H.H. Would the whole area through which these rivers flow speak of the sphere of influence? Would the whole area, not Adam and Eve only, be glorified through them?
J.T. Yes; the first two pointing to a circle, what surrounds, the second two pointing to progress forward. The former suggest love working, the "way of more surpassing excellence", @1 Corinthians 12: 31. The going forward is intelligence of the divine mind, progress in the purpose and counsels of God.
A.N.W. Would the surroundings be seen in the earlier chapters of the Acts, and the going forward in the apostle Paul?
J.T. Yes, that is a good way to put it. 'Surrounding' would come out at Pentecost in the description of the saints as given at the end of @Acts 2. Love predominated, no one regarded what he had as his own; the circle of love was there. They broke bread in the house instead of the temple, meaning that they had intelligence as to the position: the breaking of bread did not belong to the religious circle of the day. They went to the temple provisionally to preach the gospel, which testimony was to begin at Jerusalem, but "the upper chamber" was where the disciples, the inner circle, met, and it was to *this* circle the Lord added. A principle laid down in early christianity was that if there is to be addition there must be what is worthy of it. This involves the circle of affection, the circle of wealth worth coming into. It was a "daily" matter, like the work in @Genesis 1.
A.E.H. Do these two thoughts of surrounding and going forward give us the force of the verses in @Ephesians 5 -- what is carried through to eternity?
J.T. I think so. Love goes through. Christ and the assembly are in mind in verse 22. The reflection of this is to mark husbands and wives, that is what is stated in verse 23; "as also the Christ is head of the assembly". "But even as the assembly is subjected to
{245}
the Christ, so also wives to their own husbands in everything" (verse 24). Then, "Husbands, love your own wives, even as the Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it" (verse 25). A circle of love is implied to the end that there should be results, "the gold of that land is good", @Genesis 2: 12. Note the wealth that is accruing! the first idea of encirclement is gold. Added to that are the other two elements, "bdellium and the onyx stone". That is the test as to professing to be Christ's -- whether the divine product is there: "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", @John 13: 35.
W.G.T. The mining operations would be the digging of gold.
J.T. That is another matter. The point here is not that you dig for the gold, but the thing is there, it is what is to be found in a certain area. Gold is found in certain areas. You have to dig for it sometimes; in South Africa they go down 6,000 feet for gold, and they dig for the precious stones too. But the point here is not mining, Job speaks of that; this is typically the fruit of the Spirit of God working in a circle of affection. If you get into that circle you will find this product. And it is in relation to the principle of headship, because these streams are called "heads". Adam would understand the word, I suppose. A body of water flows out of Eden to water the garden, and from thence it was parted. What caused the parting? Why was each subdivision of this flow of water viewed as a whole idea in itself? It clearly implies that each division carried with it the idea of headship, the idea of influence for good in the sphere in which it moved. It is as entering Exodus that we get the great value of precious stones. The house is formed from materials, a list of which is found in chapter 25; what is used represents the persons to whom it belongs, but in the antitype the material is the persons themselves, the
{246}
wealth being in them. Here the point is the influence of the rivers. There are gold, bdellium and the onyx stone in relation to the action of a river characterised as "head". We must allow in our minds the environment into which Eve came. Though she and Adam were evidently formed on the same day, yet Adam is seen in the garden to till and guard it before Eve was made; that is his position. The river flowing out of Eden into the garden is a great feature. We do not know the extent of Eden but clearly it was a fairly large area having peculiar advantages, particularly the river flowing out of it, pointing to the Spirit of God coming out of heaven, for the word 'Eden' means pleasure.
A.B. It says the river "went out"; it was not sent out.
J.T. That would correspond with the incoming of the Holy Spirit. Of course He was sent too, but He "goes forth from with the Father", @John 15: 26. The Spirit is here definitely, as Christ was here, having prerogatives as a divine Person. I believe the word "head" would convey this. The divine authority of the Spirit is seen in the Acts.
W.G.T. We find in Matthew's gospel that the heavenly Father plants; does the planting of the garden correspond?
J.T. Yes. The planting would be evidenced in the 120 names in @Acts 1; they were the Father's planting. They were definitely planted and there is the principle of tilling and guarding what was there.
H.B. Does the enrichment in @1 Corinthians 1: 4, 5 have any bearing, "the grace of God given to you in Christ Jesus; that in everything ye have been enriched in him"?
J.T. It would fit in. That is, however, more abstract because the actual state of things at Corinth did not agree with it. It is from the divine side. In this sense the assembly at Corinth was furnished fully.
{247}
S.W.P. The river Pison surrounded the land of Havilah; was it for the protection of what was there, or for development?
J.T. Primarily it is to be regarded in the sense of influence. These are the first rivers mentioned in Scripture, and it is well known that a river has fructifying power. Areas drained by them are in this sense influenced. There is not only the draining but the freshening influence of a river. So I believe that this one flowing out of Eden points to the Holy Spirit, as also the one in the last chapter of Revelation: "He shewed me a river of water of life, bright as crystal, going out of the throne of God and of the Lamb". "From thence it was parted", @Genesis 2: 10; the word 'parted' may be linked with the 'tongues' at Pentecost. "From thence it was parted and became four main streams (heads)". The New Translation has "main streams" and what we are remarking is not out of accord with this for it implies that the full thought of a river attaches to each of the four mentioned.
S.W.P. It would come within the range of Adam's understanding, would it not?
J.T. Yes; we have to bear in mind what intelligence he had. There is nothing said about his love, for the time had not come for that. Speaking of the mystery of @Ephesians 3, Paul stressed *his* understanding of it. Understanding of a truth comes first and then the working out of it by love. We have the barest facts here. Adam and Eve lived in the garden -- how long we cannot say. Did they talk about these rivers? What was implied in them? They would find in them the power of refreshment. There would also be results in the way of production through Adam's tilling of the garden; *toil* is not mentioned until sin had come in; after that he is told that "in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread", @Genesis 3: 19.
{248}
A.E.H. Would you think that we have in Colossians the idea of fruit-bearing as seen here, "the love which ye have towards all the saints", @Colossians 1: 4?
J.T. Yes. The Spirit is mentioned only once in the epistle, to tell us that there was amongst them love in Himself; the right kind of love was at Colosse. You might say of the Colossians, "the gold of that land is good". If you were to go there you would find they had right doctrine, but that was not all, the gold was there, the product of the Spirit was there -- love in the Spirit for all the saints (chapter 1: 8).
A.E.H. The apostle also says, "Having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and the love which ye have towards all the saints, on account of the hope which is laid up for you in the heavens; of which ye heard before in the word of the truth of the glad tidings, which are come to you, as they are in all the world, and are bearing fruit and growing, even as also among you, from the day ye heard them and knew indeed the grace of God, in truth", @Colossians 1: 4 - 6.
J.T. That is a very comforting scripture, especially as adding the thought of hope, which is more the going forward as suggested by the two latter rivers; a long outlook into the purpose of God.
G.A.T. What is the thought of the river surrounding the place where the gold was?
J.T. The thought is that the gold is there because of the river. That is what we have been saying. If you have a circle of love in a place it is because of the work of God in certain persons there, the Spirit having scope in them. The second two rivers are going forward. The circle of affection was in Jerusalem, but the saints were scattered at the time of Stephen's martyrdom. Then Paul comes in and the saints are seen going forward in the things of God. Paul opened up the mystery, and in the light of it the saints go forward; Christ was in them 'the *hope of glory*'.
{249}
J.V. Do rivers carry with them the idea of supply?
J.T. Quite so; what would this country be without rivers?
L.E.S. The river of God carries with it the idea of joy. In @Psalm 46: 4, 5 we have, "There is a river the streams whereof make glad the city of God, the sanctuary of the habitations of the Most High. God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her at the dawn of the morning".
J.T. The Scriptures speak much of the idea of the river. It is a leading thought in the general position in @Genesis 2. Adam and Eve having been set there. Eve came into this environment; the river is mentioned before her formation when only Adam was there. She comes into all this. Now she is in the hearing of Adam who says, "This time" (verse 23), showing his remarkable intelligence. Eve would never forget this. She would later call it to mind and say, 'The first word I heard from you, Adam, was about myself'. And comparing her husband with all other creatures she would come to understand that he was not an ordinary creature but one made to live by the breath of God. Intelligence would become intensified in their conversations with one another, Ish and Ishshah bringing in a world of relationships, a world of affection; and that is what @Ephesians 5 contemplates, a system of affection.
C.C.T. Which comes first, subjection or affection?
J.T. Love comes first, that is, love in Christ. "Christ also loved" (@Ephesians 5: 25), not "loves" but "loved". And Paul also says, "The Son of God, who has loved me" (@Galatians 2: 20), a historical matter. "Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it" (verse 25). So that love is the source of all, but it is operative in relation to subjection and intelligence in us. From the side of the saints too, love is really first, for the Lord says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", @John 14: 21.
{250}
A.B. You made a remark in regard to superlatives, would you say a little more about that?
J.T. Gold, fragrant drugs and onyx stones represent quality. I would go to Philippians for that, "things that are more excellent", @Philippians 1: 10. Taken normally among men, wealth makes room for love; it may be corrupted in men, but true spiritual wealth is incorruptible. Poverty is the outcome of sin; divine quality is wealth. Philippians points to things that are more excellent. So in treating of faith, hope, love, Paul says, "The greater of these is love".
A.E.H. Paul says, "But my God shall abundantly supply all your need according to his riches in glory" (@Philippians 4: 19); would you connect that with the wealth in @Genesis 2?
J.T. Just so. When we come to @Genesis 24 we shall see how much Abraham's servant made of riches. All these ultimately belonged to Isaac. But we are treating now of the river of Eden and what Eve came into. We have not yet the actual word 'love', it is a matter rather of intelligence. No wife loves her husband unless she respects him. When God brought the woman to Adam He was reckoning on His creature saying something, and he said it; and it was in Eve's hearing. What can be more interesting than this, connecting it now anticipatively with the assembly? What do the saints think of Christ? Eve was espoused to one man; and so the apostle says to the Corinthians, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ", @2 Corinthians 11: 2. The Corinthians needed that word for some of them did not respect Paul, and hence they did not respect Christ, for He was represented in Paul.
C.H.H. Would that feature of the warning of Paul be seen in the fourth river, Euphrates, which would indicate boundaries?
J.T. Yes. That is another thought that comes out: the Euphrates represented boundaries. While the second
{251}
two rivers flowing out of the garden suggest progress forward, the Euphrates also carries the idea of boundaries. This has a place in assembly principles.
W.G.T. Is this not a greater thought than we had this morning? The animals and the plantings were there, but now it is the woman.
J.T. That is right; and who would be in her mind first of all but this great being that she hears talking? This would be the first human language she heard. God did not say anything; it is a question of what Adam says. She is to be occupied with him, and she will come to own his headship.
L.E.S. Would this fit in with the words of the Supper, "This is my body which is given for you", @Luke 22: 19?
J.T. Just so; and the Lord showing the disciples His *side*, (@John 20: 20), also alludes to it.
A.N.W. Would you differentiate between these scriptures: "Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands" (@Ephesians 5: 22), and, "Woman's head is the man", @1 Corinthians 11: 3?
J.T. In the latter passage the man is head of the woman, but it does not say the man is her husband. But in @Ephesians 5 it is her "own" husband.
A.E.H. @Genesis 2 speaks of man and wife, and not husband and wife; is that on the line of respect?
J.T. It would be in verse 25; but the original word for 'man' used in verse 24 is translated "husband" in chapter 3: 6, and 16. Indeed it is generally the word so translated in the Old Testament.
P.G. Would the woman of Samaria show respect in saying, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done", @John 4: 29?
J.T. She now had the greatest respect for Christ. If I do not respect the servants of Christ I shall not respect Him. Some of the Corinthians had acquired disrespect for Paul.
{252}
W.G.T. Do we see this thought of respect coming out in @Genesis 2?
J.T. Details are not given. But if you put yourself in Eve's position you would decide that Adam was worthy of respect. Evidently his was the first voice she heard; she hears that voice as standing by him; God did not say anything. Adam said, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man", @Genesis 2: 23. Adam gives a reason for the name he gives, "... because this was taken out of a man". Paul brings out that man was not made for the woman, but the woman for the man. This is to bring out the subordinate place of the assembly. The wife is placed in subjection, that is God's doing. Thus there is a law governing the wife's position. If she does not respect that law, love for her husband is negatived.
G.A.T. Is this the point in which christendom has signally failed?
J.T. Yes. The book of Revelation says of a certain body assuming to be the bride of Christ, "I sit a queen, and I am not a widow; and I shall in no wise see grief", @Revelation 18: 7. She has no real respect for Christ, nor for His word or commandment; she professes to be related to Him but it is absolutely false. Whereas the true assembly is *subjected to* Christ, this is the mind of God for her. Refusing to respect that, any one professing to be of the assembly is rebellious.
W.G.T. Is God jealous that the position be maintained?
J.T. Yes: Paul says, "I am jealous as to you with a jealousy which is of God", @2 Corinthians 11: 2. Subjection to Christ in the knowledge of His love is worked out in Ephesians; the Lord speaks to the assembly at Ephesus of her "first love".
C.H.H. Does the fact that the word 'Man' with a capital is emphasised so much in Genesis enter into this?
{253}
J.T. Yes, it is "The Adam"; see the note to @Genesis 1: 27. That dignified being is made to live by the breath of God. It is another and infinitely greater thought than being formed from the dust of the ground; the breath of God is divine. God brings the woman to Adam and says nothing. Why is not God saying anything? It is as if He intimated, 'I have a great being here and I want to see him act'. God delights in His handiwork; He delights in us as His handiwork, as formed after Christ.
W.G.T. As to what you have been saying of subjection, the book of Esther greatly stresses the absence of it in Vashti.
J.T. That book is most helpful in our times.
Now we may go on to @Genesis 24 to bring out how *admiration* comes into view, not only respect but admiration. The Canticles sets this out in a wonderful way; it sets out reciprocated affection as between Christ and His people. The theme in the longest chapter in Genesis is Isaac and Rebecca. "Wilt thou go with this man?" is the question put to her in verse 58; her answer is, "I will go". Then "Rebecca arose, and her maids", not only her nurse but her maids; the feminine side is accentuated as she proceeds. "They rode upon the camels, and followed the man". Her suitable qualities are stressed throughout. What a person she is, and how definite in her decisions and committals!
A.N.W. Why in Ephesians and here is the onus of love on the man?
J.T. We can all see that it flows out from Christ. In John's epistle we get, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us; and *we* ought for the brethren to lay down our lives", @1 @John 3: 16. Love expressed in Christ is the basic thought and response to that by the assembly is what is in mind at this time. It is effected by the Holy Spirit. These verses in @Genesis 24 show that Rebecca is a person of decision. There is opposition, her brother and mother
{254}
would detain her, but she is definite. Many are detained from following the Lord by natural influences, but Rebecca is not affected by these; she says, "I will go", and she goes. Her nurse and her maids would accentuate the feminine side, as remarked.
C.H.H. "Thou art our sister" (verse 60). Does not that thought enter into this as in Canticles, "My sister, my spouse"?
J.T. The book of Genesis brings out sisterhood. Sarah is a daughter in the family of Terah, and with Rebecca the thought of sister again comes in. Sisterhood is required for marriage "in the Lord". Spiritually we are by the work of God of the same family as Christ. Rebecca is conscious of the family link with Isaac, as verse 24 indicates.
G.A.T. She "followed the man". Is this by influence or by attraction?
J.T. Attraction, because of what she has heard. The narration of Abraham's servant would, of course, influence her. The testimony of the Holy Spirit as to Christ involves Paul's doctrine, what Christ is *in heaven*.
S.W.P. Is not her intelligence in regard to her position of a high order?
J.T. That is what the chapter is intended to show; it brings out typically what the assembly is characteristically. You do not get the servant's name here, but he was the head servant of Abraham's house; he knows all about Abraham and Abraham trusts him. The matter being left in his hands, he takes ten camels and goes to Aram-naharaim. He is so true and loyal to Abraham's son that when Rebecca makes enquiry as Isaac comes into view he says, "That is my master!" It is no longer Abraham only, Isaac also is his master. There is an allusion here to the son's equality with the father.
A.E.H. In this matter of accentuating the feminine side, do you think that may work out in our localities? Does not a brother moving on the line of affection for Christ rally the saints to Him?
{255}
J.T. That enters into this position. "They rode upon the camels" (verse 61), a matter of feminine initiative; whereas, "the servant took Rebecca, and went away", is masculine. The latter statement would refer to the influence of the Spirit over us as directing us to Christ. Then we are told, "And Isaac had just returned from Beer-lahai-roi; for he was dwelling in the south country" (verse 62). This is the crucial point before us this afternoon: it is a question of admiration. It is respect first (@Genesis 2); normally you are bound to have respect for a man like Adam as to what he is in these circumstances. But that is not the point in Isaac, it is what Rebecca *heard about him from one who knew him well*. She had his gifts on her hands and face, the testimony of Isaac's wealth on her person. She says, "I will go". There is no hesitating at all, but it is because of testimony brought by the servant of Isaac. As to the assembly it is the testimony rendered to her by the Spirit of the glorious Man in heaven. Paul was the first one to preach "Jesus that *he* is the Son of God", @Acts 9: 20. It was the Christ above that he was presenting. He had heard His voice calling him by name, and the Lord sees to it that every hindrance is taken out of the way that this servant might go into action. That is Paul. Isaac is seen as coming from Beer-lahai-roi; Rebecca sees him walking in the fields and springs off the camel. It is not only testimony now, but Isaac himself is before her and she is supremely attracted.
Ques. Would you say a word as to Isaac returning from the well?
J.T. If the assembly is to be brought to Christ, the Holy Spirit must have a great place; but the time comes when Christ is all and she is for Him only. Hence Isaac is now seen by Rebecca. "Isaac had gone out to meditate in the fields" (verse 63). He is not here a man of great affairs like Joseph, but, we may say, a man of *leisure*. It is a question of Christ and the assembly. Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the
{256}
assembly", @Ephesians 5: 32. The time of evening arrives: "And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, camels were coming" (verse 63) -- typically the power that carries us to Christ. Isaac sees camels coming, but Rebecca sees *him*. There are thousands of christians in this town, but most of them are not carried by what the camels here represent but largely by religious organisations. They are not carried by the Holy Spirit but by human arrangements. The Lord, as it were, looks for the camels. "And Rebecca lifted up her eyes and saw Isaac" (verse 64). It is important to note how she is coming, what is carrying her. The assembly is not carried by denominational paraphernalia, she is carried in a royal way, by the power of the Holy Spirit. The camels speak of the Spirit of God who takes us in power to Christ.
C.H.H. Would there be a significance in the name of the well, a testimony of an earlier time? The name Beer-lahai-roi means, 'Well of the living who reveals himself'.
J.T. The allusion is to the well that stands in relation to Hagar, typically the Jews as in the early chapters of Acts. The Spirit did not permanently affect them. But the assembly normally is appropriating the Holy Spirit, "the power which works in us", @Ephesians 3: 20.
A.N.W. In her own energy Rebecca sprang off the camel; she shows her power as affected in the presence of Isaac.
J.T. Yes. It is remarkable how free, how clear she is of all trammels. Persons in human organisations are not so marked. It is most difficult today to get people away from the trammels of the religious world.
W.G.T. *Following the man* is a good suggestion; she had in mind that in following Abraham's servant she would reach Isaac.
C.C.T. Is she brought into the knowledge of headship when the servant says, "That is my master"?
{257}
J.T. Well, that is how she should be affected. "Rebecca lifted up her eyes and saw Isaac, and she sprang off the camel. And she had said to the servant, Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us? And the servant said, That is my master!" (verses 64, 65). The Spirit does not present Himself as an Object for our affection, although there is "the love of the Spirit", but He keeps Christ before us as the Object for our hearts. "That is my master!" would enhance Isaac's greatness in Rebecca's mind. So verse 65 says, "Then she took the veil, and covered herself". That is the feminine way, the assembly not showing herself to the rude gaze of the world; her attractiveness is primarily for Christ.
C.D. Would you say that Peter is speaking with a note of admiration when he says, "Let the whole house of Israel therefore know assuredly that God has made him, this Jesus whom *ye* have crucified, both Lord and Christ", @Acts 2: 36?
J.T. Yes. He would rivet our hearts on Christ. Philip preached "the Christ", and that is how He became attractive to the converts.
W.G.T. Do you see the full thought in Paul's first preaching?
J.T. Yes. Paul preached "Jesus that *he* is the Son of God", @Acts 9: 20. That is a very attractive title; not simply the anointed Man, but the Son of God -- what He is *personally*. In regard to the enquiry as to how we come into all this, one thing of importance is to be *definite* in regard to light obtained. Many are indefinite, uncertain, unable to give an answer. Secondly, to take on the "maids", the feminine accessories, in such circumstances; for we are now dealing with a feminine matter, how the assembly appears in the eyes of Christ. Then am I on an Episcopalian waggon, a Baptist waggon, or, contrariwise, am I on the camels, the typical means the servant took to carry Rebecca? What believers have to come to is that they must take on
{258}
what God has provided if they are to get to Christ. It is not a question of going to heaven now, but a question of how I am to *reach Christ* as in assembly relationship. It is by the Spirit.
C.C.T. The thing for me to do is to 'arise' and move toward Christ in the right power.
J.T. Yes; and not use any other power. It is the Spirit.
A.B. Is it seen in @Acts 16? "And a certain woman, by name Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, heard; whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul", @Acts 16: 14. The carrying power, the Holy Spirit, did not suffer Paul to go elsewhere (verse 7).
J.T. All that fits into what we are saying. He *must* go to Philippi. There were certain ones by the river praying, models, a remarkable group. Today you hear of groups having left the churches and meeting together, but ungoverned by assembly principles. If you seek to get them to own the truth, you have the greatest difficulty. But in Philippi conditions were different. There was prayer outside the gate by the river and the Lord opened Lydia's heart "to attend to the things spoken by Paul". Thus we get the truth opened up.
W.G.T. Would you say something as to the report that the man gave to Isaac?
J.T. That is the next thing. The Spirit is seen typically throughout. What a fine spiritual review that must have been! Anti-typically it is seen in the Acts: what transpired at Jerusalem under the ministry of the twelve, and especially under Paul, was all reported, as it were, to Christ. Paul's epistles mainly furnish the truth relative to Christ and the assembly; Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly", @Ephesians 5: 32.
Ques. You used the words, "mutual admiration". Does that come in at this point?
{259}
J.T. Yes. "Then she took the veil, and covered herself" (verse 65), which implies that she is admiring Isaac, committing herself fully, concealing herself from others to be for him. It is a private matter, and then his affection is expressed in the tent; it is Sarah's tent. Thus the assembly is loved by Christ *in the place o f testimony*, that is, where Israel had been.
G.A.T. Do we get the Godhead in this chapter. Abraham, Isaac and the servant?
J.T. Yes, in a typical sense.
C.C.T. Is this expression, "He loved her", the same thought as @Ephesians 5?
J.T. Yes, it is a question of the love of Christ for the assembly: "even as the Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it" (verse 25).
P.G. What is meant by Isaac being comforted?
J.T. That is Christ being comforted now in the assembly: it is compensation for the loss of Israel typified in Sarah.
A.N.W. As to the suggestion of mutuality, was there ever a time when the saints were more at home in the Canticles than in the present day?
J.T. It is remarkable how that book has come into service. This surely is because love has been stimulated in the saints for Christ.
{260}
HEADSHIP (3)
@Colossians 1: 18; @Colossians 2: 9, 10, 14, 19; @1 Samuel 5: 1, 5; @1 Samuel 17: 48, 51
J.T. The brethren no doubt will have followed the order of the meetings so far and the distinctions made as to headship. First, Christ Head over all things *to* the assembly which is His body, His fulness, as connected with @Genesis 1; and then Christ Head of the assembly, involving union as seen in @Ephesians 5, @Genesis 2, and @Genesis 24. What is to be considered now in Colossians is the headship of Christ in relation to His personal glories, glories attached to Him as Man, involving His Deity. In view of this I hope we shall see certain things to be taken out of the way, and especially that principalities and powers are spoiled (@Colossians 2: 14, 15). The handwriting of ordinances has been taken out of the way, God having nailed it to the cross; and having made a show of principalities and powers publicly. He has led them in triumph by it.
The passages in 1 Samuel were read to illustrate how principalities and powers were spoiled, typified in the Philistine god and in Goliath the military champion. David took the head of the giant to Jerusalem, and in this way he made a show of them publicly; thus making way for true headship. This corresponds with the allusion to Satan's head in @Genesis 3, that the seed of the woman should crush it.
C.H.H. So then, union would not be brought out in @Colossians 1: 18?
J.T. No, that Christ is said there to be Head of the body, the assembly, is not to bring out what accrues from His headship, but that He has *that* glory along with other glories. That chapter speaks of many glories and among these glories is His headship of the assembly.
A.E.H. Does the word "firstborn" link on with the idea of first place?
{261}
J.T. Yes. All these glories, giving Him first place in all things, witness to His Deity. They are predicated of Him as Man. Thus His Deity in manhood is asserted in the strongest way.
A.N.W. Is not the Colossian letter corrective while Ephesians is more constructive and carrying the great divine thoughts through to finality?
J.T. That is right. Ephesians is the full thought, completeness. The Colossians were getting on well, but they were in danger of "philosophy and vain deceit", and hence needed the truth of Christ's headship.
N.B. What is involved in the thought of the beginning?
J.T. It would mean that He must be first in everything. It is a remarkable statement without qualification, "firstborn from among the dead" following it. He was not simply *at* the beginning. He *was* the beginning.
N.B. Does "the beginning of the creation of God", in the letter to Laodicea allude to this thought?
J.T. Yes, only in the verse before us He is the beginning, without saying of what. Hence nothing could be before Him. The epistle to the Colossians was to be read "in the assembly of Laodiceans" (chapter 4: 16). Alas, how far they got away from the truth of it!
H.B. Is it like "the root of David"?
J.T. Yes; David sprang out of Him.
G.A.T. He had no beginning.
J.T. That is a strong statement of His Deity. We have also "That which was from the beginning", but here He *is* the beginning. Not only was He in it, but everything originated in Him.
A.N.W. Headship is given to Him as Man in Ephesians, but in Colossians He *is* Head; that is, in virtue of who He is.
J.T. In Colossians He is Head in virtue of what He is personally; all these glories belong to Him and
{262}
there are other glories not mentioned here. What a great vessel the assembly is, seeing that in her, as the fulness of Christ, all of these glories are to be displayed!
H.P.R. Do the first three verses in the gospel of John bring out the thought, "in the beginning"?
J.T. They link on; in the beginning He *was there*, that is the first thing stated. He was a divine Person. He was God.
C.C.T. Is the thought more clearly defined in @Revelation 1, "I am the Alpha and the Omega", "the first and the last"?
J.T. Well, He was the First. No one was before Him; He was the Alpha and the Omega; the beginning and the end. He was the first to speak, and will be the last; He is still speaking. It is "The Lord God ... the Almighty" in @Revelation 1; Deity, in which, of course, Christ has part. "He who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty". He is the beginning and exists eternally; "was" is historical, "is to come" is future, but "is" is present, and without beginning and without end: Deity.
L.E.S. Would you say that the glory of His headship in Colossians is brought in over against every rival, so as to draw out the affections of the saints? Like the word to Joshua, "This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel".
J.T. Yes; and that is why such a meeting as this should affect us. The fact that we belong to the assembly should move us as the glories of Christ, who is our Head, are presented to us.
C.H.H. Is His incarnation involved in verses 18 - 20?
J.T. Incarnation and the special glories that attach to His Person in it are seen in verses 13 to 20. He is the Son of the Father's love, in whom we have redemption. The statements down to verse 20 are intended to stress the greatness of His person. It is Christ as Man, but these things could be stated of Him only because He is God. The Colossians were to be impressed by
{263}
these glories; in the new man "Christ is everything, and in all", @Colossians 3: 11. These personal glories make way for Him, shutting out all others from the minds of the saints. Redemption was necessary for this; through Him the Godhead reconciled all things to Itself. Believers, It has also reconciled "in the body of his flesh through death; to present you holy and unblamable and irreproachable before it". Chapter 2 shows that certain things contrary to us have been removed judicially: as we have noted, the handwriting of ordinances God has taken away, "having nailed it to the cross; having spoiled principalities and authorities, he made a show of them publicly, leading them in triumph by it" (chapter 2: 14, 15). Thus the way is cleared for Christ's place as Head over all things. He exercises power against idolatry. Thus Dagon fell before the ark; the ark, typical of Christ, has power to overthrow the Philistine system of idolatry. The head of Dagon and both palms of his hands were cut off (@1 Samuel 5: 4).
A.E.H. Does the word "publicly" refer to what is open, so that its false glory is exposed and hence its prestige is lost?
J.T. Quite so; that is why christianity involved the overthrow of idolatry. The result is far-reaching. The ark was set in the house of Dagon and when they of Ashdod arose the next day Dagon had fallen on his face, showing that he had no power to stand before the ark. But on the second night God shows His power and complete ability to displace any rival system, so that they found Dagon with his head cut off, and also the palms of his hands; only the fish-stump was left. The manifestation of the power of God had a very definite effect on the followers of Dagon in that neither the priests of Dagon or any that came into his house "tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod to this day" (verse 5). It will be noted that the effect of these remarkable signs on the Philistines was not repentance, but, on the contrary, *superstition*.
{264}
A.E.H. So that Dagon and Goliath represent the public side of things, and now we can judge them and have them displaced in our souls to make way for the headship of Christ?
J.T. Yes. The fall of Dagon was known publicly. God does things publicly, and that is why the testimony of the apostles had such great effect, bringing down the world by their signs and teachings. Christianity was thus proved to be superior to judaism and idolatry. Seeing the signs done by the apostles, many believed on Christ. Apollos convinced the Jews *publicly*, and Paul says he taught at Ephesus "publicly and in every house", @Acts 20: 20.
A.N.W. Is it not interesting how the apostle enforces Deity at Athens to overthrow the idolatry there? Although he refers to Him. He does not *name* the Lord Jesus; it is *God*.
J.T. Quite so. It is God, who is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the Man whom He has appointed, giving the proof of it to all in having raised Him from among the dead.
G.A.T. Would you say that before I give up anything I must discredit it in my own soul?
J.T. Yes; God would have us give up worldly things and hence He discredits them in our souls. Dagon fell on his face; this did not shake the Philistines¬ confidence in him for they *set him up again*. Rome was exposed through the Reformation and more particularly through the revival of the truth in the last century, but the evil was set up more boldly than ever in the Bull of Infallibility. Dagon was a public shame, but the Philistines, unconverted, advanced further in this error on superstitious lines. They could not deny that there was nothing but a stump left, yet they carried on by utter superstition; they would not tread on the threshold where their idolatry was exposed.
A.N.W. "Do not handle, do not taste, do not touch", @Colossians 2: 21.
{265}
J.T. Quite so; legalists would impose their restrictions, ignoring that such were taken out of the way in the cross of Christ.
A.E.H. Superstition can only exist in the presence of darkness.
J.T. You can see by these references what has to be encountered, what christianity had to encounter in the beginning. And now that christendom has gone back to paganism we see what christians today have to do to remove darkening things.
C.H.H. The public position of evil is seen in Timothy, but their folly shall be completely manifest to all (@2 Timothy 3: 9).
W.G.T. The ark has been disregarded according to 1 Samuel; the recovery of it would refer to the truth of the Person of Christ. Is that what is in mind in bringing in the ark?
J.T. Yes. The Philistines had captured the ark, but God restored it through David. "Then the Lord awoke as one out of sleep, like a mighty man that shouteth aloud by reason of wine; and he smote his adversaries", @Psalm 78: 65, 66. He restores the ark and sets up David. So today there is recovery of the truth of Christ's Person and of the truth generally; and those possessing it in any measure are responsible to seek to lead their brethren out of the current captivity. The Lord has taken certain things that were against us out of our way and we must not go back to them. The Colossians were in danger of admitting the revival of what had been nailed to the cross.
A.N.W. "Let none therefore judge you in meat or in drink", @Colossians 2: 16. Would you say a word to balance that, as to my consideration for a weak brother?
J.T. Well, we have to consider a weak brother, as taught in @Romans 14: "him that is weak in the faith receive", and, "let not him that eats not judge him that eats: for God has received him". It is a question of thoughtful love and had more force at the beginning
{266}
when converts were coming in from judaism and heathendom. Young believers who had views from earlier teaching not quite according to the liberty of the gospel, but not self-willed in what they held, were to be charitably considered. They were weak in the faith, but they were in it. All were to be considerate of each other. Patient love is always needed. As time is given for teaching and growth, all will see eye to eye. But if any one is persistent in a wrong thought it should be made clear that his *conscience* cannot rule the saints. What may be borne with in a young believer may be leaven in an older one who would force his views on others. Thus an insistent vegetarian or prohibitionist would be leavened.
A.E.H. It becomes a kind of system, a working of evil that is seen in painful results in gathering others into its views.
N.B. Would you help us a little as to "not holding fast the head", @Colossians 2: 19?
J.T. In Colossians the first great feature of our subject is the glories of Christ as in chapter 1, as we have been speaking of them. They lead to the thought that He is Head. Head here is not exactly official, not what Christ is made, but it is that in virtue of who He is He, becomes all to us -- He is Head. We are morally lifted up in the knowledge of the greatness of the Person who is our Head.
C.H.H. Is that why the word "therefore" is used in @Colossians 2: 16? Would it imply that these glories substantiated in our souls would liberate us from all these things?
J.T. Quite so. "Let none therefore judge you in meat or in drink"; we are to be governed by the principles taught in this chapter.
C.C.T. We find slow progress with some brothers and sisters. Is this because we do not take in the glories of which you have been speaking?
{267}
J.T. That is right; and the general instruction is much neglected. The epistles are written largely to remove what hinders, and to promote growth by presenting what is positive. One great fact is that the Father has "made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light"; and He "has delivered us from the authority of darkness". Darkness had authority over our souls -- paganism, judaism, and such like. The Father delivered us from all that and "translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love", the supreme Object for all our affections. 'The Son of the Father's love' is one of the most beautiful expressions. Solomon was a type of Christ thus viewed. The extension of that is in the book of Proverbs, "tender and an only one", @Proverbs 4: 3. He was a special object of affection to his parents; Jehovah loved him and he was called Jedidiah for Jehovah's sake.
P.G. John was in the Lord's bosom.
J.T. Yes; John knew divine love. Christ is the "only-begotten Son", in John's gospel; it also says, "The Father loves the Son". Believers are translated into His kingdom. How attractive to be under the rule of such an One; the rule of love! Proverbs opens it up to us, showing how one who is conscious of being a son can speak to sons. For example, "My son, give me thy heart" (@Proverbs 23: 26), a good word for young christians. @Psalm 45 says, "My heart is welling forth with a good matter: I say what I have composed touching the king". By such compositions help is afforded for young christians to see Christ in His glory. @Colossians 1 presents many of His glories as we have seen.
B.P. Would verses 12 and 13 provide conditions that are essential in the assembly for Christ to be recognised as Head?
J.T. That is right: "giving thanks to the Father, who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light" (verse 12). That is what the Father has
{268}
done, and all to the end that we might be ready for our part in the great range of glory.
W.G.T. Does the fitness contemplate that we are in fellowship with the saints?
J.T. That is what is meant; "who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light", that is *our* portion. So that we can walk in the light as God is in the light and have fellowship one with another (@1 @John 1: 7).
A.N.W. "In whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins", @Colossians 1: 14. The forgiveness of sins is a very sweet thought, is it not?
J.T. It relieves us in our consciences; thus we are free to enter into the great relationships and glories mentioned.
A.E.H. If I am conscious of my relationship with the Father, would the main effect of it be joyfulness in me? "That my joy may be in you, and your joy be full", the Lord says (@John 15: 11).
J.T. That is it; the things connected with the Father. How blessed to know that the *Father* loves you! "The Father himself has affection for you", the Lord said.
S.W.P. Is the knowledge of this great love involved in the word "translated", (verse 13)? It is not a mere movement on my side, it is the Father's action. "Who has ... translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love". I am conscious of the Father's pleasure in the action, am I not?
J.T. Just so. The thought of translation into the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love is very beautiful, enhancing the glories of Christ in our souls.
S.C. As to your reference to Solomon, is not David's concern chiefly to get the people to see that his son is young and tender?
J.T. Yes, he is a remarkable babe. There is hardly any like him in the sense of the love shown to him. He is, of course, a type of Christ; and so we are translated into the kingdom of that One. It is not, however,
{269}
a house, but a kingdom. Proverbs is a most helpful book for young people to look into on this line. It affords counsel and love, but it also involves *rule*.
C.C.T. Would you say a little more about "the kingdom of the Son of his love".
J.T. According to the words used, it is a sphere of dominant love; love rules in it; love active in an authoritative way characterises it. As I said, Proverbs opens it up to us. It is the kingdom of One who is a Son to His Father, who addresses us as sons. @Matthew 11 fits in here; there the Lord praises the Father for revealing His things to babes. He says, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes. Yea. Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight", @Matthew 11: 25, 26. Then He says, "Come to me", that is the Son of the Father's love. The Father is operating in babes. He is translating them into the kingdom of the Son of His love.
C.H.H. In the next chapter of Matthew He is seen as one greater than Solomon, "behold, more than Solomon is here", @Matthew 12: 42.
J.T. Yes; chapter 11 is introductory to the chapters immediately following. It is not only what He is personally, but also what was there in the babes, in the circle which He calls His brethren at the end of chapter 12. All was centred in Himself. How pleasing they were to Him! His relatives were without and wanted Him to *come to them*, but He would say, 'Let them come to *Me*'. That was not their thought; they would have Him come out to them; that, however, would be interfering with His service and breaking up the circle within. How beautiful is the incident recorded in Mark! "Looking around in a circuit at those that were sitting around him, he says, Behold my mother and my brethren". They did the will of God. The Spirit having come, this circle continues. It took form
{270}
in the assembly; in it normally believers find in a practical way salvation and life.
G.A.T. Is Mary here governed by what is natural?
J.T. Quite so; many nominally in fellowship are governed by natural feelings; they make more of the natural than of the spiritual.
L.E.S. Would not @Isaiah 33: 16, 17 bear on this? "He shall dwell on high, the fortresses of the rocks shall be his high retreat; bread shall be given him, his water shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty; they shall behold the land that is far off".
J.T. That is a touching scripture, the *King in His beauty*. @Song of Songs 3: 11 corresponds, "Go forth, daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart". In both scriptures He is presented in His attractiveness. That we may arrive at these things we are told in Colossians that certain obstacles are taken out of the way so that we might be in liberty. "Let none therefore judge you ..."; this links on definitely with what is before us in headship. Christ as Head of the body involving that the body is of Him; it is not a human development. As Eve was of Adam so is the body of Christ; "and not holding fast the head, from whom all the body, ministered to and united together by the joints and bands, increases with the increase of God", @Colossians 2: 19. The subject is now squarely before us; we, as of the body, are to hold the Head. All supply depends on the Head.
G.A.T. Do you keep all this before you when dealing with things in the current religious systems?
J.T. Yes; you are holding fast the Head as the attitude of your mind. It would disallow all human ecclesiastical and denominational arrangements. You learn to exercise your mind against all that is under these heads; you hold fast "the Head", maintaining full
{271}
scope for Christ in the mind. Christ as Head is thus known experimentally.
W.G.T. It would influence the mind of a believer; holding Christ as Head enables him by discernment to detect and refuse his own will.
J.T. Quite so; those in nunneries often appear very humble and chaste in their outward movements, but their *wills* are in this, not giving place to Christ as Head. Thus we are enjoined, "Let no one fraudulently deprive you of your prize, doing his own will in humility and worship of angels ... not holding fast the head" (verses 18, 19).
N.B. Is departing from iniquity consequent upon this, or does it precede it?
J.T. It precedes it; we must be clear of iniquity to come into Christ's headship. In enjoying His headship I am not only subject, but I regard Him in my mind in a holy, affectionate and intelligent way.
L.E.S. Would the last verse of @Romans 7 fit in with this as to the mind? "So then I *myself* with the mind serve God's law; but with the flesh sin's law".
J.T. Yes; the idea there is to eliminate all else but God's law. That state is basic in the christian. It leads up to this truth, that I make room for Christ to influence me *organically*.
G.A.T. Does that fit in with @Colossians 3: 2: "have your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth"?
J.T. That is right. You have *control* over your mind; by holding the Head you can turn your mind away from corrupt things; you have *power* to do that.
A.B. Does the last phrase of verse 15 of @Colossians 2 advance the thought, "leading them in triumph by it"?
J.T. Yes. In verse 12 you get the full thought as to power, "In which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead" (see footnote New Trans.). God has done all -- raised Christ and quickened the
{272}
saints with Him by His power, also taking out of the way the things mentioned in verses 14 and 15; and the cross is the means of it morally.
A.E.H. Why are the bands brought in here (verse 19)?
J.T. It is an allusion to the human body, "bands" referring to ligaments; they hold other things together. We get a larger view in @Ephesians 4: 15, 16: "but, holding the truth in love, we may grow up to him in all things, who is the head, the Christ: from whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love". There you get "the whole body" and it is from the Head that it increases. The human body is used to convey the idea of Christ and the assembly. The apostle felt the Colossians could follow him on this point, so he points out that what would hinder had been removed through the cross. Thus in holding the Head what is needful would flow in, which would produce in them the working out of the truth of the body in love. The Head functions to the increase of the body. It increases with the increase of God.
T.S. Do you think that we should constantly look for a manifestation of Christ in His body? The things of which you were just speaking might be on our side a hindrance to this.
J.T. Quite so. God has acted to remove them, and we accept that, and thus make room for Christ and nothing else. He is everything and all to us.
G.A.T. When you say, making room for Christ, what do you mean?
J.T. It is very essential that we make room for Christ in our minds and affections. In a sense what is before us depends on love, being rooted and grounded in love. In chapter 2: 1 - 3 we see how essential it is that we hold the saints in our affections, not in any
{273}
sense ignoring wrong or compromising with evil, but at the same time clothing the saints with God's thoughts of them.
A.E.H. Would Epaphras fill out the idea? His prayer was "to the end that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God", @Colossians 4: 12.
J.T. That is right; he was a Colossian saint. Through him Paul evidently got to know their state. Paul knew that he was concerned about the state of the Colossians -- that they might stand perfect and complete in *all* the will of God.
N.B. Verse 16 of the last chapter shows the circulation of which we have been speaking: "And when the letter has been read among you, cause that it be read also in the assembly of Laodiceans, and that *ye* also read that from Laodicea".
J.T. Paul had also written a letter to Laodicea; it is worthy of note that he did not make one letter do for both assemblies, but he writes a letter to each assembly and both were to be read in Colosse and Laodicea. Evidently conditions in the two assemblies were similar. Thus ministry may deal with a *district*, although *each* assembly retains its local status.
S.W.P. Is constitutional development in view in verse 19 of chapter 2: "and not holding fast the head, from whom all the body, ministered to and united together by the joints and bands, increases with the increase of God"?
J.T. Yes; there can be no growth save as we hold the Head, "from whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love", @Ephesians 4: 16. That would be all the saints on earth; @Colossians 2: 19 corresponds, as we have seen.
A.N.W. The increase would be in spiritual substance, I suppose.
{274}
J.T. Just so. And it is comforting to know that it is the *whole* body. What is going on in other countries affects us.
A.E.H. It would seem as though God would have us be in the very centre of all His present operations. I was wondering if chapter 2: 19 speaks of what is basic, things inaugurated by God? The negative side would have feasts, new moons, and sabbaths, darkening our minds; but believers holding Christ as Head, are set in the centre of the great system of glory inaugurated by God Himself.
J.T. Yes; it is immense. And it is most important that this should be apprehended and maintained in our souls. We are in the midst of apostasy and hence the dense darkness. It is not simply the natural darkness in men's hearts, but a turning away from the true light which now shines -- God known in Christ. Thus in christendom certain men are "twice dead".
A.E.H. You are touching on Jude now. The maintenance of the truth is much more difficult now than at the outset.
J.T. You feel the denseness of the darkness in this twice-dead condition. "If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great the darkness!" @Matthew 6: 23.
W.G.T. The fig-tree was to be cultivated for one more year. Is that what you had in mind?
J.T. The fig-tree was to be cultivated for one more year (@Luke 13: 6 - 9), which represents the longsuffering of God; "But early in the morning, as he came back into the city, he hungered. And seeing one fig-tree in the way, he came to it and found on it nothing but leaves only. And he says to it, Let there be never more fruit of thee for ever. And the fig-tree was immediately dried up", @Matthew 21: 18, 19. The fig-tree was thus dead, as cursed by the Lord. Apostasy has set in in Christendom and in due time God will confirm it there. "For this reason God sends to them a working of error, that they should believe what is false, that all might be
{275}
judged who have not believed the truth", @2 Thessalonians 2: 11, 12. The Lord says of Jezebel, "Her children will I kill with death", @Revelation 2: 23. That is an apostate condition, and it has already taken place. It is judicial fixedness and hence there is no hope. It is most solemn.
W.G.T. We have to look on persons here in a judicial way and not now as subjects of grace.
J.T. Yes. The *time* of judicial fixedness is in God's hand. When the Lord says, "I will kill her children with death", that is final. @Revelation 18 announces prophetically the destruction of that system.
G.A.T. If a person is found amongst us suffering under the judicial dealings of God, what should be done as to him?
J.T. That is a matter for discernment. John says, "I do not say of that that he should make a request", @1 John 5: 16. He refers to "a sin to death". There is no evidence that the Lord or the disciples prayed for Judas after he betrayed his Master.
{276}
HEADSHIP (4)
@1 Samuel 17: 54; @1 Samuel 18: 6, 7; @1 Samuel 25: 1, 3; @1 Chronicles 29: 10, 14
J.T. This morning we looked at certain scriptures in Colossians and 1 Samuel with a view to seeing that the headship of Christ in the assembly is one of His glories. The glories which are mentioned in the first chapter of Colossians involve His Deity. All things were created by Him. The assembly is His body, and He is Head of it. It was thought that the brethren would be helped by having this clearly in their minds. It involves also the glory of the assembly.
Then in @Colossians 2 it is said that God took certain things out of the way for His people, things which would hinder them from entering into the great thoughts of headship. This is illustrated in Dagon in the presence of the ark. Then the cutting off of the head of the giant (@1 Samuel 17), typifies how principalities and powers are made a show of "openly"; God overthrew them through the death and resurrection of Christ. The way is thus open for our entering into the great thoughts of headship and growing thereby. All the body is nourished by the Head; it is essential therefore that we hold the Head.
It is now purposed to look at the scriptures read in 1 Samuel and 1 Chronicles relative to the principles of headship worked out in David as a type of Christ, and his recognition of God over all in the whole matter; so that in the last scripture read David represents the service of God into which the headship of Christ enters. In this connection we are in living touch with Him and guided by Him in relation to spiritual principles in the service of God. There are certain principles governing the service; Christ being Head governs us in it, and we draw from Him as Minister of the sanctuary. In @1 Samuel 17 the head of the giant is said to have been taken to Jerusalem, a
{277}
remarkable incident; the time is not stated, but the fact is very important, because the service of God is there, in the place of His choice, in which the house was built, in which the service was inaugurated by David and carried on by Solomon. Later David went there and overthrew the Jebusites, taking their strongholds. He dwelt in it and called it the city of David. Thus room is made for God in Jerusalem, which is called later the city of the great King. Thus headship works out there in the service of God. The Psalms speak much of liberty in this way.
A.N.W. Would this be the fulfilment in type of, "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts in Man, and even for the rebellious, for the dwelling there of Jah Elohim", @Psalm 68: 18?
J.T. Quite so; that psalm yields much as to our subject. All is carried out from heaven now; Christ in heaven is contemplated in these types. The first thing we need to understand in the great subject before us is the taking of the giant's head to Jerusalem; how that God now has a suitable place from which to carry on His service and government. Christ being Head over both.
L.E.S. Does all this suggest that the assembly now becomes the vehicle in which the headship of Christ is set out and witnessed to?
J.T. Yes, that is clearly seen. We have the 144,000 with the Lamb on Mount Zion. They are able to learn the heavenly song sung before the throne, and before the living creatures and the elders. In this we may see how links are formed in the whole universe resounding with praise. The books of Revelation and the Psalms are full of it. The Psalms end with calling upon everything that hath breath to praise Jah.
C.H.H. So David now moves to secure the position, the lawless head being removed. Is this seen in the wise woman throwing the head of Sheba over the wall?
{278}
J.T. Quite so. Thus headship in David was protected. Other distinct incidents are seen, such as that of Abimelech: a wicked head was destroyed by a handmill stone. And we may add Nabal, in @1 Samuel 25; Jehovah smote him and he died. He also represents the fall of a lawless one in the place of headship. We have many things that illustrate the idea of headship according to the world, both political and religious, and it is important that the people of God should recognise them and not allow them to darken our minds as to the headship of Christ.
W.G.T. Does @Ephesians 4: 8, "He has led captivity captive", suggest the thought of David taking the head of Goliath to Jerusalem?
J.T. Yes. The truth involved in that is witnessed to in Christ as gone into heaven.
R.W. Will you say what Jerusalem meant to David at this time?
J.T. Well, he had some light about it. In Matthew it is called "the city of the great king". David took the giant's head there in recognition of the fact that typically the headship of the devil had been destroyed.
P.G. In carrying the head to Jerusalem God would get the glory out of the victory.
J.T. Quite so; that is where the house was built and the service of God began. The destruction of the opposing elements in the types is very significant. The point now is that they must be discredited in our souls. From the Vatican down, elements that are rivals to the headship of Christ exist; and we must rigidly keep clear of their influence; thus we are free to take part in the service of God.
G.A.T. I think it is very important for all of us to get hold of what you are presenting about the hindrances being removed. The women on the way to the tomb were worried about who was going to remove the stone, but when they got there the stone had been removed already.
{279}
J.T. Yes. The idea of headship according to man was in a negative sense witnessed to where Christ was crucified; it was the place of the skull. The princes of this world did not know who He was, for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. But He is that, and hence in Him was all the wisdom of God. This wisdom is now known in the assembly. They put Him in a tomb to get rid of Him, but He is now our living Head. All this comes out in the house of Simon the leper; there the woman anointed the Lord's *head* with the ointment. All this enters into David's position typically. The giant's head carried to Jerusalem is a trophy of his victory, and room is made through which divine wisdom is to be worked out in Jerusalem -- the place of God's choice. In the song of the women of @1 Samuel 18, it is said, "Saul hath smitten his thousands, and David his ten thousands". David is made superior to Saul. What is of man is thus seen to be superseded by what is of God. As Saul hears of that, jealousy arises, and he is removed. The christian has only one Head, Christ.
L.E.S. I was wondering if the message to Philadelphia might not suggest headship; the Lord says, "I make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee" (@Revelation 3: 9), as though there is a testimony rendered to the overthrow of every rival head.
J.T. The synagogue of Satan would certainly have the character of headship opposed to Christ. But there is really an Ephesian touch in what the Lord says as to His love for the assembly. "I will cause;" He says, "that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee". There will be public evidence of Christ's love for the assembly.
A.E.H. Would the women answering one another in @1 Samuel 18 indicate that we are still on Colossian
{280}
ground? And in the light of that, what about the armour in the tent? Would that indicate the tentative position?
J.T. Goliath's sword is now in David's hand, and the armour is in his tent. David knew well how to use both. Goliath's sword would be a symbol of death as in Satan's hand. Now it is in Christ's hand. It was by *it* that David killed the giant "completely", and cut off his head.
A.E.H. Therefore I need to know more how to use the sword of Goliath against myself.
J.T. Yes. We have to use death against ourselves. If I do not "put to death the deeds of the body" I shall not live; I shall be governed by my own will. But death is ours (@1 Corinthians 3: 22), and we can use it against ourselves.
A.E.H. Would you say that I do not come into the full good of the Colossian position until I do this?
J.T. Yes. We have to reckon ourselves dead unto sin. "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ, seek the things which are above ... have your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth; for ye have died, and your life is hid with the Christ in God" (@Colossians 3: 1 - 3). The sequence to the position 'risen with Christ', is that we are dead. Thus it is said, "Put to death therefore your members which are upon the earth" (@Colossians 3: 5). We use death against ourselves. Paul could say, "I die daily"; he was applying the death sentence to himself.
F.M. Would the thought of destroying adverse headships be seen in Jael taking Sisera into her tent and driving a tent-pin into his head?
J.T. Yes; that is another illustration of what we are saying. His head denotes the moral and spiritual ability of the man, and Jael uses death against Sisera there.
C.H.H. Would the songs of these women indicate an undeveloped condition, but development by progress?
{281}
J.T. That is right. You can see that Saul is losing ground, and that is important; but David is gaining in the affections of the people.
C.C.T. How could I apply that to myself?
J.T. It is a question of how much these heads in what they represent are destroyed for you, and how much you will accept as to the reproach of Christ in making room for Him. It is worked out in you in the measure in which you accept self-negation in accord with His death.
C.C.T. What is the thought in regard to singing and dancing (@1 Samuel 18); how do we apply that today?
J.T. That accords with the place Christ has. In the type, He is *beginning* to have a great place, He is the theme of our song. Your whole being is brought into the celebration with holy energy and joy. Matthew tells us that as the Lord was in the temple the children cried, "Hosanna to the Son of David". Of course the leaders in Israel refused that, but the Lord said to them, "Have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?" That He left them is quite significant (@Matthew 21: 17).
P.G. What would be suggested here by the women instead of the men singing the praises?
J.T. It would denote the general state of the people as affected by David. They were ready for him; and so it is said, "All Israel and Judah loved David", @1 Samuel 18: 16. God works in His people so that they should respond to what He presents to them objectively.
A.N.W. The negative side here is, "Saul eyed David from that day and forward" (verse 9).
T.S. Does the mixture of the song indicate that it takes some time to free us from captivity? They went out to meet king Saul.
J.T. That is right. The song is partly to Saul and partly to David. Saul was still king. It is the same with Abigail; Nabal was still alive when David came into view, but God came in and removed him so that
{282}
way might be made for David, that Abigail might be free. So it is in @Romans 7: 2, "If the husband should die, she is clear from the law of the husband". This is how the Lord comes in to remove what legally holds us. In early apostolic days the high priest at Jerusalem was still legally the high priest of Israel, but the Jewish system now has no claim on us whatever. God has taken it out of the way, "having nailed it to the cross". Now we are "to another", to Christ, to serve under and with Him; to "serve in newness of spirit", @Romans 7: 6.
L.E.S. Does this indicate how things were clarified one hundred years ago, so that the testimony might go forward?
J.T. Yes. We can see that both David and Abigail were helped in the recognition of what God would do in setting aside Saul and Nabal, and they waited until God set them aside. God is also helping us so that these elements opposed to Christ seen typically in David's day are being set aside in *our hearts*.
W.G.T. Does what the women were doing in answering one another suggest continuity of thought?
J.T. It is rather the idea of mutuality. In Matthew and Mark it is said that after the Supper the Lord and the disciples sang a hymn, and then went out to the mount of Olives. As we sit down to partake of the Lord's supper it is a question as to what is suitable, including mutuality; all join together at the beginning; "we being assembled", Luke says (@Acts 20: 7), it is a mutual matter.
J.W. Does @Luke 24: 26 enter into what you have been saying, "Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory?"
J.T. Quite so; it was necessary that He should enter into His glory. A glimpse of this glory was seen at Emmaus. The Lord was free to take the place of Head in the home; but such a house was not equal to that glory, hence He disappeared. But standing "in their
{283}
midst" in Jerusalem He entered, in principle at least, into His glory. That is the idea, it is not the temple now, but the assembly. There room is made for the headship of Christ, He is at home there. He shines there in infinite love and wisdom. That is how the truth works out in the assembly. Thus we can readily see that the headship of Christ cannot extend practically to those held in human organisations. What the Spirit says to the assemblies is largely to set believers free from what is of man so that they should enter into headship.
J.W. So that the outcome was that the disciples were praising and blessing God.
J.T. That is right; the Lord leaves them here, and they are praising God. They are engaged in the service of God, surpassing in quality the services of David and Solomon. If you take Luke's account alone you would not think that forty days intervened before the Lord ascended. In this gospel He was carried up into heaven, and they were continually in the temple praising and blessing God.
S.W.P. Would @2 Chronicles 20 fit in here, the singing and rejoicing after all the opposition was put down?
J.T. That is a good illustration of what we are dealing with; "Jehoshaphat at their head" (verse 27). The king was their head "to go again to Jerusalem with joy; for Jehovah had made them to rejoice over their enemies. And they came to Jerusalem with lutes and harps and trumpets, to the house of Jehovah" (verses 27, 28).
Rem. In @1 Samuel 17 the pressure is intensified against David by the Philistines, and in chapter 19 Saul definitely sets himself against David, yet David progresses.
J.T. Yes, there, is steady progress. God being with him. In chapter 25 we are told of Samuel's death. All Israel mourned for him; he was a great prophet, but he
{284}
had done his work. There was great need for a leader in Israel, and God is making way for David; but Nabal appears against him. Why should this be? Samuel's ministry had been effective and Abigail represents the result of it. Typically that is how the truth is seen in this book. Abigail had been, as it were, taking in the ministry; she was intelligent as to what was proceeding. Then Nabal comes into view. Abigail's husband, a churlish man. Abigail has a right judgment regarding both David and Nabal. Nabal as opposed to David is in his way. But David is proceeding and God removes Nabal. On the principle of @Colossians 2: 14, 15, he is "taken ... out of the way".
S.P. Would you say that in principle there is no lapse between Samuel's ministry and that of David, but rather continuity?
J.T. Yes; they were contemporary, but now Samuel is dead and David continues. David is equal to the position that has developed, but there is this opposer Nabal; he speaks contemptuously of God's anointed.
W.G.T. Abigail says of her husband, "Nabal is his name, and folly is with him", @1 Samuel 25: 25.
J.T. Just so, she had a right judgment about him. She confirmed the young man's judgment; he had said to her, "Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our master; and he has insulted them. And the men were very good to us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we anything, as long as we companied with them, when we were in the fields. They were a wall to us both by night and day, all the while we were with them feeding the sheep. And now know and consider what thou wilt do, for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household; and he is such a son of Belial, that one cannot speak to him", @1 Samuel 25: 14 - 17. The servant also had a judgment about this man. We must arrive at a judgment as to every evil that arises affecting the brethren; as in this case: "he is such a son of Belial, that
{285}
one cannot speak to him". Abigail, possessing the discernment that marks the assembly, confirms the young man's judgment as to her husband.
A.B. What you are calling attention to is most important in a practical way; the current ministry and the embracing of it have much to do with our progress. Nabal says, "Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse"? (verse 10).
J.T. That is it; Christ is despised; Nabal is most unfair and insulting, but his attitude is a type of what is current at the present time -- a disregard of what God is saying, a refusal to recognise the ministry of the Spirit of God. "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies", @Revelation 2. Abigail, we may say, was a product of the Spirit, and hence discerned the evil character of Nabal. How did she know about David? Typically, she came to know him through the ministry.
C.C.T. The word 'understanding' is emphasised by the word 'good', and therefore she is able to take a true stand.
J.T. That is so, and it is what the Spirit of God presents to us as to her at the first. The verses we read say that "the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance"; that is, she was in correspondence with David. In the assembly it is the idea of correspondence with Christ, and I believe it is worked out in the remnant today.
C.H.H. Would you say that difficulties that arise in the assembly are ordered of God, and that they must be overcome in order that there may be spiritual growth?
J.T. God works that way; the saints must have a judgment about these things, and reach decisions; and we must judge ourselves as to the part we have had in them. God uses such exercises to bring out the truth.
J.W. Abigail had a judgment as to Saul also, according to verse 29.
{286}
J.T. From verse 18 her movements are progressive; Saul to her is just "a man" risen up to pursue David and seek his life (verse 29). Saul is just a man, but murder was in his heart.
W.G.T. Does Abigail not represent how right principles can be maintained in the house if the wife maintains spiritual dignity, even though the husband is churlish?
J.T. Yes; if the general condition is good God supports His people, although those ostensibly in the lead may be wrong; but this contemplates an eventual right judgment and the evil dealt with. This principle is seen in the letters to the Corinthians. Hannah, in the beginning of this book, is seen triumphing over evil in her husband's house with a resultant contribution to the house of God. In chapter 2: 1, Hannah is said to have prayed, but what is recorded is a rich and beautiful poetic tribute to Jehovah (verses 1 - 10).
A.E.H. Do you go to @Colossians 3 for the teaching of all this? I was thinking of the injunction to "put off" certain things (verse 8), and to "put on" certain things (verse 12).
J.T. That is right. The Colossians had in fact put off the old man and put on the new; this was an act of mind on their part in the light of the death and resurrection of Christ, but they needed to put the truth into practical effect in detail. They were the elect of God and the graces of Christ should mark them.
T.S. Had the pressure of Abigail's position helped her in the development of assembly features?
J.T. No doubt. She was in great pressure, and this brings out the graces of the assembly, answering to Christ. She prevailed on David to do what was right. He said "Blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou, who hast kept me this day from coming with bloodshed, and from avenging myself with mine own hand" (verse 33). That is, he began to see what true worth there was in her.
{287}
F.M. Nabal was a man "at Maon", and his "business was at Carmel". Would this indicate that he was not living at home?
J.T. Yes; if we live in our businesses we miss the headship of Christ, and that greatly affects us in our assembly service. Nabal was living in his business, shearing sheep, thinking of himself, and in his heart there was no room for David.
C.H.H. His heart was in his business, and it died within him; would his occupation correspond with the shepherds clothing themselves with the wool as seen in @Ezekiel 34?
J.T. That is right. There is some allusion to his selfish and exacting character. The judgment of God on Nabal was executed after ten days, and then Abigail becomes the wife of David; she is thoroughly in accord with him, there is beauty in *both*, mentioned by the Spirit of God. Abigail corresponded with David in understanding, too; hence what scope for his headship!
A.N.W. What is the point in Nabal being overcome governmentally?
J.T. God is calling attention to persons and things being removed to make way for Christ. Stephen was put to death, but this sorrowful fact was turned to the enlargement of the economy in which Christ was operating. Even Jerusalem had to be taken out of the way. The Lord says, "For these are days of avenging, that all the things that are written may be accomplished"(@Luke 21: 22) -- referring to the destruction of Jerusalem. It should "be trodden down of the nations until the times of the nations be fulfilled" (verse 24). "The fulness of the nations" was to come in, and Jerusalem would hinder this great result, as @Acts 15 shows.
H.P.R. Is there any connection between the activities of Abigail here and the movements of Rebecca when she saw Isaac and sprang off the camel?
J.T. There is. As Rebecca moved in right instincts and understanding, so did Abigail. Rebecca had no
{288}
previous husband concerning whom to form a judgment, but Abigail had Nabal and she had a thorough judgment of him and expressed it to David. Nabal, therefore, represents the Jewish legal system which was opposed to Christ (@1 Thessalonians 2: 15, 16). The saints in the early days had to judge this murderous system and leave it.
A.B. Adam would bring out the qualities in Eve, and David brings out what was in Abigail.
J.T. Yes. "Blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou". The mutual response to each other is very beautiful, typical of Christ and the assembly. Finally David says after the death of Nabal, "Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil" (verse 39), a beautiful attitude, the kind of humility which the Lord values. Abigail was seeing the value of what she was coming into, and how Jehovah had cleared the way for her, as believers now can often see how the Lord clears the way for them to take up their places in the assembly. "David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her as his wife ... and she arose and bowed herself on her face to the earth ... and arose, and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers that followed her; and she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife" (verses 39 - 42). Thus we have here a beautiful figure of the assembly's union with Christ.
A.N.W. It seems a very quick transfer from Nabal to David; would you say she did not love Nabal?
J.T. Well, in a way we could. No doubt Nabal became worse and worse, but it is his character as described and judgment on him that have to be taken account of. Abigail discerned him, expressing her judgment of him to David; and God executes the judgment on him. He is thus taken out of the way, so that there is room made for the full scope of love. God acted, according to this type, in making way for
{289}
Christ and the assembly in early days, and in principle He is doing this continually.
C.C.T. Abigail values the time she is in, for it is said, "Abigail hasted, and arose". You were connecting this with fellowship.
J.T. Fellowship is open to me as I wash my robes (@Revelation 22: 14). I can then go in by the gates into the city. The tree of life is there. I have a right to all that; why should I delay in appropriating it? Abigail has a right to go now, because David has sent for her. Why should I stay outside of the holy circle of fellowship if I have liberty to enter it?
H.P.R. You are speaking of principles needed to be applied in crises in local assemblies. Is this not a needed exercise with our young brethren today, in fact with all, that we might have judgment about the thing to be dealt with; and not only that, but that we might voice it with our brethren in the care meeting? In the matter before us the young man formed a judgment regarding Nabal and voiced it to Abigail.
J.T. That is right. It is important. You have to place such information where it belongs, that is, on the conscience of the brethren in the care meeting. Through careful enquiry, the Lord helping, the matter will reach the assembly as fully attested. That is what this young man did; he had a judgment as to Nabal and placed the information he had before Abigail. She is, to type, the assembly and hence she acts. Brethren in care receive the information, take counsel, investigate, and place their findings before the assembly. All is tentative until the facts are presented to the assembly. The conscience of the brothers in care enters into the assembly, but it is enhanced as all are together in executive capacity, the Lord being with them.
A.N.W. Have you not said that the care meeting is the gateway to the assembly, but that the sisters have to be present for assembly action?
{290}
J.T. That is right; the whole assembly has to be there for judicial action, but not for the investigation.
C.H.H. Would you say that the assembly meeting is not for deliberation?
J.T. Quite so. Deliberation should go before. The evil as fully attested is told to the assembly; that is what is said in @Matthew 18, "Tell it to the assembly".
F.M. It is helpful to see that both David and Abigail went *down*.
J.T. That is a good point.
G.A.T. Would the one who states the facts go on to pass the judgment? Would the thing be thus completed at that time?
J.T. We should be there as before the Lord, recognising the dignity and the holiness of the position. The Lord says, "There am I in the midst of them", @Matthew 18: 20. He would support specially the persons who should act in the matter. Normally all feel they have His approval.
G.A.T. You would allow the person involved to be present in the care meeting?
J.T. If he is nominally in fellowship, yes, and he should also be at the assembly meeting. If he is subject he will be there.
{291}
HEADSHIP (5)
@1 Chronicles 29: 10 - 22
J.T. What was before us at our last reading relates to Christ as Head of the assembly as seen in David in relation to the service of God, a most important feature of our subject. How headship enters into the service of the saints as together in assembly for the Lord's supper was considered. We were diverted a little to consider the general principle of the care meeting, a very important subject; but the chapter in Chronicles which we read presents David in a most remarkable role as head, and, we may say, as minister of the sanctuary, for he leads in the service. We are told that he blessed Jehovah in the sight of all the congregation; and then in verse 20 he directs the congregation to bless Jehovah. He says, "Bless now Jehovah your God", and the congregation did so. So, we have the service proceeding to the end of verse 22.
In this first section David speaks to God, saying, "Thou art exalted as Head above all"; applying the idea of headship to God himself, showing David's intelligence as to this great thought.
We also saw how as leading up to David's ministry, Dagon fell before the ark in the house of Dagon, among the Philistines. David slew the Philistine and cut off his head, and took it to Jerusalem as a testimony, to the place where the service of God was to be inaugurated, and to the setting aside of all headships of evil. We noted in Colossians how God set aside what stood in the way of His people. He took certain things out of the way, making a show of principalities and powers. Further on in 1 Samuel we saw that Nabal, the husband of Abigail, was set aside by God. He was in the way; a churlish man, and antagonistic to David -- pointing to what exists today as set up by men. All such things are to be discredited in the minds of
{292}
believers, so as to make way for Christ as our Head; displacing all others. Abigail becomes the wife of David, a type of the assembly as the bride of Christ -- her Head.
It is thought we should further consider @1 Chronicles 29 so that we may see David acting as head, linking on with the thought of minister of the sanctuary. Through this we learn what Christ is to us as assembled; both as regards His support and the worship of God.
A.E.H. The thought of minister of the sanctuary links on with headship; but would the thought of minister of the sanctuary be related to feeling?
J.T. Headship certainly involves feeling; for we can readily see that Abigail would be marked by deep feelings in her union with David, and these would be allied with intelligence. She was a woman "of good understanding and of a beautiful countenance". She is typical of the saints as under the Lord's eye. His beauty being reflected in us. The assembly is of Him; brought out of death with Him, formed and beautified by the Spirit to correspond with her Head. And the Lord clothes us with His own blessed thoughts, so that we are suitable to Him. As regards Christ's ministerial service in the sanctuary, this involves feelings too, towards God and towards the saints.
S.W.P. "All the congregation ... blessed Jehovah ... and bowed down their heads" (@1 Chronicles 29: 20), would this suggest making room for the Head?
J.T. That is the thought. The verse would point to Christ as Head -- influencing us towards God in the sanctuary. The fixed relation in which we are to Christ makes room for this.
N.B. When the Lord comes into the morning meetings, as we speak, is it as Head?
J.T. Initially it is as Lord. We are in the Lord's day (@Revelation 1: 10), and His supper is rightly celebrated on it. In @1 Corinthians 11 we have the Lord's supper, so that we are under His authority. We go out of our
{293}
houses and walk or drive through the streets to meet together, all tending to divert our minds. We need to become familiar with the fact that our walk characteristically is in an opposite direction from that of the world, so that we need to be on our guard and thus in subjection, counting on the Lord's support and protection. As assembled we have the Lord's supper in mind, and in view of external circumstances it is most wholesome and necessary that His dominance should be owned and felt. Nevertheless His headship is there and is to be before us. Normally, as the Lord is discerned His headship is owned and realised.
A.B. Does @1 Corinthians 8: 5 bear on what you are saying: "There are gods many, and lords many"?
J.T. Yes, as referring to the divine economy -- shutting out what is contrary. "To us there is one God, the Father, ... and one Lord, Jesus Christ".
H.P.R. Is not the same person who is Lord to us also Head to His assembly?
J.T. Yes. He is positively related to the assembly as Head, but the authority of Christ as Lord, of necessity is also present as we come together in assembly, according to what has been already said. But our subject is headship as it is brought before us in David. The kingly thought is there, of course, but *active* authority gives place to the greater thought of headship. "And David said to all the congregation, Bless now Jehovah your God". The same passage also says, "And all the congregation blessed Jehovah the God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and did homage to Jehovah and the king". Christ's dignity as Lord goes right through with His headship. While we are here in flesh and blood we need the authority of Christ, which involves His lordship. We must keep this in mind.
A.N.W. The scriptures say that as He came into the midst of the disciples He was owned (@John 20: 20 - 28).
J.T. Yes. The difference would be caused by what
{294}
*He has to do* when He comes. The *state* of the meeting must enter into it. We may not get past His lordship if the state of the meeting is low, if the brethren are divided or insubject. What I mean is that we cannot ignore the *actual* state of the brethren. "Jesus himself stood in the midst of them": but they were perturbed; they were not ready for Him. So He had to use His authority. He also expressed a desire to eat with them. He would give them ample proof that it was Himself. He says, "I myself". The condition of the meeting must enter into what He is as actively among us.
L.E.S. Luke would take account of the circumstances in which we are found, and grace would be active; but John presents the *abstract* side of things.
J.T. Yes. He says, "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you", @John 20: 19. The doors are closed, shutting out the Jewish side; Christ is all to them. The world was shut out, and Jesus came in. Luke says He Himself stood in their midst; but John says Jesus *came* and stood in the midst. In John He says, "Peace be to you" twice, the second after the disciples rejoiced as having seen Him. These variations indicate that John gives the abstract side and Luke the practical condition of the disciples as the Lord appeared to them.
S.W.P. Is John's side typified when David blessed Jehovah in the sight of all the people?
J.T. Yes; David is not here seen in physical coldness and weakness. It is a wonderful scene, especially as you think of David as in the account in Kings, old and needing warmth. But God came in and strengthened him for the moment, so that in our chapter in Chronicles we see him as head of God's people. As a corresponding position I mention the morning of resurrection as presented in Luke: the women had come with spices to anoint Him; they were not moving in the light of
{295}
resurrection, they needed adjustment. Two men in shining garments appeared suddenly to them. The need was urgent and it was met suddenly (@Luke 24: 1 - 9). According to @1 Chronicles 29 a change came over David, he is in vigour, and is able to lead the people. This is one of the most remarkable incidents recorded as to headship.
W.G.T. Do we not get in David here the thoughts of both liberty and control? As in great liberty he is maintaining control; there may be control but no liberty, and liberty but no control.
J.T. Quite so. According to 1 Kings he had become weak and had lost control, and Adonijah had taken the throne. But here he is in full control of the situation, and executes Jehovah's purpose in Solomon, causing him to be anointed as king and so defeating Satan's efforts through Adonijah.
E.C. Does this service of David correspond with Christ's service in the assembly, "I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises"?
J.T. Yes. David combines his authority as king with priesthood. So that he is here directing the service of God. Hebrews opens up this great truth. Christ's deity is involved in His present position. In Hebrews He sets Himself down as Minister of the sanctuary.
L.E.S. All this shows that we need to hold our minds as under the control of the Spirit, ready to move under the headship of Christ amidst any circumstances.
J.T. That is right, ready to move under divine authority. If things are going wrong in the assembly God will come in. If the universe got from under His control what would happen? Thus, it is divine supervision in the assembly that keeps it right. The women were perturbed at the tomb, but *suddenly* two men stood by, and there was adjustment. God is behind and over everything, so that there is constant adjustment. It may be a word from an obscure brother that
{296}
sets it right; thus the value of the word, "Take heed therefore how ye hear".
W.G.T. If a wrong hymn is given out what would you do?
J.T. I would seek to be governed by the light governing the position. It would be a poor thing to be overwhelmed by such an emergency. Heaven can act suddenly to meet adverse conditions, as we have seen. There is power in the assembly for all needed adjustments.
A.E.H. "And they made Solomon ... king the second time, and anointed him ... to be prince", @1 Chronicles 29: 22. Is this the idea of God being magnified before the people?
J.T. Typically, that would mean that their thoughts of Christ were steady. Solomon was made king when very young, and some might be sceptical of that, but the people had not changed their minds, they made him king the second time. This is to indicate that as the state among the saints is right the Lord Jesus is becoming more and more to us. That is as it should be. At the end of each meeting Christ should be enhanced in our souls.
C.H.H. I was wondering if the apostle had that in mind when he wrote, "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen", @Romans 11: 36.
J.T. Yes. David applies headship to God Himself; and Paul does also: "the Christ's head God", @1 Corinthians 11: 3. Deity involves headship. Christ is God, and so He had part in divine headship; but as become Man He is under God's headship, but nevertheless He is "head of every man", and God has given Him to be Head over all things to the assembly, as we have seen. As already said, David typifies Christ in this chapter as leading in the service of God. He says, "Thine, Jehovah, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the splendour, and the majesty; for all that is in the heavens
{297}
and on the earth is thine: thine, Jehovah, is the kingdom, and thou art exalted as Head above all; and riches and glory are of thee, and thou rulest over everything; and in thy hand is power and might; and in thy hand it is to make all great and strong", @1 Chronicles 29: 11, 12. God is *operative*; there is "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". He is exalted in our minds and hearts through our appreciation of Him known in the universal operations of His love.
L.E.S. Would our intelligence be the measure of our apprehension of God as set forth in the way of which you have been speaking?
J.T. Yes. The apostle says: "*I*, the prisoner in the Lord, exhort you therefore to walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called, with all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, bearing with one another in love; using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace. There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all. But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ". @Ephesians 4: 1 - 7. That is how the divine economy is apprehended.
S.W.P. Is that why David says, "The God of our father Israel" (verse 10)?
J.T. Yes; it alludes to what He was to Israel. It is God known in His operations. If a man is a believer he will be able to give some account of God in this sense. He must be *above all*.
J.H. Would @Deuteronomy 26: 5 fit in here? "A perishing Aramaean was my father".
J.T. Quite so. The speaker alludes to Jacob as in Canaan in need and outward smallness; and later in suffering in Egypt. But he was the object of Jehovah's care and delivering power. So David here refers to
{298}
Jacob, but not in the sense of smallness, but to *Israel*, denoting His spiritual quality and greatness. His name had been changed, and in the changing he becomes a prince. Israel is viewed in this tribute of David's according to what God made him. Israel is a prince.
A.B. Regarding the operations of God, Isaiah says, "Never have men heard, nor perceived by the ear, nor hath eye seen a God beside thee, who acteth for him that waiteth for him", @Isaiah 64: 4.
J.T. Just so. That is quoted in 1 Corinthians as applying to ourselves -- the things God has prepared for them that love Him. The idea of operation is there also. In verse 20 David is seen functioning as head, and as minister of the sanctuary; and we see a great expansion in the service. Solomon is made king the second time and anointed to Jehovah to be prince, and Zadok to be priest. We are told what the people did as David directed them. It is what the saints are able to do as guided by the minister of the sanctuary. The Lord helps us, and as He leads us the service goes on. This implies that the assembly has priestly intelligence as to what should be done. The service here expands, the sacrifices being in great volume. Headship is in evidence throughout. Then we have the majesty and power of the true Solomon foreshadowed -- which words seem to fail to express. The account is most affecting.
W.G.T. Does not what we get in verses 17 and 18 appeal to us as the moral element in the service?
J.T. Yes; they indicate how the Lord is concerned about the saints as the instruments of service. It is all very beautiful, showing the care of the Head for the body at the present moment. That is how we are furnished; it is indeed a shadow of the headship of Christ, how He is concerned as to the state of our souls.
{299}
QUICKENING
@Colossians 2: 13 - 15; @Ephesians 2: 1 - 6
J.T. I was thinking of *quickening* as seen in the epistles to the Colossians and the Ephesians. The word 'quickening' may suggest to some minds here that the subject of eternal life should come up, but it is not in my mind. The term 'eternal life' is wider than quickening, applying to the earthly saints in the future as well as to the saints in this dispensation, and also involving an order or sphere of things into which believers go. "These shall go away into eternal punishment, and the righteous into life eternal", @Matthew 25: 46.
The thought now is to consider the word 'quickening' as seen in these two epistles; in them it takes on a more exalted significance than it does elsewhere. We have it in the Old Testament, particularly in @Psalm 119, a familiar psalm to many of us, the longest one in the book. The word 'quickening' appears there more frequently than in the rest of the Old Testament; it is an outcome of the *desires* of the saints, that psalm being largely a question of desire. The word 'quickening' is also found in the New Testament in a wider and more general significance than in the two epistles in which we read. The idea is connected with the Father in @John 5, "For even as the Father raises the dead and quickens them, thus the Son also quickens whom he will" (verse 21). The Father quickens and the Son quickens here; and in @John 6 we are told, "It is the Spirit which quickens" (verse 63). But nowhere else have we the expression, "quickened with Christ" save in these two epistles. It applies in Scripture only to the saints of this dispensation, and it is thought that the affections of the saints are specially brought into it, in the thought of being not only made to live, but made to live *with Christ*, in association with Him, involving that we are *sharers of His life*.
{300}
C.A.M. Does the sense of origin come into it?
J.T. Well, it would seem so. We are viewed here as dead in offences. "And you, being dead in offences and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, he has quickened together with him" (@Colossians 2: 13); that is, God quickened us out of that state, so that it is an entirely new beginning for believers; we are taken in life out of a dead condition. This, of course, is morally death; the passage does not refer to physical death; it is what we were as alive in the flesh, *dead in trespasses*; that is, responsible persons who have sinned, and are "dead in offences and in the uncircumcision of your flesh". So it is entirely the sovereign work of God in taking us out of that condition into a living condition in association with Christ.
C.A.M. Would it be right to say that all the past, whatever that may have been, is considered a settled matter, starting at this point?
J.T. Yes; all the past and all that would hinder our progress and enjoyment in this new state of association with Christ. We are told, "Having forgiven us all the offences; having effaced the handwriting in ordinances which stood out against us, which was contrary to us, he has taken it also out of the way, having nailed it to the cross; having spoiled principalities and authorities, he made a show of them publicly" (verses 13 - 15). So that what might hinder us in enjoyment and progress in this life is taken out of the way at one stroke in the death of Christ.
R.W.S. Is "quickened together with him" greater than verse 12 which says, "Ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God"?
J.T. We have observed that verse 12 brings in *faith*. It is through the faith of the operation of God that raised Him from the dead, which means that resurrection is not yet literally accomplished in us. Christ alone is risen. We are said here to be risen through the faith of the operation of God, who raised
{301}
Christ; that is, it is a certainty; its literal accomplishment is only a matter of time. It is true anticipatively; for faith it is a certainty.
A.R. To the phrase, "through faith of the working of God", J.N.D. has a footnote: 'energeia: active internal power'. Would that help in relation to what you had in mind?
J.T. It is the sense that you are not merely dealing with the matter theoretically, but that God actually raised Christ and He will certainly raise the believers; you are conscious of the power. It is the idea of energy operating in us; you are conscious of the power and it is only a little while until it extends to the body, and we shall then be literally raised. It is a *faith* matter now. It is as good as done; God may regard things that be not as though they are (@Romans 4: 17).
A.R. The power of God operating in us makes the thing a reality and you just wait the external change.
J.T. We are conscious that it is the power that is working in us. We are conscious of the power, that it is not a mere theory, only it has not as yet extended to our bodies. The body is yet mortal; Paul says, "But we have this treasure in earthen vessels" (@2 Corinthians 4: 7), and later he says, "that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life" (chapter 5: 4), that is, that which is working in you will, in due course, make the body live as well as the spirit. So you have the *reality* of the power in your experience.
A.N.W. Would you make a little clearer what you see in the expression, "dead in offences and in the uncircumcision of your flesh"?
J.T. These had to be dealt with, too, and that shows that it is not literal death that is meant, because a man who literally dies in his sins will never be saved; therefore it is not that, it is a moral condition. "One died for all, then all have died" (@2 Corinthians 5: 14), meaning that it is as good as done. There was nothing left but that we should die, but God has come in in a sovereign
{302}
act and taken believers out of that state of moral death, and at the same time forgiven their sins.
R.W.S. This quickening is not presented as a matter of faith.
J.T. No; faith is not connected here with it. Faith is connected with our resurrection, as we have seen. Resurrection is future, and introduced here to complete the marvellous work of God of which believers are the subjects. Canaan is in mind in Colossians. It is a question of the power of God which faith lays hold of, so that we are enabled to take the ground of being risen *with Christ* in assembly service. Quickening goes with this as an actual accomplishment in the believer. The affections are affected in a practical way. We are "quickened together with him". This teaching in Colossians and Ephesians is needed for our part with Christ in the assembly, in the service of God. It is not only that we have life, but we are quickened, with our affections active and our minds affected by it.
A.B.P. "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". Does that involve quickening?
J.T. There must be something corresponding there. We have to bear in mind that the Holy Spirit had not yet come. The thief went to paradise, but he is not a member of the assembly and never will be. He left this scene before the Holy Spirit came, but at the same time God had begun a work in him, whatever name you might give it. He was sensible of what was beside him in Christ. He says, "We indeed justly, for we receive the just recompense of what we have done; but this man has done nothing amiss", @Luke 23: 41. Then he says, "Remember me, Lord, when thou comest in thy kingdom" (verse 42). That shows he had light; and it is clear there was formation by the power of God, for he was going to be with Christ in paradise. Besides, he had spiritual instincts and understanding.
A.B.P. In a sense he is a Colossian. He dies with Christ, and I wondered whether it carried through in
{303}
that sense in the teaching. Luke writing as he does to support Paul's ministry, is there not a suggestion of it in that?
J.T. The thief on his cross literally died with Christ, and he was a Colossian saint in that sense, but he certainly was not risen with Christ through the faith of the operation of God, although he must have had some idea that he would be raised. Nor was he quickened with Christ, because Christ Himself was not yet quickened; He was not yet raised from the dead. Still, there is the fact that the repentant thief died on a cross beside the one on which the Lord died and went to paradise immediately after the Saviour went there. It is beautiful that the Lord said, "Today".
A.A.T. You were saying both quickening and new birth are a sovereign work of God. Would you mind again explaining the difference between the two?
J.T. Birth is a family thought. The word is, "Except any one be born anew" (@John 3: 3), which Nicodemus immediately connected with the progenital idea. It is a question of the family of God. New birth implies our induction into the family in due course. But as formally recognised as in the family we are said to have received Christ and to "believe on his name"; also to be born "of God". Thus we are "children of God", @John 1: 12, 13. But the word 'quickening' is in the Scriptures on a living line. It contemplates persons who were responsible, as in sins, and morally dead; that is, incapable of any response to God whatever. Out of this state they are quickened with Christ. New birth and quickening are collateral in the constitution of the believer. "Born anew" is said to be an operation of the Spirit, and what is born of the Spirit is said to be "spirit". In the scriptures before us quickening is by *God* and it places us in living association with Christ.
A.A.T. Do I understand you to say a Jew could be born again and not be quickened?
{304}
J.T. Oh, they will be quickened according to @Psalm 119. The word is used ten or eleven times in that psalm, which alludes to them; but we cannot say they are quickened with Christ. That is what is before us now, to show that we are constituted capable of taking part in assembly service in association with Christ. We are quickened with Him, and thus we are partakers of His life. The epistle to the Romans does not state that they were quickened together with Christ, nor does any of the other epistles speak of it in this way. It is not found in any of the epistles but Colossians and Ephesians, and they contemplate *advance in the truth*; so the idea would be intelligible and appreciated by the persons involved. What a thing it is! It is a wonderful thing to be quickened at all, but it is more wonderful to be quickened *with* Christ, given a status above all other families.
R.W.S. "Reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus", @Romans 6: 11. Would that not bear on being quickened with Christ?
J.T. That is Roman truth; it is intelligible, because the epistle is initial and basic. Sin has a great place there. In the passage you quote it is not yet sin in themselves, but sin in the world. "Alive to God" is that you are feeling Godward; God has a place with you. It is reckoning, which implies that the christians at Rome had not progressed far. The apostle does not say they *were* dead, but they were to *reckon* themselves to be dead to sin. The word 'reckon' there is important. You act in light and on principle, and thus in time you will come to the state that corresponds. Colossians says that as having been raised with Christ we have died (@Colossians 3: 1 - 3). One recently converted who had been accustomed to attend theatres might still have an inclination to go to them, but light controlling his conscience would hinder him; but as he maintained this attitude, the Spirit helping him, he would overcome the desire. He thus would be dead to the evil.
{305}
Ques. How would you link up the thoughts of the quickening of the mortal body and the quickening that we have in Colossians?
J.T. The quickening of your mortal body is on account of God's Spirit that dwells in you. It corresponds with the resurrection of those who are in their graves when the Lord comes. They will be raised out of the state of death. But quickening in @Romans 8 does not mean that you have been in the grave, but that as a christian you are here in the body when the Lord comes and you will be changed. Those of us who are alive and remain shall be changed and caught up with those who are raised (@1 Thessalonians 4). The Lord shall "transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory, according to the working of the power which he has even to subdue all things to himself", @Philippians 3: 21.
C.N. "Whereunto also I toil", the apostle says, "combating according to his working, which works in me in power", @Colossians 1: 29. Does that help in the idea of quickening?
J.T. Paul could speak experimentally of the power of God as it had wrought in him. You are calling attention to the power that works in us: that will presently extend to our bodies. It is the same power, but it has not yet done so, because our bodies are still mortal. It will extend to our bodies as we are alive here when the Lord comes for us. It will affect those who are in their graves also, that is, the power of God will take effect in them. The power is not working in them while they are in their graves. They are in dissolution. Faith alone can grasp the idea; that all that are in the graves shall hear His voice. How can they hear His voice? It is only as the work of God takes place instantaneously in them, giving them power to hear His voice, and they shall come forth. That is one of the most wonderful things entering into this subject. It is said of the Lord Jesus that He is "marked out
{306}
Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1: 4. However long a man may have been dead, the Lord can raise him. Wonderful! You may say his body could not be found; and that is true as far as human ability is concerned, but God can find it, and faith knows that. The power that works in us, that Paul speaks of here, will extend presently to our bodies as alive down here and will also extend to those in their graves, so that all will go up together with Christ.
A.N.W. Would you say again what you have said about the relationship of quickening with eternal life?
J.T. It is included in the thought of eternal life. The expression 'eternal life' is of course very wide as over against time and death. This is included in that, only there is something added there to the idea of eternal life, namely, association with Christ, which others do not have. Of course, all the saints will be with Him, each family according to the Father's appointment, but it is remarkable that the words "with Christ" are attached to the word "quickened" only in these two scriptures.
W.R. Does this also suggest, "the last Adam a quickening spirit", @1 Corinthians 15: 45? Have you in mind that as associated with Christ we should be done with the natural propensities and make room for the spiritual ones?
J.T. That is how the truth before us works out. God is a Spirit and the Lord says, "For even as the Father raises the dead and quickens them, thus the Son also quickens whom he will", @John 5: 21. So that is a prerogative that the Son has, and that prerogative will be used in regard of all the saints. The Lord Jesus raises them all.
J.H. Would Mary Magdalene be touching on this great truth at the tomb when the Lord makes Himself known to her and speaks of this relationship with the Father and with the disciples?
{307}
J.T. Well, she would be ready for it, I suppose. She had been very dark, although she loved the Lord. She was looking for Him but not alive, although He had told the disciples He would rise again. But the conversation that ensued would lead her to this thought, because He says, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father", meaning that He was going to His Father; "but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", @John 20: 17. And then as come into the midst of them He breathes on them and says, "Receive the Holy Spirit" (verse 22). That would link up with what we are speaking of; they partook of His Spirit, involving His life. We are quickened with Him, but John shows it is into the same life in which He lives.
J.H. Would it not need the incoming of the Spirit before you can enjoy it?
J.T. Yes. This teaching involves the incoming of the Spirit.
Ques. Do the resurrection of Lazarus and the details connected with it link on with love here? You were saying that the affections are involved. It is a love matter.
J.T. That is right; it is a love matter. It was the family at Bethany, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died", @John 11: 32. Mary was thinking of her *brother*. We are told earlier that the Lord "loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus" (verse 5). So it was a love matter, and there is something in that; because the Lord comes back after He raised Lazarus and sits at the table with him. It was association; that was the idea of it. That helps very much.
H.S.H. Does the thought of quickening here involve active participation with Christ in the way of testimony at the present time?
J.T. It would involve that. But what is before us is more its bearing towards God, with Christ in the assembly
{308}
in the service of God. In what happened at Bethany we have the suggestion of both sides. Lazarus was one of those that sat at table with Him. That is *association*. And then we are told later that many came to see Lazarus and believed because of him. That is, Lazarus was a testimony, which would show that Colossian truth is essential to the testimony here; that we are *living* people -- living with Christ.
C.A.M. That thought you have just expressed about Lazarus would help with regard to the exalted idea here -- quickened together with Christ. All the other history is closed; you have nothing but Christ.
J.T. Quite so. All this war that is going on is not Christ. All these histories in the world, men rising up and doing great things, are in this sense nothing. If One died for all, then all have died; and what confirms what you are saying is that they which live, meaning those that are quickened, should not live unto themselves, but unto Him that died for them and rose again. That is the position. What is happening and what is filling the world with history is really *nothing* from this standpoint. It will all go into oblivion, never to be revived or brought into mind at all, whereas this life is going to stand. And as regards christians, we have part with Christ, we are brought into life with Christ, which is an exalted position, sharing His own life. And so, as we were saying, Lazarus was one of those that sat at table with Him. That is association and participation with Him. Then in @John 13 the Lord says to Peter, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me" (verse 8). That is the idea. The Lord is reminding Peter of this great fact, that his place is in association with Christ; and He says, 'If I cannot wash thee, it cannot be'. So that being washed enters into this matter. We are cleansed of all that would hinder our enjoyment of this precious fact, risen with Christ, and in association with Him in life.
{309}
C.A.M. So that what is transpiring all around is a tremendous test to us because we might be living in it; but as we are taught of God, we find quickening with Christ our great and only outlet.
J.T. That is all that is going to subsist eternally. That is what is meant as to those who have eternal life. All others shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. That is the general thought of eternal life, but we are dealing now with something even greater than what that generally implies, namely, association with Christ in life.
A.R. Eternal life really does not take you off the earth, but here we have a link with Christ where He is.
J.T. It is His life above, where He is.
Now turning to Ephesians it says, "We too being dead in offences, (God) has quickened us with the Christ, (ye are saved by grace, ) and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus" (chapter 2: 5). That gives full scope in the assembly, because the assembly is composed not only of risen people but of heavenly people.
A.N.W. I would like to ask more about Colossians. Does the word "together" there imply what is collective? It is not exactly together *with* Him, but we are *together* with Him.
J.T. The "together" would apply to us, "has quickened together with him" (verse 13). The "together" would not be inclusive of Him but the company that is quickened with Him.
A.N.W. I thought it would come out in the verse in Ephesians, that we are together in the raising but not with Him.
J.T. In @Ephesians 2: 6 the raising up together and sitting down together refer exclusively to the saints. We are not said to be raised with Him there. In Ephesians it is "and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies". That is
{310}
with one another. "With him" is omitted. But it is in verse 5: there we are quickened "with the Christ".
A.A.T. Do I understand that is future, the raising and the seating?
J.T. It is future, but it is, as we have been saying before, as good as done, because God has undertaken to do it. Indeed, according to the passage, it *is* done. God can thus speak.
A.R. If we understood association with Him, as you have been speaking of Him, we would catch what is in His mind and have guidance about giving out hymns, or what we should say in the assembly.
J.T. Yes. Sections of the assembly service are not always recognised. It is from "glory to glory" in assembly service. It is one glory after another. There is the Lord's supper, and all the glory that attaches to that, and then we go on to what we are dealing with here, "quickened with Christ", and the glories attaching to that. The assembly comes in here. There is also our relation with Christ as His brethren, and also our association with Him as sons before His Father and our Father, His God and our God.
R.W.S. Would what is regarded as part of a hymn in @2 Timothy 2 fit in here? "The word is faithful; for if we have died together with him, we shall also live together" (chapter 2: 11). Is that a lower level than Colossians?
J.T. No, I should not think so; only the apostle is speaking of living with Christ as future. There is a connection in the verse with what we are speaking of. It is hortatory, alluding in part to the truth we are considering.
R.W.S. The "with him" is not added at the end of the verse. It reads, "if we have died together with him, we shall also live together".
J.T. I think the "with him" is inferred. It is needed for the full answer to our death with Him. The fact that all of us live together is not the force of the
{311}
passage; it is that we are associated with Him. It goes on to say, "If we endure, we shall also reign together; if we deny, *he* also will deny us; if we are unfaithful, *he* abides faithful, for he cannot deny himself" (verses 12, 13). I would think the idea of living with Him runs throughout. So in Thessalonians, "that whether we may be watching or sleep, we may live together with him", @1 Thessalonians 5: 10. It is another statement of the same force.
J.S. Would His movements in the assembly involve our intelligent movements?
J.T. Well, the idea of Christ's headship is that the body is controlled by it. Still, our intelligences are brought in. It is not only that we are controlled by His impulse; we have divinely given intelligence in ourselves so that we are capable of discerning His mind and the guidance He affords.
A.R. Would you say something now about association, and the thought of being raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus?
J.T. The Ephesian passage takes us the whole way. It is remarkable how it expands on what we had in Colossians. In the latter hindering things are taken out of the way; in Christ's death everything is dealt with in one stroke, so that we should not be hampered at all. But in Ephesians, you are taken beyond all hindering things, seated in the heavenlies. "We too being dead in offences, (God) has quickened us with the Christ, ... and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus, that he might display in the coming ages the surpassing riches of his grace in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus. For ye are saved by grace, through faith; and this not of yourselves; it is God's gift: not on the principle of works, that no one might boast. For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them" (verses 5 - 10). The full position
{312}
of the saints as heavenly is contemplated in this passage, so that we are free to enter into assembly service and testimony as the next paragraph shows (verses 19 - 22). That is, the *full* position of christianity is stated in this chapter.
Ques. Do you get the suggestion of quickening in Joseph and his brethren? I was thinking of the position into which Joseph introduced them, from his own sphere of glory as with him, association.
J.T. He set them free as his brethren. It was not simply to patronise them, regarding them as inferior. He elevated them. He made them known to Pharaoh as his brethren. Thus Christ associates us with Himself before God as His brethren.
A.Pf. The prodigal son who was dead and came to life again -- would you say association with Christ is involved there?
J.T. That is another thing. The parable portrays the full result of the gospel. "Because this thy brother was dead and has come to life again, and was lost and has been found", @Luke 15: 32. There can be no doubt that you might work this whole passage into that, because I believe it is the Ephesian position the Lord had in mind in all that wonderful parable of the prodigal; you have the house immediately, and the music and the dancing in the house, and the best robe on him.
A.Pf. Yes; the prodigal recovered is, so to speak, alive with his Father.
J.T. You have not, however, got Christ in the parable. He is typified earlier in the parable as to the Shepherd; He goes after the sheep. But in regard of the prodigal, *he goes back to his Father*. The idea of the Mediator in the position is not contemplated. It is the Father and the recovered son; the son come back to God as the Father. The parable presents an exalted thought. There is nothing said about the Mediator there. That is, it is having gone away from God, come back to Him known as his Father.
{313}
A.N.W. Would it be right to connect "lost" and "found" with Romans, and "dead" and "alive" with Ephesians?
J.T. I would agree with that.
A.R. Would you explain a little about *sitting down* in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus?
J.T. It is the full position. Sitting would mean that we are there in liberty and dignity. God in His *great love* has placed us there. We belong to the place, we are indigenous to it, which would imply that all past history is cancelled. We are there as *heavenly*. The Lord Jesus says that those who "have part in that world and the resurrection from among the dead ... are equal to angels", which would at least mean that they are *heavenly* in rank; but Ephesians shows that the saints of our dispensation are greater than angels. Our origin and rank are from Christ.
H.G.H. Is verse 10 the basis of the thought of being quickened with Him?
J.T. "For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them". The word "created" takes us further. It would imply that you fit into the great scheme of creation. @Genesis 1 is the chapter of the first creation; the word 'create' is not used of all creatures. Man was created, also the creatures of the sea and air; others were "made". Creation was the primary thought -- "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". This would assume that God had a great scheme in His mind, governed by the word 'create'. Each part has to be there to take its place, and that is in mind here. So it goes on to say, "Having been created in Christ Jesus for good works". That is not said as to quickening, nor even of workmanship. It is that the creation required these works, "which God has before prepared that we should walk in them". I think that opens up something for us, that we belong to the whole divine scheme.
{314}
J.S. Does not the thought of quickening underlie @Genesis 1?
J.T. It does; the principle of life was in the earth.
W.R. That opens up a remarkable sphere of operations. Paul says to the Romans, "That ye may with one accord, with one mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ", @Romans 15: 6.
J.T. Creation needs good works, "which God has before prepared that we should walk in them". What are these good works that He has before prepared? We must know them. They fit into the great scheme of creation. We need to know them and to have ability to walk in these good works. I suppose the full idea would be in the walk of Jesus here below, a heavenly Man on earth.
C.A.M. Would you make the word "before" apply, in God's mind, prior to everything?
J.T. Yes. "Which God has before prepared that we should walk in them". They are there. Can I walk in them?
C.A.M. Then the objective in christian experience will be what God has ever had in His mind.
J.T. I think that is how we should arrive at the truth in this respect; and so every creature was needed to answer to God's mind. Take the land animals: they were brought to Adam. A creature is coming up, an elephant: Adam, in view of naming it, is sure to observe its movements. God had given him ability to name that creature, and the name he gives would be based on the expression of life in it. And God accepts the name Adam gives. That would mean that the creature is essential to the creation -- a living, moving thing, answering in a practical way to the divine intent in creating it. God's idea is a living state of things, and the variety of creatures brings out what life is as seen in their movements.
C.A.M. Your further remark, that the good works in which we are to walk would be understood in apprehending
{315}
the life of Christ here below, seems to be most helpful.
J.T. That, in this sense, is the acme of everything. But all the creatures named by Adam would in some sense represent life; each had some feature and every feature was essential to the great scheme of creation. I think that is the idea of creation here. God has that scheme in His mind. When you come to Jesus, especially in John's gospel, you get the full idea. The Baptist looked at Him "as he walked".
C.A.M. It helps us in that way to understand why such a term as a lion can be applied to the Lord, and the Lamb of God, too.
J.T. Yes; He is called the Lamb of God, and the Lion of the tribe of Judah. In the offerings of the Scriptures, you get creatures representing Him, and it opens up a very wide door, it seems to me, as to new creation -- what God has in mind, and that each one must fit into his place; each one *must* be there.
A.N.W. Is God's mind in the creation reached in "everything that hath breath"?
J.T. Quite so; it is all responsive to Him.
A.R. The thing was there in creation in life substantially before the name was given. If we were spiritual, we would arrive at the same thing in the spiritual realm. Many names are written down there, and they must correspond to the mind of God in what they are substantially.
J.T. John's gospel brings out what we are speaking of now as to life, so that the Lord's own walk is stressed in chapter 1. John the baptist calls attention to Jesus as He walked. Then John the evangelist says, Andrew went and found Simon his brother and brought him to Jesus, and Jesus looked on him. He is there as the last Adam. The Lord looked on him and said, "Thou shalt be called Cephas (which interpreted is stone)", @John 1: 42. That item is needed in the divine scheme; and so the principle applies to every one of us.
{316}
I believe these good works that are spoken of bring out what the features intended by God are. Therefore it is most important that we should walk in them.
A.R. So that is further seen in the two that *followed* the Lord, not here in relation to suffering, but they said, "Teacher, where abidest thou?" (verse 38). They must have had an impression that He was walking in relation to a glorious sphere.
J.T. Quite so; they were attracted. Really @John 1 is almost astronomical, the remarkable movements in relation to Christ, and everything fitted! Then how wonderful the heavens are! Everything fits! "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the works of his hands", @Psalm 19: 1. Down here below everything is disorder, but God is going to bring it into order, and that is what is in mind. These good works are prepared that we should walk in them -- having that in view.
W.Ras. Would you say a word about Dorcas in @Acts 9? It says, "She was full of good works and alms-deeds which she did" (verse 36). What would be the teaching in that? Her name means 'gazelle'. "And it came to pass in those days that she grew sick and died" (verse 37).
J.T. She clearly was doing something, making garments; but she died, which is suggestive negatively. Why should a person die who is so highly regarded and so useful in her community? Well, they washed her and put her in the upper room and sent for Peter. That was all under God. It leads to what we are talking of; it is the universe of God that is in mind. Did she fit into it when she was making garments, or was she a good social member, who belonged to a sewing class? Peter on the other hand, who has a divinely given name, represents the idea we are speaking of. "Thou shalt be called Cephas" or "Peter", the Lord said to him, both names having the same meaning. Now he is sent for, as if God was in that. God is going to bring
{317}
Dorcas into *His* realm, into the realm of new creation. Is she going to be head of a sewing class; a good social member in the town?; or is she going to be a despised disciple and follower of Jesus, having no status in this world at all, but having a status with God above? The latter is what comes out. Peter arrived, "and all the widows stood by him weeping and shewing him the body-coats and garments which Dorcas had made ... But Peter, putting them all out, and kneeling down, prayed" (verses 39, 40). Dorcas societies have no spirituality attached to them. Peter put them all out. "And, turning to the body, he said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up". Notice that. He belongs to the new creation; he belongs to the great divine scheme and he is operating in it, and she saw him. That is what is to give character to her henceforth. "And having given her his hand, he raised her up, and having called the saints and the widows, presented her living" (verse 41). She belongs to another set now.
W.Ras. She is called "a certain female disciple" (verse 36).
J.T. But she is now a risen saint, quickened we might say, and delivered to the saints and the widows.
R.W.S. So Peter writes in his epistle that Christ is a model that we might follow in His footsteps; "leaving you a model that ye should follow in his steps", @1 Peter 2: 21.
A.N.W. Does the mention of His workmanship in the verses you have been dwelling on suggest detailed refinement in the creation?
J.T. Well, workmanship is really more, in a way, than creatorship. I suppose there is more skill in workmanship. Take Adam, he was created; we are told so expressly; but he was also *formed*. That would imply *skill*, in the physical realm he was the masterpiece of God.
{318}
STABILITY IN THE ASSEMBLY
@Acts 14: 23; @Titus 1: 5 - 16; @Titus 2: 1 - 10
These scriptures relate to the government of the assembly, and that is why they have been read. What I have in mind is *local gatherings, and stability in them*. Government itself is intended to promote stability, and prevent chaos, and never was there a time when it was more needed than the present: the stabilising of conditions which are severely shaken among the nations. In early days when faith was developing, especially in the one said to be the father of all who have faith, it will be recalled that this man, Abraham, in a time of shaking such as we are experiencing now, resided by the oaks of Mamre. It was war time, one might say a world war, four kings against five -- nine kings engaged in deadly conflict. Abraham was on neither side and only came into the conflict because his brother had been affected by it, carried away, as many christians have been in recent years. Our concern as believers is their recovery; not exactly in a physical sense, but in a spiritual sense. And in this effort, if we are in faith, we are wrestling. Persons who have faith are taught how to wrestle. It is said that an angel wrestled with Jacob, and of christians it is said that "our struggle is not against blood and flesh, but against principalities, against authorities, against the universal lords of this darkness, against spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies", @Ephesians 6: 12. It is a very real exercise, and it has in view that we belong to the heavenly calling; also to the heavenly army. Our concern is the rescue of our brethren, but that, whilst not ignoring the conflict, we may be kept free in our spirits from its influence.
So Abraham, we are told, dwelt by the oaks of Mamre. That is how the passage should read, (@Genesis 13: 18). That was in Hebron. Hebron represents what was *before the world*, and this is what holds our minds
{319}
normally, what was before the world and what will be after it. Think of what happened before the world was! -- divine counsels, and promises, too, for promise had a place before the world, the promise of life "before the ages of time", @Titus 1: 2. Abraham lived typically in those relations and was stabilised in them. The oaks of Mamre denote what is stabilised. How sure he was in the storm that raged! He had divine light in his soul; divine promise, too, and was restful in the presence of the storm; stabilised, as I may say.
Now, the verse read in @Acts 14 corresponds with what I am saying. The apostles, Barnabas and Paul, were active and successfully so; but they were sufferers, for the enemy raised a storm as usual when God is working. He is the prince of the power of the air, and God allows him to stir up strife and storm. You know how he used it against Job and his family. He also used it against Paul and Barnabas. They were successfully engaged in the blessed service of God, many being converted; and Paul was stoned. Such was the storm of opposition. He was drawn out of the city as dead; so that he was laid aside by the power of the devil's winds, bitter north winds of persecution; but he was encircled by the brethren, as we have been saying here today. How precious it is to be encircled by the brethren! And he rose up and entered into the city. He did not flee the city; he rose up, not a coward, but a victorious soldier of Jesus Christ, a good one, enduring hardships of the severest kind. He and Barnabas returned to these meetings that were mentioned, and as you will observe in verse 22, they were "establishing the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to abide in the faith, and that through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God".
That is what they had in mind, *confirmation* of the disciples; so that the winds of persecutions were not deterring the apostles, they went on, steady against the wind, as it were; and in view of its effect on the
{320}
disciples, they confirmed *them*, as the verse read says. Note it says "that through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God". Not 'perhaps', but 'must'. So that we are not to be in any way discouraged or upset if persecution arises. It is a question of 'much' tribulation. It is a question of 'must' too, that we enter into the kingdom of God. It is the kingdom now in its moral sense, and the *present* entrance into it that is in mind.
Then this verse that I read, that "having chosen them elders in each assembly, having prayed with fastings, they committed them to the Lord, on whom they had believed". They saw that the tender plants planted in those towns were exposed to the bitter winds of persecution. What will happen to them when we leave? would arise in the minds of these great servants, for they cared with genuine feeling about them. They must leave and visit other parts, and what will happen as they depart? Will the disciples lose heart? Will they be discouraged? Will disintegration set in? Will the assemblies in these towns be effaced? These solemn considerations arose or were in the hearts of these devoted men. And so they chose "them elders in each assembly". Evidently there were several that might be able to serve in these churches, for there was a *choice*. They were not limited to one. In fact, we never find only *one* elder in an assembly. In these assemblies there was a choice, and elders were chosen in each. Earlier, if an apostle was required there was a choice, too. There were two nominated. Doubtless there could have been others; but it was regarded that two were sufficient, and Matthias was selected, but it was by the disposition of God on the principle of the lot. They cast lots according to Old Testament procedure and God honoured this. But there is not casting lots for these elders, nor is there any election of them, nor is there any appointment of them by a superior elder or bishop. It is the
{321}
word 'elder' here, not 'bishop'; but it is the same idea. The word 'ordain' is not in it either. It is a question of choice, what these great servants would decide in the emergency, which brothers they would choose in each assembly. We are not told how many they chose in each assembly but we are told that they chose elders, not *an* elder in each assembly. So that the idea of a bishop of a city is foreign to Scripture. Here it is a question of choice by great servants who represented the authority of Christ, with the wisdom that He gave them to represent Him. They chose from what was there. They did not go to other districts to get men of experience to exercise oversight in any of these assemblies; they chose them in each assembly. That is to say, the persons chosen were resident in the town, in the assembly there.
Well now, I have said all that about the verse read in @Acts 14 to show you how concerned the apostles were about stability; so that before they left they chose them elders in each assembly. Thus the assemblies were furnished in so far as the wisdom of God in these two men could furnish them. But as elsewhere, the Spirit would have part in the choice. When the apostle Paul sent for the elders of Ephesus, he said to them that "the Holy Spirit has set you as overseers" of the assembly (@Acts 20: 28). And the same would apply here, that whilst they were chosen by the apostles, the Holy Spirit was there. There can be no assembly without the Holy Spirit, no assembly according to God, nor can there be any christian according to God without the Holy Spirit. Someone will say to me, Well, every christian has the Holy Spirit. If he is a full christian he has, but there are many who are only half, may be not even that. The teaching abroad is so defective that persons, although subjects of the work of God, are often unfit for the reception of the Holy Spirit. But any one who is truly a christian, that is to say, his sins are forgiven, he is justified through the death of the
{322}
Lord Jesus, he is a believer in Christ risen and glorified -- if he is subject, has the Spirit. It is said that God gives the Holy Spirit to those who obey. Well, someone says, does Scripture not say, If you believe you receive the Holy Spirit? It says, *After* that you believed. It is not automatic. But still, the Holy Spirit is available, that the believer might serve God, that he might by the Spirit glorify God in his work, and worship Him. The Holy Spirit is also available in the local assembly, and if elders are there the Holy Spirit is there to support them, so that there may be a stabilisation of their services. It can only be in the power of the Holy Spirit. As the apostle said, "Wherein the Holy Spirit has set you as overseers", @Acts 20: 28.
And now I go to Titus, so that we may see what is in mind in this selection of spiritual servants. We are down in Crete in this passage, and Titus was there, a worthy disciple and servant, and a companion of Paul, a trustworthy man. The apostle says to him in this letter, "For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou mightest go on to set right what remained unordered, and establish elders in each city, as *I* had ordered thee" (verse 5). It is not here choosing. He does not say 'choose' here; it is 'establish'. That is to say, the thing must be done. He does not say, If there be any suitable persons. There is no 'if' about it. You may dismiss the 'if' when God is working. God will not fail to provide what is needed, but He is pleased to use trustworthy persons. And that is one of the most important things to keep before us, trustworthy persons in the service of God; that heaven can rely on one in a crisis, that the brethren can rely on him, too.
Well, Titus was reliable. The apostle says, I left you in Crete for the purpose of setting things in order that were not in order, and to establish elders in each city. That, of course, does not mean every city or town or village in Crete; it means cities or towns in which there were assemblies. Not that these men were such as
{323}
aspired to the office, as the letter to Timothy says. They were to be appointed or established. It was an imperative matter. They were not suffering from persecution here; that is not the point. The Cretans were conditioned as a race of people that rendered them unstable and untruthful. As converted, they were likely to carry their old characteristics with them, and among them such a characteristic as untruthfulness; "always liars", as he says (verse 12). This could not but cause disintegration in the assembly, hence the imperative need of the establishment of elders; "establish elders ... as *I* had ordered thee" (verse 5). Then the apostle changes the word in verse 7 to "overseer". Elder and overseer are the same in effect, an elder has the same responsibilities in office as an overseer. There are two words in the original to designate the office of bishop or elder, the word for bishop is used by the apostle here. It means overseer. An elder suggests age and experience. The object is, dear brethren, stabilisation, that the saints should not be carried away by every wind of doctrine or other influence. Elsewhere we read of "being rooted and founded in love" (@Ephesians 3: 17). If we are rooted and founded in love, the necessity for elders is not so great, because 'rooted' means I am drawing from the divine source, and growing; 'founded' means I am steadied, I am not overturned by the wind. The roots go out horizontally as well as down to steady the tree. Where these conditions exist the necessity for elders or overseers is not so great, but still they were to be in Ephesus as well as in Crete. But you can see from the two letters, the first to Timothy and this one to Titus, that the assemblies in Crete were not on the same level or of the same quality as the assembly in Ephesus; but elders are enjoined to be appointed in both places.
I am concerned now about what is said of Crete, because of this matter of lying. The apostle was specially concerned about it. There is such a disposition to
{324}
misrepresent the truth. And so the apostle says to Titus, "If any one be free from all charge against him, husband of one wife, having believing children not accused of excess or unruly. For the overseer must be free from all charge against him as God's steward; not headstrong, not passionate, not disorderly through wine, not a striker, not seeking gain by base means; but hospitable, a lover of goodness, discreet, just, pious, temperate, clinging to the faithful word according to the doctrine taught, that he may be able both to encourage with sound teaching and refute gainsayers. For there are many and disorderly vain speakers and deceivers of people's minds, specially those of the circumcision, who must have their mouths stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which ought not to be taught for the sake of base gain" (verses 6 - 11). This is what the overseer has to deal with, what confronted him in these meetings in the island of Crete; and hence the qualifications required. They are imperative. It is no question here, as at Ephesus, of a person aspiring to be an overseer. It is very happy if a brother does aspire to be an overseer, just as it is for a brother to aspire to have a gift. It is quite right, but then the next question is whether he is qualified for the gift or for the office. To have an aspiration to be an overseer is one thing, but to have the qualification is quite another. And God is not ready to appoint unqualified persons for offices such as are indicated here. There is not a word in this instruction to Titus of one aspiring to be an elder, whereas in the letter to Timothy it is intimated that one might aspire to be an elder, but that he must be qualified. That is to say, dear brethren, God is not allowing anyone to come into His house or His service on his own terms. God makes the terms, and we are safe only as we abide by divine terms. As said before, God says to the saints at Ephesus, If a man aspires to a gift or aspires to be an elder, very good; but he must qualify. Here there is no thought of that.
{325}
The need was so great because of general conditions, and because of persons that had gone out upsetting souls, that there *must* be elders, there must be overseers; but God says, 'They are there'. As I said before, if there must be elders, God provides them. One might speak of the wonderful activities of God, one has often spoken of them. He governs the universe; worlds we know nothing of are kept going by Him. In the field He is active with the corn, giving it a body; in the sea He is active with the fish, and the cattle on a thousand hills are His; not a sparrow falls without Him; and how much more when His dear people are exposed to the awful conditions that are here described! God, therefore, provides persons that can be appointed.
And now, I want to come to chapter 2, to Titus himself; what was he to do? Not, certainly, to sit on a throne and say, You must obey me; for he was *not* the bishop of Crete. There is no such idea as that in Scripture. Timothy is said by some to be the first bishop of Ephesus; it is *not* so. He never was a bishop. He appointed elders by apostolic authority, he was apostolic delegate to do it, but he was not himself it. And Titus was simply here, left here purposely to look after certain matters because of the need that the assemblies in Crete should be stabilised against the awful influences that characterised the place. God is not going to leave His tender plants exposed to these influences. He did not even leave the garden of Eden uncared for. He put Adam there to dress it and to *guard* it. You say, What was there to guard it from? there was no sin in the world. But that is the word used. There was a serpent, liable to satanic power. God knew that. Eve, alas! was amenable to that power, and so, through her, was Adam. They were both driven out, but Adam had been placed in the garden to dress and guard it. And so it was that these overseers at Crete were appointed by the apostle's delegate. Titus, to keep and to guard the assemblies.
{326}
The feminine speaker in the book of Canticles says, "They made me keeper of the vineyards" (chapter 1: 6). Who are "they"? They made a mistake, because she says, "Mine own vineyard have I not kept". And so you see, dear brethren, how we may be very active in looking after gatherings in other parts and forget our own. The first obligation is myself, to rule my spirit; then to rule my house; and then to have part in the assembly in which I am set locally. Have I kept it?
And so it is that in this city the gatherings need attention. If ever there was a Crete, it is this city: lying, deception, corruption of every kind rampant in it, and the saints are in it; gatherings are in it. Not simply the saints individually, but the gatherings are in it. They are the divine planting. God took Israel out of Egypt, a vine, a noble vine, and planted it in Canaan, but it soon came to naught, it was not kept; it was not looked after. And so the urgency of looking after these gardens that have been formed over many years, through great exercise and toil. Are they going to disintegrate? They certainly will unless there be the spirit and principle of eldership in each of them. I quite own there is no such thing as appointing elders today. There are no apostles here, or apostolic delegates, but the Holy Spirit is here, and the great final act and confirmation of all appointments in the assembly was by the Holy Spirit. As the apostle says, "Wherein the Holy Spirit has set you as overseers", @Acts 20: 28. He had himself appointed Timothy to make them overseers in Ephesus, but it was the Holy Spirit finally. If the Holy Spirit does not confirm the appointment it should never be made. It is the confirmation that tests. If a brother gets some little bit of service, whether we think he is very well fitted for it or not, the test is in the confirmation of it. See what he does, whether he looks after the bit of business put into his hands according to God. So this second chapter tells us what Titus himself should do. Is he going to be just a little king with a throne?
{327}
The archbishops of the Church of England have thrones. I will not go any further, there is no need to attack people. But Titus was not like that, not a man with ecclesiastical authority that everyone must bow to.
Now I take him at the present time as an example of a person able to minister. One is doing it now, and there are many here able to do it, thank God. But the first thing is this: "But do *thou* speak the things that become sound teaching" (chapter 2: 1). Not only sound teaching, but the things that *become* it; the things that go with it. I may be able to set out the doctrine, but fail in the things that are suitable to it, and if I do, I am disqualifying myself and I am discrediting the truth. I speak of this because it is so important. There are so many that can minister, and we thank God for them all; they are increasing, and the word is: "But do *thou* speak the things that become sound teaching", that *become* it. Many things are said and done that are entirely out of keeping with sound doctrine. Morally those who preach and teach are certainly under the eyes of the brethren and they are to be exemplary. Christianity is not a system of doctrine only; it is to be exemplified. It is what is in persons; and men like Timothy and Titus, obviously having such authority in their hands, must speak the things that are in keeping with sound teaching. It is said to Timothy, "Let no one despise thy youth", @1 Timothy 4: 12. If you are actually young, be like those who are older or more mature. Be as old as you can, so to speak, in your ways. If you are to carry the confidence of the brethren you must be sober and balanced as one who has experience.
And so after Titus is enjoined as to himself it goes on here, "That the elder men be sober". I must go through this because it is so practical at the present time; each composing element of every meeting, as I may say, is segregated, each in its class, and the first is old men. I see some of them here, quite a few. I am included in them now, and there is a word for us
{328}
aged men; we are to be "sober, grave, discreet, sound in faith, in love, in patience" (verse 2). Now mark it, dear brethren, if elder brethren are not coming up to this standard in some way, we are failing in stabilisation, because the young ones are patterning themselves on us. Hence there must be what is given here; sobriety, gravity, discretion, soundness in faith, love and patience; all these. Let us write them down, at least in our minds; write them down and examine them every morning and every night. When challenged as to Himself, the Lord said He was "Altogether that which I also say to you", @John 8: 25. And He is urging me now to pay attention to what I am ministering of the truth and be in accord with it. Perhaps I am keeping up to the mark fairly well, but there is something unattended to, something unjudged, and this is out of keeping with what I am saying, and the truth is discredited. There is not total accord with my service. Well, let me see to that. Let me pray more about that than anything else, and I shall soon be exemplary of the truth, and I shall soon be a stabiliser to the assembly. Another thing is that I cannot be unduly away from my local setting. If I am to be a stabiliser to my local assembly, I must be there. I am not ignoring that the idea of gift runs parallel with this. Eldership is not gift, nor is even Titus spoken of as a gift. He comes before us rather as a reliable man, a useful man. He was a converted gentile, and Paul took him up to Jerusalem; as there he was a testimony to Paul's work -- what God was doing among the nations. As one of a class, perhaps he could not be equalled in Jerusalem. But the point is not gift; it is reliability, trustworthiness. There are tender plants in this town or that town in Crete and Titus is to see that suitable persons are appointed or established in each of these gatherings as overseers. Gift, of course, has a great place, and it is set, not only in the local assembly, but in the assembly generally. "God has set certain in the assembly: first, apostles; secondly,
{329}
prophets; thirdly, teachers", and so on (@1 Corinthians 12: 28). They are not set locally; gifted men are universal in their bearing, but elders are never universal, they are always local. So that you must be a local man to be an elder. A gifted man may be an elder too. "If he is apt to teach" he would have some gift, but then an elder must be a local man characteristically. He is set up there; he is chosen there; he is established there to look after the local company, and looking after it that it may be what the local company should be. Everyone of us, I trust, can see the divine mind as to the overseer. And there are the qualifications. As I said, it is well for each of us to note them down.
The next thing is aged women. There are a good many of them here today, too. What is said about them? "That the elder women in like manner be in deportment as becoming those who have to say to sacred things, not slanderers, not enslaved to much wine, teachers of what is right" (verse 3). It does not say here 'becoming sound doctrine', but 'sacred things'. How necessary that is in experienced women! "that they may admonish the young women to be attached to their husbands" (verse 4). There are a good many young women here. We may thank God for the young people that are married. It is an entire mistake to dissociate the marital idea from the testimony of God, it has a great place in that testimony. And the elder women are to be an example to the young women that are married: "not enslaved to much wine, teachers of what is right"; it is not a question of gift, it is a question of practical knowledge and moral power to be able to teach younger persons what is right in their spheres. "That they may admonish the young women to be attached to their husbands, to be attached to their children, discreet, chaste, diligent in home work, good, subject to their own husbands": first to love them, and then to be obedient to them, "that the word of God may not be evil spoken of" (verses 4, 5). See what is over
{330}
against all these simple, practical things, that the elder women teach the younger ones; over against them, if these are not present, there will be blasphemy (verse 5). See how serious it is! Things may run riot where these things are disregarded. "Diligent in home work"; young people will never get any help in their souls in shopping. If you have to shop, of course, do it, but if you go into the shops for sight-seeing and spend a day there, you are sure to suffer. The authorised version says, 'keepers at home'. I think the word is 'workers at home'. I think the meaning of it is something like home work, as the children do, but that is work for school, done at home. But the wife -- *her work* is at home and do the work of the home. The old sisters are to teach that. You may say, This is too much detail, and too personal; but you see, this is Paul's letter to this trusted brother called Titus in the island of Crete, where the people are just as I have said, and where there is such exposure to corruption, and he is saying to Titus, You urge this matter of the old sisters and the young sisters.
And then, finally, the passage goes on to say, "The younger men in like manner exhort to be discreet" (verse 6). You will observe that these are the component parts of every local gathering in the city -- old men, young men, old women, young women. What about the young men? "The younger men in like manner exhort to be discreet". You might ask me where they begin, at what age do you commence this lesson? With young persons of fourteen? fifteen? sixteen? seventeen? eighteen? I would say that the times are such, and people run to and fro so much, and knowledge has become so increased that people are older now at fifteen than they used to be at twenty, and we must take account of that. So that it is a question of when we are to take account of young men. I may say fifteen or sixteen, in high school. They know more than men
{331}
in some places know at twenty-five, and they are responsible accordingly, and they have to be guarded accordingly. So that I would begin with them at a literally young age. The direction is, "The younger men in like manner exhort to be discreet: in all things affording thyself as a pattern of good works" (verses 6, 7). The minister himself is here again. We will, say a brother is preaching the gospel, and very often he says, I want to say a word to the young. Of course it is easier to talk to the young, but then I must begin with myself even when speaking to the young. The thing comes back on myself. I may not be so very old myself. Am I sober? As I said before, Paul said to Timothy, "Let no one despise thy youth". If I am light-hearted, if I am wanting in sobriety and am marked by all that goes with youth, I am no example to young people. So that Paul says to Timothy, "Give heed to thyself and to the teaching", @1 Timothy 4: 16. "Till I come, give thyself to reading, to exhortation, to teaching" (verse 13). "But youthful lusts flee, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart", @2 Timothy 2: 22. I would that each of us thought of that in coming into fellowship. With whom am I coming into fellowship? "With those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". If I want to find them I shall have to hear them pray. I shall try to get an invitation to their houses and see how they do at the head of their tables; how they regard the young children; whether they are occupied with things of this world, story-telling and all that, which is corrupting and damaging. If I am a Titus, I shall see to myself. It is not only that I can preach a good gospel and put plenty of fire into it, but what is my life? What is my conversation? Where is my sobriety? That is the point in regard to these young men I am ministering to. So that our chapter goes on to say, "In teaching uncorruptedness, gravity, a sound word, not to be condemned" (verses 7, 8). This is the
{332}
minister, the one that preaches the gospel, the one that ministers in the ministry meeting, takes part in the Bible readings audibly and freely; these words are for him. We rejoice in the many that can serve, preach and teach; but then, dear brethren, the Lord is saying a word to *us*. What about our conversations? So the apostle goes on further, "a sound word, not to be condemned; that he who is opposed may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say about us". That is, a young brother that preaches, that teaches, that gives a word, as we call it, should be such that no evil thing can be said about him. This is Titus, not the young men he is speaking to, but Titus himself.
And then the apostle says, "Bondmen to be subject to their own masters, to make themselves acceptable in everything" (verse 9). There are very few bondmen now. There is hardly one in America. Slavery was abolished many years ago and one is thankful for it. So that there are no such persons now, but there are persons who have to serve masters, though, of course, trade-unionism is breaking that down. As their principle works out, the *servant* is the master. That is the false principle that is being set up, insisted upon, sometimes backed up with force and violence, an awful state of things. Still there are servants, and they are here exhorted to be obedient to their own masters in all things. That is for the servant, and I know that a great proportion of this audience are in that class. Not bondmen -- the word is intolerable now; it is simply not admitted in the world, the idea of being a bondservant. We have an eight hour day, forty hours a week. But then, most workers *have* a master; and we thank God for any element of mastership that remains. It is of God. It is a sobering, limiting influence to be under, if one is with God. If one is a master, he is to learn from God how to be a master; to learn from Christ. The very word 'master' or 'despot' is applied to God and to Christ; and if I am a master, then the
{333}
thing is to "put on the Lord Jesus Christ", to show all due respect and care and fairness to those who serve for wages. But the word here is not to the master, it is to the servant; and what I want to finish with is that he is to adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things. So that we have in all this: the brethren, old, young, male, female, minister, preacher, elder, are all in mind; but it is to this one end, that there is not only stabilisation of the local company as we follow these lines, there is also adornment. It is a great idea, because one feels the poverty that marks oneself as to the dignity of the assembly, the dignity of the truth, what we are dealing with. If it be a brother in need, let not the assembly be charged. Well, you say, is the assembly to have a bank account? The idea is that the assembly is a great dignified thought, and the things that are under its hand, the financial means, are to be held in dignity. It is no mere benefit society. Far be the thought. We lose the idea of the assembly if we do not see the dignity that attaches to it. Instead of that, we adorn it by recognising its dignity and we adorn the testimony that is contained in it by humility, by subjection. Some of us here were speaking last week about subjection: a great point in it is subjection one to another: "all of you bind on humility towards one another", @1 Peter 5: 5. The brethren are clothed in my mind as having such dignity that I am ready to adhere to a word of another brother. His advice may be good; it may be worth my while to think over and be subject to what he says. I must therefore not assume to be too superior to listen to another. This attitude will lead to peace, it will lead to self-judgment, it will save us from independency, and it will be the adornment of the doctrine which is of our Saviour God.
{334}
PIETY
@1 Timothy 3: 16; @1 Timothy 4: 7, 8; @Acts 16: 33, 34; @James 4: 13 - 15; @Acts 27: 21 - 27, 30 - 38
I have before me to speak about *piety*. And I thought it well to begin with the first verse read, because it introduces the idea of mystery into the subject. "And confessedly the mystery of piety is great". And, as if to indicate what is meant, that the idea proceeds from God, the passage says, "God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory". The verse seems to be poetic; so that it remains peculiarly in the mind, and is the kernel of all truth; so that it is well that it should be in our minds; that we should repeat it at any time, both to our own edification and to that of others.
But I referred to the word 'mystery' because it is a sort of shroud by which we are concealed from men, as the veil of Rebecca. As we had it today, the veil concealed her, but not from Isaac. So now piety enshrouds us and hence we are not understood, as ordinary men are. "The spiritual ... is discerned of no one", @1 Corinthians 2: 15. Not that we should make it a point to be misunderstood; it is from the very necessity of the case, as scripture says, "For this reason the world knows us not, because it knew him not", @1 @John 3: 1. Christ was marked by mystery, and yet He was a positive testimony in all that He said and did. Every word, every act, every movement was in Him testimony; but with it all, the big question mark always covers His position; like the manna in @Exodus 16: manna meaning "What is it?" Never was it a thought of God that Christ should be compassed by man's natural mind. It is true, He said of Himself that He was the song of
{335}
the drunkard; but that song could in no way convey Christ. It would be a profane song. There is much profanity connected with the Lord's name today. How desecrated His name is in the mouths of men and women at the present time! How dreadful to His own mind it must have been that He was the song of the drunkard! But such songs could never penetrate the veil of His flesh. Believers have access to the holiest through it. But those profane songs of the drunkards could never penetrate that veil. God is mysterious. A representative of Christ of old said to one, when he enquired about His name, so that he might do Him honour, "How is it that thou askest after my name, seeing it is wonderful?" @Judges 13: 18. So is the name of Christ: "and his name is called Wonderful", @Isaiah 9: 6. But wonderfulness in itself does not imply that it is understood or penetrated.
Now we are inside this veil in the mystery of piety. The world knows us not; that is, christians normally. If we join with our neighbours in their social affairs and the like, we shall soon become known, and they will consider that we are not much different from themselves. I do not wish to be regarded in that way. I wish to be regarded *as different*. That was what Christ was. There is a type of Christ called the red heifer. The word 'red' indicates something distinctive, different; the heifer was slain as a sin-offering and its blood was sprinkled before the tent of meeting seven times, and she was burned, with cedar-wood, and hyssop and scarlet, without the camp. Her ashes were to be used with running water for cleansing one who became defiled by touching a dead person. Becoming defiled by evil associations, we lose our heavenly character and we must appropriate the ashes and running water for our cleansing and restoration, and thus we are again set up in our heavenly status and association; for those that are heavenly are as the heavenly One; that is Christ -- the heavenly Man down here (@1 Corinthians 15: 48).
{336}
And yet we are to be a testimony to men on God's behalf, especially in the gospel. The gospel is presented in language and terms that are intelligent to the ordinary man; but it is to be presented so as to detach the believer from this world. He is not only to be a forgiven man but also a heavenly man. He is to have part in the assembly which involves what is called "the mystery of the gospel". The persons who preach it belong to the assembly. They preach the gospel clearly so as to be intelligible to men, but in wisdom, so that they may see that it leads them out of this world to heaven, that God is bringing many sons to glory (@Hebrews 2: 10). So the Lord taught in the temple every day; He said when He was attacked, "I taught always in the synagogue and in the temple ... Demand of those who have heard, what I have spoken to them", @John 18: 20, 21. He spoke in the temple every day, but where was He at night? There is mystery attached to His nightly relations. He was on the mount of Olives. He would be with His Father there. This would involve the mystery of piety.
God was manifested in flesh; manifest -- that is not mysterious. The manifestation is not a mystery, but it is what is behind the manifestation. What was there? *God*. You may say that the creation (the heavens and earth) witnesses to God. So it does. "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands", @Psalm 19: 1. "Because what is known of God is manifest among them, for God has manifested it to them -- for from the world's creation the invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made, both his eternal power and divinity", @Romans 1: 19, 20. But that is all in keeping with what is normal in the gospel, "so as to render them inexcusable" (verse 20). To preach mystery to people will not put them under that which makes them responsible. But nevertheless, mystery is there, the mystery of the gospel. Even in the creation
{337}
there is mystery. Who can fathom it? We hear much about it from so-called scientific men, but they will admit that mystery enters into it. Indeed it is undeniable even as to things with which we are constantly in contact. But I am not dealing with this now, but with the mystery of piety.
"God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit"; meaning that the Spirit was the power of the Lord's testimony. He was justified in the things that He did. Let anyone question Him. John the baptist, for instance, sent messengers to Him, saying, "Art *thou* he that is coming, or are we to wait for another?" @Luke 7: 19. How sorrowful that must have been to Jesus! But He says, "Go, bring back word to John of what ye have seen and heard: that blind see, lame walk, lepers are cleansed, deaf hear, dead are raised, ..." (verse 22). What can anyone say to a man that raises the dead? Not simply one person, but many. "... justified in the Spirit", and in many other things -- far more than what Scripture records in detail, there was the justification of God in Christ by the Spirit. "But if *I* by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Matthew 12, 28. But who could explain it when the Lord made the woman straight, and when He said to the young man of Nain, "Youth, I say to thee, Wake up. And the dead sat up and began to speak", @Luke 7: 14, 15. Who can question this? He is justified! Whatever that Man does or says is justified by His works of power. God had visited His people. "Has appeared to angels"; the angels saw God there. "Has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world". Everything He did as here below was verified in one great culmination. "Has been received up in glory". Notice, *in* glory, not simply into glory; it is the *manner* of His reception.
I am saying these things so that our souls should become accustomed to mystery. "And confessedly the
{338}
mystery of piety is great". But then there are other references to the mystery. @Colossians 2: 2 says, "Being united together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge". Chapter 1: 27 leads on to this -- "... what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you the hope of glory". Christ has been received up in glory and is among the nations, including America -- far away from His birthplace of Bethlehem and the scene of the cross, far away from Jerusalem. Christ is the hope of glory, but His position there is "this mystery". Let us appreciate this great fact, for we have part in it. In Colossians our life is said to be "hid with the Christ in God". Thus our life does not consist in what we are or have outwardly; it is hid -- hid with Christ in God. As walking in the light of all this we cannot but be mysterious. Presently we shall be translated into heaven. That will occasion mystery surely. What has become of us? The papers may take up the inquiry: What has become of this one and that one? People will say, I always thought they were mysterious people; I never could understand them. I have seen them going off with their Bibles, but did not know where they were going. It is involved in the mystery of piety. In piety the flesh is given no place at all. Piety brings God in and where God has His place there is no room for the flesh. The outlook of piety is glory above. It is simply that we are here for a moment -- sojourners, ready to depart "on the morrow", @Acts 20: 7. The mysterious disappearance is always imminent. That is our position.
The next thing is to *exercise* ourselves in this matter. That word "exercise" is used much by the Lord's people; I think more than by most. The word for us is, "Exercise thyself unto piety; for bodily exercise is profitable for a little, but piety is profitable for everything, having promise of life, of the present one, and of
{339}
that to come", @1 Timothy 4: 7, 8. It is the present life. Whatever the outward circumstances, there is the present life. There is gain in it through piety. And then, that which is to come. The life to come is in mind throughout Scripture. It was "promised before the ages of time". Eternal life is immense in its scope and blessedness. Having the promise of it strengthens us to exercise ourselves unto piety. And the man that is not exercised in the sense in which Scripture speaks of it is not a christian; at least he is not one characteristically. "For this cause I also exercise myself to have in everything a conscience without offence towards God and men", @Acts 24: 16. The man who says that says here, "But exercise thyself unto piety". I want to have that whatever else I have: I cannot be without it. You may enquire, What does piety mean? It marks the believer normally as a characteristic state, and as working out it means simply that I bring God into my circumstances. He of course brings me into His; but piety is that I bring God into my circumstances, and the apostle says that this is profitable for everything. I do not suppose there is a merchant in the whole world who can say his particular commodity is profitable for everything, but here is something that *is* profitable for everything. The promise of the present life and the one to come, is the positive thing that underlies this exercise "unto piety". I have the power for it; the muscle, as it were; the energy for this exercise that I should have piety. If there is something I have not brought God into, I can bring Him into it today. Are there things in my life that I cannot bring God into? The apostle is aiming at that state of things. He says, "Exercise thyself unto piety". That means, I must see that God comes into all my matters. I am not going to enumerate the matters I have in mind. There are many; but the point is, exercise yourself as to piety including them all. That is, you are not indifferent: You are not drifting along like a fish without fins and scales. You are going against
{340}
the pressure of the tide of evil in this world. You say, I want to bring God into whatever specially weighs upon me. As you get up in the morning and get ready for the day's duties you say, Will God hear me now? Certainly. Pray while you are getting dressed. God is ready. God says, If you put a grain of wheat in the field, I will give that grain of wheat a body as it pleases Me; and why will God not look after the believer when He is doing his toilet in the morning? We are apt to get up and not be too happy in our spirits in the morning. The devil is apt to take advantage of us early. Bring God in. A little word of prayer when you get out of bed will raise your heart toward God. I have been greatly impressed by Nehemiah's short prayer. He says to God, "Now therefore strengthen my hands!", @Nehemiah 6: 9.
"Exercise thyself unto piety". That is what the apostle says. It is profitable for everything, having promise of the present life and that to come. As I have said, I cannot enumerate the things. Each of us can do it for himself. But the great thing is to keep God before you always and bring Him into whatever arises in your affairs.
I would next touch on the *household* of the believer. It is mentioned in @Acts 16. It is the household of a jailer, a man who in his unregenerate state would use brutal, unseemly, and blasphemous language. Now he is converted. The passage I read is well known. The jailer has done damage to the Lord's servants. Paul and Silas, He did his duty to a point, because he was a jailer, but he thrust them into the inner prison and made their feet fast in the stocks, disregarding their wounds. They had just been scourged. But now he washes their stripes, "he took them the same hour of the night and washed them from their stripes", @Acts 16: 33. That is a very tender and sympathetic action; and then we read, "and was baptised, he and all his straightway". I just wanted to show how he brought
{341}
piety into his house *at once*. He did a kind act in washing their stripes the same hour of the night. He might have put it off until the morning if he had a hard heart, but he has a soft heart now. He is converted. He washed their stripes the same hour and laid the table for the prisoners. He laid the table for them. There is no assertion of his masterly rights in his house. He did the thing himself. But he rejoiced. You say to him, You are full of exuberance; you have just been converted and you think everything is all right now. It was; he brought his whole house into his joy. He rejoiced 'householdly', for that is the word, really. He rejoiced householdly, believing in God. God has His place in that jubilance, at that happy table. We all know how we make earthly joy of one thing or another, and minister to our natural tastes and appetites. But, dear brethren, where is God in all this? The jailer brought God into his household joy. It was an occasion for joy, but it is a household joy. He says in effect, This is a matter for God to have part in. So that there was a peace-offering in that house that night. One has often connected the scene with the prayer meeting, the gospel meeting, the Bible reading and the peace offering. What a transformation! and piety enters into it. God is in the whole environment. So that the house is full of joy; the head of it, a converted jailer. The head of the house is rejoicing with his household, believing in God. A believer at the head of a house, in piety, is one of the finest divine orderings in this world. The head of Christ is God, and the head of man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and that is what is seen here.
I just refer to business for a moment now. James takes account of business. He wrote to Jews, and they are the leading *business people*, you might say, in the world. His epistle is addressed to "the twelve tribes". He has the dignity of the Jews in mind, but they would spoil their dignity by their *keen* business transactions
{342}
in which they disregard piety. God will help you to make a sale. He will help you to buy and help you to travel and sell, but then if He does, it is because you are pious. Think of a pious salesman! Think of a pious soldier! (@Acts 10: 7). There are millions under arms now in this country. How many pious men are there among them? You might say, I could never think of a soldier as a pious man, but the Scripture speaks of pious soldiers. Cornelius was a pious soldier. Why can he not be pious? It is a department of God. Government is of God, and you cannot have governments as things are in this world without armies and navies, and without the police departments. It is not, however, the christian's department. The christian is not of it, but he can pray for it. Whether Cornelius continued in the army we are not told. Scripture contemplates pious soldiers, pious sellers of goods, pious sailors, pious manufacturers. They are to be considered. Those who sell, like Lydia, will not tell lies about their wares, and about their deliveries. They bring God into their businesses. That is what James has in mind in his brief reference to people who are in business. It is a well-known passage that I read; it says, "Go to now, ye who say, Today or tomorrow will we go into such a city and spend a year there, and traffic and make gain, ye who do not know what will be on the morrow (for what is your life? It is even a vapour, appearing for a little while, and then disappearing, ) instead of your saying, If the Lord should so will and we should live, we will also do this or that", @James 4: 13 - 15. "If ... we should live"; that is, if God allows us to live, and we do this or that; God has to do with the matter. You say, 'I will leave this city; I have not done so well here; I will go to another where prospects seem better'. If I do that, I am leaving God out. Can I hope for prosperity? No, I cannot. If I leave out God I am apt to meet with disaster. "If the Lord should so will"; that is, I must take the Lord into account. "If the Lord
{343}
should so will and we should live, we will also do this or that". Well, if I speak in such language I should say, 'Why should I go away from the city in which I am? I am making my living here. God is helping me, so why should I move away?' I pray about it and I do *not* move away. I am needed here. Many meetings have been weakened because people thought they would do better financially by going elsewhere. I know that this country is largely peopled by those who thought that way. Millions of Europeans came to America to improve their circumstances. And, of course, this country was opened up of God to benefit humanity. But then, what about the motive underlying all this? "If the Lord should so will and we should live, we will also do this or that". Did they bring the Lord in like this? The more I think over those words, the less likely I am to make a hasty move, because I want to bring God into it; I will make no move without God. I weigh over these precious words, and the more I weigh them over, the less likely I am to make a rash move -- or any move. God is supporting me where I am, and blessing me where I am; why not continue? It is the will of God. The fact that God has followed up human migratory movements with the gospel and blessed men does not set aside what I just said. We rejoice in His sovereign mercy thus attested.
Finally, I would say a word on @Acts 27. What is in mind is my political relations. It is part of Paul's experience that is depicted in this chapter. It entered into a four year period, or more, of extraordinary experiences of the apostle Paul with the governing powers, involving great sufferings. He had been two years imprisoned in Caesarea. Now he is on his way to Rome in custody, and he is to spend two years there under guard. This voyage occurs between the two periods, but it is an incident in relation to his position in the political world. We are all outwardly in the political world; I mean as to outward contact in which
{344}
we are subject to the ruling powers. We are all in that, and the question is how each is in it. That is just the one thought I wish to close with. How am I in this political world? Paul was in it -- very much in it -- *not morally*, but physically. He was bound with a chain, and the boat was tossed about in the Mediterranean. A terrible storm arose on it and continued for days. What I want to show is that he brought God into the matter. I cannot get out of the international world. I am somewhere in it whilst I am here below, and the question is, How am I in it? Am I pious? And so I read in @Acts 27.
The passage says, "When they had been a long while without taking food, Paul then standing up in the midst of them said, Ye ought, O men, to have hearkened to me, and not have made sail from Crete and have gained this disaster and loss. And now I exhort you to be of good courage, for there shall be no loss at all of life of any of you, only of the ship" (verses 21, 22). What a word that was on that ship after a long abstinence! That is, they had not been taking food. Here is a man standing up, and we see he has shackles. He is a prisoner. But he is not speaking like a prisoner. He is speaking almost like the master of the ship. A pious man becomes influential even among men. As with God, he acquires moral power. When the Lord Jesus stood before Pilate, which is a corresponding position, He said to him, "Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above". He brought God into the matter. Pilate had power, but God gave it to him, and the Lord recognised that. Paul is on the ship as a witness of Jesus, and there is a terrible storm, but he stands in the midst of all, especially those responsible, and says, "Ye ought, O men, to have hearkened to me". You may say, 'What has he got to do with the matter? Why does he not stay in his cabin and read his Bible and pray?' But no, he comes up on the deck and says, "Ye ought, O men, to have hearkened
{345}
to me, and not have made sail from Crete and have gained this disaster and loss. And now I exhort you to be of good courage, for there shall be no loss at all of life of any of you, only of the ship. For an angel of the God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood by me this night" (verses 21 - 23). Some of us might think he ought to be preaching the gospel, but he is a pious man. I want to bring before you, dear brethren, the importance of bringing in piety in the present situation. Can I bring God in as before the authorities? It is a question of God. Paul says, "For an angel of the God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood by me this night". He is no pro-Roman; he is no pro-Jew. He is God's -- "whose I am and whom I serve"! Well, an angel appeared to him. How we need angelic service! They are all ministering spirits sent out for service on account of the saints (@Hebrews 1: 14). I often say to the Lord, I would like to be treated as Gideon was treated. He requested that the dew should be on the fleece, and God put it on the fleece; and then he asked that it be put outside the fleece, and God put it outside the fleece, the fleece being dry and on all the ground dew. I would like to be treated like that -- indeed I may say I have been treated thus. I am not merely bringing myself forward; God forbid! But, I am seeking to show how we may come into the gain of piety, the gain from bringing God into what we are doing. Can God condone wrong? Can He condone wrong in the government under which I am? No. If I do, I am identifying myself with the wrong. God is not condoning the wrong. Piety forbids me to condone wrong, whatever the wrong, or in whomsoever it be. Can I justify the right? Certainly. Piety requires that I justify the right in whomsoever the right is. Since sin came into the world, war has been waged between good and evil. Piety requires that I take sides with God, and if I take sides with God, I take sides with what is good and what is right, and condemn what is evil, no matter
{346}
in whomsoever it is. If I condone evil, I am identified with the evil, and I become evil myself. That is the general and unchanging position between right and wrong.
Paul says, I belong to God, "whose I am and whom I serve". But then, see the advantage he had. There was nobody in that ship like him. He says, "For an angel of the God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood by me this night, saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must stand before Caesar; and behold, God has granted to thee all those that sail with thee". Think of that! There were two hundred and seventy-six people aboard the ship. And Paul indicates that he was praying for them, that they all might get ashore safely. You say, Is he not praying that they may be saved eternally? No doubt he was. But he would say, I am praying also that they may get ashore safely. Thus God had given those two hundred and seventy-six people to him. God is the Saviour of that ship; Paul being a pious man, God hearkens to him. He sends an angel to him. It is not assembly intimacy; it is a *governmental* position. It belongs to the history of the nations; and in it there is prophetic instruction as to the failure of the assembly. The soldiers and sailors belong to the nations, and they are all saved because Paul asked for them. Hence today, we are to pray "for all men; for kings and all that are in dignity". God has to do with them all, and so we have to do with them all. There is great difficulty in travelling from country to country now, but christians pray for all governments. Is God going to do anything in the way of shortening this terrible war? I think so. He will do it from His own point of view, but He will do it from the point of view of the prayers of the saints. We must thus take sides with the right in the attitude of our souls and not condone evil for national reasons. To stand up for wickedness is wicked. Let us take this to heart. We need to look into this matter in our relations with the powers that are;
{347}
whether we can be godly in that connection. Paul is, and he is given the two hundred and seventy-six souls who sailed with him. And they land on the isle of Melita. Well, you say, if God told him that, why was he not just restful and say no more? No. He is concerned as to the rest of the voyage as a man who feared God should be; for dependence should always mark us.
And presently the sailors evidently gave up hope, as many do. People are very quick to say so-and-so is winning the war, and so-and-so is not winning it -- leaving God out. But it is a question of what God is doing. The sailors seem to have no hope of the ship; but Paul trusted God, and knew all should reach a certain island. It is a question of what God would do. What is Paul going to do now? Is it all settled? Well, it is all settled, and Paul knew this. And as to the present situation, the whole matter is settled in the sense that one of two things is going to happen. If present conditions go on and get worse and worse, the man of sin will appear, and the saints will be translated; but if they do become better, in the sense that right, as we have been speaking of it, prevails, we will all be allowed to stay on here a little longer. That is piety. As to details, there are those sailors wishing to leave the ship. They evidently think the ship is going to founder and they want to escape. I do not want to be among those. Paul speaks to the centurion -- notice the centurion and the army is one set, and the sailors another set, and the passengers another set. And the sailors are about to leave the ship. You may say that Paul should let someone else attend to the sailors, he being a christian. 'No', Paul says, in effect, 'that is my business. I want to see the will of God go through, and these sailors are essential to this', so he said to the soldiers, "Unless these abide in the ship ye *cannot* be saved". Did not the angel say so-and-so? Never mind; they must not be allowed to leave the ship. The soldiers
{348}
saw to that; and the sailors were used, as they should have been used, to guide the ship to the destination indicated, which was Malta. She was taken right through in spite of the storm, and it was all in connection with the piety of one man, and he a prisoner on the ship. It seems to me a momentous thing, and it is within our range, also applying at the present moment, *whether I can take God into my reckonings in regard of all that is transpiring*. That is piety! If I leave God out, I am like a ship without a rudder and compass in the sea, tossed about by every wind. The knowledge of God in my soul keeps me steady, but it does not make me indifferent to what may be happening. I look out for those sailors. Do not let them go off the boat. How am I going to keep them? Pray for them. They are essential to the salvation of those two hundred and seventy-six, including Paul and those with him. Hence I have no difficulty about praying for armies and navies to a certain point. It is a question of the will of God. It is a question of the maintenance and support of what is right and the testimony of God here right unto the end. May God bless this word.
{349}
THE SPIRIT OF GOD
@Genesis 1: 2; @Genesis 2: 6, 7; @Genesis 6: 3; @Romans 8: 23 - 27, 15
My remarks will be about the *Spirit of God*. I have in view to develop and make clear that through Him divine feelings are set out. The Spirit of God, of course, is God, but come in, even sent in, in the attitude of dependence. He, therefore, comes down very low to be alongside of us and in us to take account of us feelingly.
So I have in mind to look at a state of chaos effected by some power hostile to God, but causing deep feelings in God. "The earth was waste and empty, and darkness was on the face of the deep". God never created things in that condition. It was without form. All that we can see of God's creation indicates great attention paid to form; and, too, all that we can see indicates that voidness is not a divine thought. And the absence of light, which is darkness, is not a divine thought. Light marks God's operations, for He is light, but in the state described here, "darkness was on the face of the deep". And on account of all these things, the Spirit of God is clearly affected, for He "was hovering over the face of the waters". He garnished the heavens, but He is not mentioned in that connection here. He is occupied with this state of things; not with the ornamental side of the creation. It does not say the heavens were waste and empty; it is just the earth.
Apparently the catastrophe was not universal; it was limited. It is always so, including the present state of things. The state of christendom is very bad, but still there is something for God. And what there is has been preceded by divine feelings. Many weepings, many tears, preceded what we are now enjoying. What we have is limited, I admit, but still we are enjoying something. That is, God came in; He came in to make a change in the profession of christianity; but before
{350}
coming in in a positive way, He came in feelingly in a negative sense, for He felt what the enemy had brought in. And so it is, bringing the matter down, not only to the profession of christianity, but to each individual. God is affected when any of us turns aside from the truth. He is the first to feel it; and He feels it very keenly. His feelings will be reflected in those who are spiritual; whether it be in our parents, brothers or sisters in the flesh, or our brethren, God has a way of coming in and causing right feelings when there has been in any of us, departure from the truth. You will remember how the Lord in one of His parables, said that a certain householder sowed good seed in his field and his enemy came and sowed darnel. In the explanation of the parable the Lord says, "The darnel are the sons of the evil one; and the enemy who has sowed it is the devil", @Matthew 13: 38, 39. It may be through a school friend, or a business friend, or some hobby that has been taken on, or the love of money -- whatever it is, an enemy has done it and you are not what you used to be. There is a want of form, a certain voidness; and if a spiritual brother speaks with you the conversation is not tasteful to you. You are without form and void spiritually. But God has a means here of expressing His feelings, His Spirit being here in the assembly.
And so in the scripture I read, it is said, "the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters". The earth was evidently totally immersed as it was in the days of Noah. And hence what feelings! Who can fathom the feelings of the blessed Spirit of God as He brooded over it? It would not be in part only; the whole position would be noted: darkness, and below the darkness, water; just water, not a pulsation of life at all. And so it was; for how long, Scripture does not say. Geologists and astronomers are very profuse with their years; they have plenty of them, sometimes, I believe, far more than God, and sometimes far less! The Spirit of God was in this attitude for how long no astronomer
{351}
or geologist can tell. Only God knows how long the period was. And how long He can mourn over disaster, who can tell? But there is the fact for reception into our minds that the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. God would make use of the waters; they are a creation. And so, if the Lord is going to take any one up here tonight to bless him. He is not going to make any use of the darkness that is in your soul; He will dispel it to make use of your soul; He is going to make use of you as the darkness is removed. The Spirit is not said to move over the darkness, but over the face of the waters. They will be used later. Presently, the earth emerged out of them; the water was not destroyed, nor the earth. In principle, darkness was dispelled. God said, "Let there be light", and there was light. Light displaces darkness. Darkness is retained in God's wise ordering. He called it night and separated it from the light. God is light. There is no darkness at all in God.
The whole of the first chapter after this is the outcome, morally, of the Spirit of God moving on the face of the waters. What was below was going to be brought out. The earth was to emerge and bear fruit. The power of vegetation was put into it, and grass and trees were to grow out of it. Man was to be made out of its dust. What a development! All this is preceded by the Spirit moving on the face of the waters. History is brought out. God did not make the earth in its submerged condition. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". The earth was specially in the mind of God; life was to be in it; trees were to grow out of it; grass was to grow out of it, and man was to be made out of it.
Now that is chapter 1 very briefly. Chapter 2 is Jehovah Elohim; not now dealing with darkness. In truth, it is foreshadowing the wonderful period in which we are; the period of "glory to glory". @Genesis 2 is a wonderful chapter. It is a chapter of glories. Intelligence in man marks it, the breath of God having
{352}
given him being. God is spoken of as breathing into Adam's nostrils the breath of life. It is not that He lives as we do; far otherwise; God is a Spirit. But the Holy Spirit is pleased to bring things down to our understanding. Thus man became a living soul by the breath of God. The Spirit of God says "there was no man to till the ground" (verse 5). It is not 'no being', but 'no *man*'. God is going to have some one to work with Him. If I am restored out of the chaos I had gotten into, God says, I want you to work with Me. The Lord Jesus says, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work", @John 5: 17. That did not mean the Father stopped working. The last Adam was now here and He was working.
I wonder how much we think of this as we turn aside from the truth -- that God has lost a man. The Lord Jesus says, "How much better then is a man than a sheep!" @Matthew 12: 12. A sheep is of some value to God. The sparrow does not fall without Him, but God attaches great value to a man. So, "there was no man to till the ground". And yet chapter 1 says, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness ... And God created Man in his image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them" (verses 26, 27). But chapter 2 says "there was no man to till the ground". So we must think a little and understand how God puts things together. He leaves them for a moment and then comes back to them and tells us that a certain thing was created before another. Many things were created before man, and man was created before woman. In fact, when we hear of her in chapter 1 we would think she was created with Adam, whereas in truth she was created after him. And when she is specifically brought into being, it is not creation, it is making or building. An architectural word being employed suggests peculiar dignity; the material of which she was built suggests dignity also, for it was a *rib of man* -- not dust of the ground.
{353}
As to the material used to make man, the passage says that God caused a mist to rise out of the earth, and it watered the face of the ground. And then, "Jehovah Elohim formed Man, dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and Man became a living soul". It is just the dust of the earth, but the thought of moistening the ground immediately precedes this, and evidently enters into that out of which man was formed. That he was "dust of the ground", is inserted here anticipating the Fall, intended to be a humiliating fact connected with sin, in view of repentance. But the passage shows that the material out of which man was made was of less value than that out of which woman was made. The main thought, however, is that man was formed and breathed into by Jehovah Elohim and in this way became a living soul. It is of a rib of man, as living by the breath of God, that Eve was built. Thus there is no inferiority on either side, but man is not of woman, but woman of man. Paul says, "For man is not of woman, but woman of man", @1 Corinthians 11: 8. Chapter 2 of Genesis is a chapter of glories. What enters into the man's glory is that as formed by God. He breathed into him; it is not said that He breathed into the woman. He may have made her to live by a less distinctive transaction. In Ezekiel breath is said to come into Israel through prophecy. Animals live by breath, too, but we are not told *how* this took place as they were created. God breathing into Adam's nostrils indicates that He was operating with very pleasing material. He breathed into man's nostrils, we are told. Think of that transaction of God's! These details help us to know God. What did He breathe into man? The *breath of life*. Hence the great superiority of man above the animals. The breath of life.
And then God takes a lion and brings him to Adam. He takes an elephant and a horse and brings them to Adam. *How* did He do these things? How did He
{354}
take the birds to Adam? Scripture says He did, to see what Adam would call them. Was Adam equal to this? Yes. How pleasing he must have been to God! You see Adam there in the field and an elephant coming up. God brought him up. 'What are you going to call this creature?' 'Elephant'. God was pleased with that. 'What are you going to call this creature?' 'Horse'. 'That one?' 'Lion'. 'That one?' 'Sheep'. See how wonderful God is, coming down to His great creature, into whose nostrils He had breathed in this familiar way!
The apostle Paul says to the Athenians, "Some of the poets amongst you have said, For we are also his offspring". Why then did they think that God is like gold, silver, or stone to be worshipped? God is thus available to be known by us; He "is not far from each one of us: for in him we live and move and exist", @Acts 17: 27, 28. Elihu says, "The Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath given me life", @Job 33: 4. That is a remarkable scripture. Elihu was representative of God; one in a thousand, an interpreter. He connected his very being with the Spirit of God; the breath of the Almighty had given him life. I refer to that because of this remarkable chapter in Genesis, so full of glory, as if God were to cause His own glories to shine out before Satan showed his hand and caused darkness. In the second chapter the breath of God causes man to become a living soul: and he is set in the garden to till it and guard it. He was to have dominion and a general working part in that which God had created and made. He was intelligent in all this as shown in his naming of the animals and fowls. Solomon spoke about all these things. The millennium will bring out the wonders of creation; certainly of the earth. God would say, You must have the man, the woman, and the lower creatures; the land animals, the beasts and the birds to fly in the air. You must have all these. They are all made for a purpose, and they will all appear according to the divine intent in the
{355}
millennial day. God says in effect to Adam, I am in covenant with you; I am linked with you, and I want you to be with Me in all that I have made. How applicable that is at the present time! God would bring us to be fellow-workers with Him. God is working governmentally, but He is also working directly through Christ by the Spirit, and He is calling us to be with Him. He is feeling it if you are not. If He has lost one of us, He is feeling it, and would say, He is better than a sheep.
I now go on to @Genesis 6 for a moment, to show you how the Spirit is *pleading*. That is feeling too. The word 'plead' is energetic. You may depend that there is great feeling in striving by the Spirit. In this service He may use others to save you, as He *is* doing. It is a day of household salvation. A peculiar phase of the truth that is being emphasised is the household. The fathers and mothers are overwhelmed at times with the conflict there is to save the children; and the Spirit of God is in it. To the young here I would say, He is striving for your salvation, to keep you out of the evil; and if you are in it, to deliver you out of it. I just touch on that verse; it is a gospel verse. God says, "My Spirit shall not always plead with Man"; not, "I" shall not plead, but "my Spirit"; that is Himself in a feeling way. He will not always strive with men; but He will give him one hundred and twenty years; that is, until the flood.
Now I pass on to the New Testament to bring out my main thought, and that is the activities of the Holy Spirit in us. I have been speaking about the breath of God, and it is very touching that the incoming of the Holy Spirit is called impetuous blowing or breathing, in @Acts 2. It is not, however, breathing into the disciples as the Lord did. That is peculiarly touching. The Lord, it says, "breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit", @John 20: 22. That is to say, they were to understand what they were receiving. But
{356}
in @Acts 2 it is an impetuous breathing, (see note in New Translation). That is, a powerful sound coming in from heaven. What is the actual fact of the Spirit of God coming in in this way? "And there came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where they were sitting", @Acts 2: 2. But it is violent breathing, as the note says. That is, God is coming in Spirit-wise. That is the point. Think of the divine thoughtfulness in all this, dear brethren! Would that we had a right appraisal of the blessed Spirit of God; what divine Persons had to do in order to make it possible to impart the Spirit, and then that He should come in in this way! So that the cloven tongues as of fire "sat upon each one of them". And when the actual speaking begins, it is "as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth". The disciples spoke about "the great things of God", the Spirit of God thus acting in them.
And so I thought these verses in @Romans 8 would help us. The apostle says in verse 23, "And not only that, but even *we* ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit". Christians have the Spirit in a greater and more blessed way, a more elevated way, than others -- "the first-fruits". But, in spite of that, "we also ourselves groan in ourselves, awaiting adoption", sonship, "that is the redemption of our body". The real cause of the groaning is the state of our bodies -- the mixed condition in which we are; and what will bring that to a definite end is the redemption of our bodies, and that is called sonship here. So that, as to the state of our bodies, we are not in the state of sonship absolutely, yet. We may as well accept that, although it is said, "ye are sons" (@Galatians 4: 6), but sons by *faith*, not by actuality; I mean, in the sense of our bodies being included. Our bodies are mortal; they are subject to corruption; they are liable to corruption. We are all sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. It is a heavenly relationship; but our bodies are not equal to that, and
{357}
so we are "awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body".
You may say, 'I thought I was redeemed *in toto* when I believed in the Lord Jesus'. Well, that is true in the great principle of salvation, but my body needs redemption yet, because I am liable to death and the grave. We should never die if our bodies were redeemed in the sense of @Romans 8: 23. We are awaiting that. Our bodies are liable to death, and yet God is using them. We are to present them to Him as living sacrifices, but we await the glorious redemption of our bodies. Does everybody here really understand that verse? I would you did. Awaiting sonship, for that is the word; adoption is sonship; and the meaning of that in this passage -- every passage has to be taken in its context -- is the redemption of our bodies, so that they are no longer liable to death. In the meantime, the apostle says that although we have the first-fruits of the Spirit, we are groaning. And, oh! what groaning is going on throughout the world! If ever there was a period of groans it is today. God said He heard the groanings of His people in Egypt. He hears them now, too; and they are prevalent; nor do we want to stifle them; it is legitimate to have them. But then, think of this: the Spirit of God Himself in us, groans. But He is not doing it as if things are impossible. No. The Spirit of God never groans in that sense. Many of our groans are because we think there is no possibility of relief. But there is. A Christian characteristically never loses hope. Hope is one of the great features of Christianity -- faith, hope and love. Love is the greatest; but the other two are great also, and the Spirit of God groans in us, not hopelessly, but hopefully. And He makes intercession for the saints according to God.
I want you to ponder that, dear brethren: what the Holy Spirit is as in us, what He actually is to us, what operations He carries on in us. The passage says, "but
{358}
the Spirit itself makes intercession with groanings which cannot be uttered" (verse 26). But God understands Him. Sometimes I wonder whether I should pray without using my vocal powers even in the formation of words. If I had to do that I could not pray nearly as much as I do. I am thankful that I can pray without articulating. Abraham's servant prayed in his heart, Scripture says, and God answered him. God answered the very feelings of his heart. That is, you make formations in your heart, and in your mind, of your needs. You can make formations as to them throughout the night seasons. As one says, "Even in the nights my reins instruct me", @Psalm 16: 7. The reins are the inwards, the automatic organs. God knows them; He does not need to have the vocal powers in action to discover what our needs are. He knows well. And the Holy Spirit is there to see it in the believer, in his organs, and to make groans which cannot be uttered. God knows them. That is one of the most encouraging things I know of. "The Spirit itself makes intercession with groanings which cannot be uttered". But He makes intercession for the saints according to God. There is thus perfect correspondence with God in believers. Is that not a great thought?
A person that really judges himself, who has gone through @Romans 7, knows what this inward thing is, and what that is; he labels the things, as it were, and disallows this, and allows that. And so he says, "I *myself* with the mind serve God's law" (verse 25). So that there is in me the Spirit of God, corresponding exactly with God in heaven. Think how great one is in that sense, and how imperative it is to disallow the flesh, for the flesh lusts against the Spirit! The enemy is against the Spirit, and so, as Moses says, "Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation to generation!" @Exodus 17: 16. The war is on but the Spirit of God is greater than Amalek, "greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world", @1 @John 4: 4. He is also greater
{359}
than the flesh in the believer so that there is room for the Spirit of God; and, therefore, in the subjective condition in the saints forming the assembly, there is perfect correspondence with heaven. Is that not testimony? It is, and a wonderful triumph. It is going to come out fully presently -- when we are entirely according to God, spirit, soul and body. But for the moment the triumph is in the teaching of Romans: how it enables us to make room for the Holy Spirit in us, so that there is correspondence in us with God. His very groanings in us are acceptable to God, and He makes intercession for us according to God.
That is the secret, beloved brethren, of the testimony being maintained in this world. Heaven is attentive to what is going on in the saints. But it is in this matter of a subjective condition such as I have mentioned, in the believer, that the Holy Spirit has scope, and so there is perfect correspondence between heaven and earth; that is, in the state of the believer. The believer himself and the whole assembly are, in principle, in accord with heaven. That is what @Romans 8 teaches. We do not know how to pray, says the apostle, as we ought to: "But he who searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he intercedes for saints according to God" (verse 27).
And, finally, while the Spirit is doing all that. He is thinking of God. He is thinking of the Father. God has been helping us as to the term 'Father'! The Lord Jesus said in the garden of Gethsemane, "Abba, Father", @Mark 14: 36. Heaven heard that. I do not say that was the only time, but it is said that He said it *there*, that is, under great pressure; and we are living in a time of pressure. Never, perhaps, was there a time of more general pressure. I often question why it is that in our day God has allowed the two greatest wars that ever occurred. Is it accidental? It is not. He has the brethren in mind. He is keeping war away from among the saints, but allowing it among the nations. But still
{360}
it is a great pressure, and the Lord was in the greatest pressure in the garden and said, "Abba, Father". That is what He said, and that was heard in heaven by the Father. It was delightful to Him. The Lord was always pleasing to His Father, but in Gethsemane and on the cross peculiarly so. On the cross He said, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" @Mark 15: 34. That was heard in heaven too, but not then answered. But the expression was heard and felt as infinitely precious by the Father, and the Holy Spirit thinks of that in coming down into our hearts and crying, Abba, Father. And when the disciple says, "Lord, teach us to pray". He said to them, "... say, Father", @Luke 11: 1, 2. The Holy Spirit comes in and does not wait for us to say it, but *He* says it. He is urgent about it; He cries, "Abba, Father", @Galatians 4: 6. But in @Romans 8 we have, "... whereby we cry, Abba, Father" (verse 15). It is urgent too: "... whereby we cry". This would imply that there is great love for the Father; it is from the Spirit, who first cries in the believer.
So that all that I have said is to emphasise the thought of the Spirit in this feeling way, so that we know how to move toward God at the present time. Really the whole current sorrow and pressure is intended to affect the saints. As knowing God and His great purpose of love for us we cannot but think thus. He is forming us for our great destiny through it. God will come in for deliverance; but He is causing it to affect us for our gain; He is working in His people, having all the elect in mind, and when His end is reached, the external matter will be seen in its true character. Let us then be learners; learners especially in the sense of making room for the Spirit of God so that He may be known in a feeling way in our hearts, and that thus we may be with God in a feeling way.
{361}
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE
@Acts 26: 13; @Ezekiel 47: 6 - 9; @John 3: 30
I have in mind to speak about *experience*: experience with God, with His people, and with the things of God, with a view to showing that such experience causes increase in our knowledge of God, of Christ, of the Spirit, and of the saints; also of the things of God in general. The service of God requires that we should progress in experience, so that there should be elders amongst us. We have among the gifts the word of wisdom; that is not exactly the fruit of experience, it is a divine gift, but the use of it is greatly enhanced by experience, and this may be said of every gift that God gives. In one sense, every saint has gift: "to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", @Ephesians 4: 7. And the exercise of the gift effectively is really contingent upon experience.
Paul says, "*I* have learnt in those circumstances in which I am, to be satisfied", @Philippians 4: 11. Contented christians are not many. In one sense, we should never be satisfied until we reach the goal of spiritual progress, the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. But as regards human circumstances, we have to be on our guard against ambition, which is greatly stimulated by what other brethren have and we have not. So learning by experience leads us to contentment, even if we have not what others have in material things. As a matter of fact, very few of us are capable of having very much with safety, and the only real value of material things beyond actual necessities is that they may become the expression of love for others, the expression of unselfish regard for others. It certainly is an experience, to be satisfied with whatever circumstances we may be in. If we have more than we need of material things, the
{362}
satisfaction in this would be, not that it should become a stepping stone for further increase, but that it should be the means for expressing love. The "greater" of faith and hope is love. There is no quality greater than love; and the more ability or means we have of expressing it, the more it grows. There is to be no cessation of its growth whilst we are down here. We shall not be growing eternally; we should become beyond human conception if there were no end to our growth. As conformed to Christ's body of glory, clearly we shall be perfect, completed. Eternity is a finished state of things; but until we reach that, the thought is 'more and more'.
Now, experience leads to that. The word 'more and more' is of value only if we possess the thing that is to be increased. If we have not got it, then the word 'more and more' cannot have any force with us; the point is, therefore, to have love and have it increasingly. It is not only that the objects of our love gain, but those who exercise it gain too. It is a matter that prevails and pervades. Prevailing is power; but pervading is that it finds its way into every crevice, every passage way. 'By the Spirit all pervading', we sometimes sing.
God's thought for us thus is that of growing up to Christ, to a perfect standard, and of no contentment on our side until that is reached. And when that is reached, we are translatable; God translates what is according to Christ. He was received up in glory; and in a certain way we shall be received in glory. By faith Enoch was translated, and it is on this principle the work of God proceeds in us. Enoch was prepared by the fact that before his translation he had the testimony that he pleased God. He would go up contentedly, without any anxiety that he would not be pleasing, that he would not find a place in the divine realm; his place is with the sons. All shall be there, even the angels, on that principle. Each one is regulated by the status of the family to which he belongs, but clearly all in the
{363}
Father's realm have part in sonship. So, as we are about to be translated, dear brethren, it is obvious that we should seize the opportunities for development in growth by experience.
Scripture speaks much of God *showing* things, that is, to persons who valued what was shown. In this connection I wish to speak first of light. We read of the light being sweet (@Ecclesiastes 11: 7). The passage read in Acts is from the third account of Paul's vision on the way to Damascus, and from it I wish to speak of his experience in light. It was a vision, because he saw the Lord, but what I have in mind now is his experience in the light that shone. Light is one of the first things we have in Scripture. God said, "Let there be light" (@Genesis 1: 3), but that light is not defined, nor is the source of it given us. Paul, however, speaks of a light above the brightness of the sun, shining from heaven round about him. I have read the last mention of it in @Acts 26; he mentioned it twice himself, and the Holy Spirit mentions it directly once. Paul here speaks of the light in a superlative sense. In speaking to Agrippa here, he had much expansion inwardly; no doubt God helped him peculiarly in this address. It was a unique opportunity, and he did not come short in the appreciation of it. I do not suppose anyone really can speak on God's behalf save as he appreciates an opportunity as divinely given. And this was divinely given, and availed of, for the apostle was in much liberty and power. He says, "At mid-day, on the way, I saw, O king, a light above the brightness of the sun, shining from heaven round about me and those who were journeying with me", @Acts 26: 13. I do not suppose any other monarch had such an address presented to him as this one spoken to Agrippa. "O king", the apostle says. He knew what to say; he knew objectively whom he was addressing; and he knew what form of words to use. He was not communistic in that sense; he recognised dignities. There are those who speak
{364}
evil of dignities (@2 Peter 2: 10). This is one of the dignities, and Paul says, "At mid-day, on the way, I saw, O king, a light above the brightness of the sun, shining from heaven round about me and those who were journeying with me". The apostle spoke as a man of experience. What power would creep into his soul, if it had not been there at the start, as he spoke in this experimental way! "At mid-day" -- the sun was in the heavens above him as the great heavenly light shone around him. I am speaking of it now just to enlarge on what I have in mind as to experience. He says it was "a light above the brightness of the sun", that is, he compared it with something else, with the greatest natural luminary. He was able to speak by comparison, and that is a very good way to work out experience, to compare things with other things.
Now Luke, as we have often noted, in recording the incident, says just that it was "a light from heaven". That was important; it was important at that point to stress heaven. Not a light from Jerusalem, but from heaven; not a light from Rome, but from heaven. Heaven was peculiarly interested in Paul at that time, and the light shone from there round about him. Then in the next account, which was by himself, in chapter 22, he says to his Jewish hearers that it was "a great light" from heaven (verse 6). The material heavens are full of lights, and a great variety of them; but Paul says, "a great light". He is alluding to the area of comparativeness which the heavens suggest. He had been learning since he first saw it, the first time he experienced it; that is, he had been experiencing more as to light. How many times the apostle would have thanked God as he recalled that memorable day outside Damascus! The impression as to the light that shone around him never left him, and it increased. Not that the light increased in itself, but it increased in his soul; that is the point. In your experience of divine light, what you saw yesterday was wonderful then, but as you
{365}
see it today it is more wonderful. And that often happens in our experience in looking at the Scriptures or meditating upon divine things; the thing itself is not increasing, it is the state of my soul that is growing. So Paul, in speaking to Agrippa, evidences that the truth involved in his experience at Damascus had become enlarged in his soul. "At mid-day, on the way, I saw, O king" -- his soul has been stirred up. He was speaking to a poor sinner, although a monarch. He was to witness before kings. The Lord had said that, and it would be in Paul's mind that He had said that, and that this great impression that he had received at the start should be brought to the attention of Agrippa. So he used words to effect that, and the Holy Spirit was in them. Did ever Agrippa hear such words before? "At mid-day, on the way, I saw, O king, a light above the brightness of the sun, shining from heaven round about me and those who were journeying with me". If Paul had just said, 'a great light'. Agrippa might say, I have seen great lights, too. But when he said "a light above the brightness of the sun". Agrippa could not truthfully say he had seen anything like that. Paul had. He was presenting to the king and those with him the fruit of his experience, his experience in light, enabling him to present light as perhaps he had never spoken of it before, on this remarkable occasion in Caesarea.
Well might Agrippa say, "In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian" (verse 28). To be a true Christian involves that I must see the light above the brightness of the sun. And that is the light today; Paul had experienced it and we need it now; making sure of things by experience, so that we might find our way through, because the darkness is very great, and the confusion around. Natural light will not do; but this light above the brightness of the sun in our souls will carry us through the darkest experiences; and it becomes more and more magnified.
{366}
Now the next experience which I have selected to speak of is that of the Holy Spirit, and that as seen in the passage in @Ezekiel 47 which I read. This passage is peculiarly adapted to my subject because it especially records experience, the experience of a prophet; his actual experience in company with a man who had a measuring line in his hand. The Holy Spirit is not simply content to tell us that a river flowed out of the house, from the right side of the house, under the threshold, south of the altar, and that it flowed toward the east; that would be interesting by itself. But Ezekiel by the Spirit of God records also that he was conducted along through it by an extraordinary man with a measuring line.
Now, dear brethren, we are in the presence of accuracy here, and therefore we must not be glib in talking about having received the Holy Spirit. We must be sure that we are speaking truth, which as to this matter involves experience. If the Holy Spirit has come into your soul, you have some corresponding experience, some experience of His presence. There can be nothing greater subjectively in a believer than the indwelling of the blessed Person of the Holy Spirit. How can I fail to have some corresponding experience if I have Him indwelling my heart, shedding God's love abroad there? This measuring line is therefore apropos of this great feature of our subject. The measuring line is in relation to this river, what Ezekiel was experiencing of this river.
Well, the man measured a thousand cubits and the waters were to the *ankles*. This is initial experience of this great blessing, but through it I am learning to *walk* in a spiritual way. Then the prophet being taken through the next measurement, the waters were to the knees, which implies that I can *leap*; I am joyous through the work of the Holy Spirit in me, like the man in @Acts 3, who walked and leaped. And then, as Ezekiel is brought through another thousand cubits the
{367}
waters were to the *loins*, the third experience. The Spirit is touching my affections, my lower affections. I am proving that there is a power operating in me that is different from anything that I have known -- the Holy Spirit. I have bowels of compassion, as the scripture says. I love the brethren; I am learning to value the brethren, and how to treat them, and that I cannot get along without them. If I have any difficulty with any one of them, I go to him and have the matter settled; otherwise, my loins are not affected. The well springs up from the inwards, according to John's teaching. Finally there were "waters to swim in"; after the fourth measurement, "it was a river that could not be passed through", the prophet says. This points to the renewal of the Holy Spirit; which is poured out on us *richly*.
I do not know of any scripture that is more apropos of my subject tonight than this chapter of Ezekiel. Dear brethren, we are drawing near the time of translation. Our mortal bodies are to be quickened on account of the Spirit dwelling in us (@Romans 8: 11). It is persons that have the Holy Spirit that are translatable. Therefore it is most urgent that we should have the Holy Spirit. We are going up together, and this should be an incentive to us to be together *now* in the unity of the Spirit. The Lord has no pleasure in persons who are at odds with one another; He wants us to be together. God "has quickened us with the Christ ... and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 5, 6.
That is the experience Ezekiel has, yet he has not yet seen any objects of *special* interest. It is all a question of the water, and his experience in the water. And he finally says the waters were "a river that could not be passed through", a river that could not be passed through (verse 5). As sharing in the antitype of this river we say that the Holy Spirit is a divine Person; we have proved this. While realising and enjoying His presence,
{368}
I cannot compass Him. He reaches out beyond me, and enlarges me, too; and He searches the depths of God. I cannot say that I can search the depths of God, or that the Holy Spirit takes me into the depths of God, but *He* can go into the depths of God (@1 Corinthians 2: 10).
Verse 6 says, "Son of man, hast thou seen this?" That is, I am divinely challenged. This is needful as the things of God are brought to our attention. What do you see? This is to bring out what you have learned so far. "And he led me, and brought me back to the bank of the river" (verse 6). Applying this to the believer, he is caused to return. That is the action of the man with the measuring line; it is not my volition. He is educating me. The prophet saw trees; that is important to notice. I am stressing it now because it enters into my subject very aptly, that as having experienced this river, I come to see trees, actual growth of life. "When I returned, behold, on the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other" (verse 7). This is a fine sphere to get into, after I have been swimming in the deep waters, to see the fruitfulness of these trees by the river. Ezekiel had not seen these before. He had been occupied with the river. It is, of course, right that we should be occupied with the blessed Spirit of God, seeking to apprehend Him; but now there is the fruit of the Spirit, represented in the trees here. He does not describe the trees, but he says there were "very many", and they were on one side and on the other.
I am thankful to say that I have seen many of those "trees". I see a good few here; a lovely sight! Not that one would be material in any sense, but the saints reflecting the power of the Spirit inwardly realised, the ankles, the knees, and the loins, these are suggested by the trees. The whole person is affected, for the thought of a christian implies this. Agrippa says to Paul, "In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian", but Paul says, "I would to God, both in little and in much,
{369}
that not only thou, but all who have heard me this day, should become such as *I* also am, except these bonds", @Acts 26: 29. That is a christian. That is, so to speak, Ezekiel swimming. The whole body is affected. Such a man is worth looking at. Agrippa was not equal to that; he was not equal to these trees. When the matter of great persons came up, he would think of Rome; I mean, of the great warriors and rulers there. He was not equal to the spiritually great, "the crowd of names" at Jerusalem seen in @Acts 1. Never in David's day or Solomon's was there such a group of men and women together as there was in Jerusalem then; and everyone had his own distinction, his own spiritual attractiveness. The very many trees were on the one side and on the other, the result of the fructifying power of the river. What a place the Spirit had in those days at Pentecost! They were all speaking as the Spirit gave them to speak forth. He was the evidence of Christ being exalted at the right hand of God. "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God ... he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear", @Acts 2: 33. That is the river.
<blockquote> 'The river of His grace, <br>Through righteousness supplied, <br>Is flowing o'er the barren place, <br>Where Jesus died'. (`13:3)</blockquote>
That is what it was, and there were these trees; and the book of the Acts is full of them.
Well now, thirdly, we must look at "the double river" (verse 9). It is a full thought, and I had it specially in mind. What the prophet saw at first is now doubled. That is a remarkable thing. In the application, it is not that the Spirit increases; it is the person who has Him that increases. "The double river", Ezekiel says. It is a difficult passage for many, and I do not think it can be understood save on the line of experience. It is the Holy Spirit and He is what He is. He is a divine
{370}
Person; and hence the more experience I have of Him the greater He is in my apprehension. Certainly Ezekiel had now a greater grasp of the river than he had at the beginning. The word "double" would mean increase or intensity of the thought. But where was the increase? Not in the Spirit, as I said, but in the person who has experience of His indwelling. Ezekiel had the experience we have been considering, and the river is greater in his eyes than it was before. That is the point. The Holy Spirit becomes greater to us as we progress in experience of His gracious work in us. And, dear brethren, if we are not moving steadily on those lines, we are missing our greatest privileges. There will be lapses in our lives. It is to be a steady thing; that is, what is contemplated in Christianity implies going on to perfection; a steady growth. The double river would mean increase. Typically, it came about in Ezekiel's soul. We should not have such a book if it were not that Ezekiel had such an experience. He saw great things at the beginning, he tells us, but this is one of the most extraordinary of his experiences, and we may connect it with the remarkable references to life in the book of Ezekiel.
And now we come to John the baptist (@John 3: 30). Certain ones come to him and say that the Lord Jesus was baptising; as much as to suggest that John had a rival. How often that comes up among the brethren, the poison of rivalry injected into someone! You do not like to lose your prominence among the brethren or to be in any way reduced outwardly. John was not the man to whom to broach such a matter. He was proof against that, as he had been proof against the suggestion from Jerusalem to take the place of the Messiah; he was a lowly man. The first thing he says as to this is that the Lord Jesus "is preferred before me, for he was before me", @John 1: 15. A good start in the service of God is that somebody is owned as preferred before you. Christ is before all and above all. John
{371}
knew that and so he says, "He must increase, but I must decrease". How must He increase? Is it that His Person is going to be greater? That is not the thought. As to His *Person* the Lord Jesus is God, "the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come", @Hebrews 13: 8. There is no growth there at all. As a Child, a Boy and a Man there was growth. But John is referring to the Person. We must all have the Person of Christ before us. John had had to do with the Lord, and he said he was a friend of the Bridegroom. He admired the Lord Jesus; he heard His voice; he saw Him coming to him; he saw Him walking; he thought of that glorious Person. It is not that He is in Himself becoming greater, but that I am taking in more of what He is. And the more I take in, the greater He becomes in my eyes, and the less I think of myself. He must increase. It is the divine appointment; the very universe must give scope to this Person. Daniel, interpreting Nebuchadnezzar's vision, speaks of a stone cut out without hands. You saw that, Nebuchadnezzar, he says. It should have sobered the king and humbled him; but instead of that he became more inflated. Finally he lost his mind, a most terrible thing. He lost his mind for seven years. God should be feared: "let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear", @Hebrews 12: 28. "God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion" (@2 Timothy 1: 7), one of the greatest things to have. In telling Nebuchadnezzar about the great image, Daniel enlarges on this stone. It is cut out without hands. That implies that a divine Person is in mind. It could not be said of a creature. It became a great mountain and filled the whole earth. This is seen openly as the millennial kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, involving Himself. Everything in the millennium will be filled with Christ, "who fills all in all", @Ephesians 1: 23. And so it is that in John's experience he comes to this: "He must increase, but I must decrease". That means I must give more
{372}
and more room to Christ, and there must be less and less of myself according to what I am after the flesh. In another sense it makes me greater, but I have to learn to be nothing in order to be something. The 'nothing' implies my baptism; and resurrection with Christ implies what I am. In baptism I am dead. In Colossians we are buried with Him; that is the nothingness: "buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. That is experience. Faith affords light as to God's mind, and the Holy Spirit in me enables me to experience it; to become great on those lines. But baptism is my disappearing, my going out of sight, while resurrection by "faith of the working of God" is coming into view in another world; this implies something of the experience which John the baptist had. It is a very great thought. Paul says, "Brethren, *I* do not count to have got possession myself; but one thing -- forgetting the things behind, and stretching out to the things before, I pursue, looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus", @Philippians 3: 13, 14. That is experience. I come into heaven in that way experimentally; having in measure gone through these things. They become more and more to me, so that when I go up to my heavenly place I am equal to it. The Spirit enables me to lay hold of it now.
{373}
THE EXALTATION OF CHRIST
@Acts 2: 33; @Acts 5: 31; @Philippians 2: 9 - 11
My purpose, dear brethren, is to speak about the exaltation of Christ and what flows from it, what accrues from it, both to God and to man. The idea of exaltation began early, it began sinfully; Adam aspiring to be as God, and that spirit has come down to us and is prevalent today. It has marked the founders and leaders and builders of this world, whom men have admired and still admire; those who would exalt themselves as having ability, courage, and boldness to go forward in their projects. Their aim at self-exaltation is oftentimes skilfully disguised, but exaltation is pursued until, if possible, the zenith is reached.
This is not only so with men of this world, unregenerate men, but, alas, it finds a home even among christians, and we are given the word that he who "exalts himself shall be abased": God sets Himself peculiarly against self-exaltation, it interferes with His operations amongst us, it even blinds and darkens those who would serve, and so He sets Himself against it peculiarly. He abases all those amongst His people who exalt themselves. It is for *Him* to exalt, it is *His* prerogative. The Lord told the mother of the sons of Zebedee that it was the Father's prerogative to exalt His own. She would have her sons exalted *because they were her sons, and she was their mother*. Alas, dear brethren, we allow this spirit of self-exaltation; but it is he who humbles himself that is exalted. In the world this spirit obtains, and at times hides itself in men of great powers; they seek power and place, and will allow nothing to thwart them in so far as it is possible.
Our minds are being prepared by God at the present time for the full development of this. I believe God is showing us how things are to happen by what is current.
{374}
We are not to be mere observers of these matters and speak lightly of them as, perhaps, fulfilling prophecy; we are to be affected by them. God would draw us to His side as to them, so that we might be with Him about them, and that, correspondingly, there might be prayer; because much hinges on the prayers and influence of the people of God at the present time, as to the present course of things in the world.
God would remind us, dear brethren, of the great place that He has accorded to us, and the intentness of heaven to hear what we have to say, that is, specially what we have to say as the outcome of our observation as with God. He will do nothing, we are told, save as He revealeth His secret unto His servants the prophets, (@Amos 3: 7). He would draw us to His side in this sense, so that our prayers might be insistent; He loves to do things in answer to our prayers. He does things of His own accord, of course, but our prayers are greatly respected in regard to the governance of this world; it belongs to us, the saints are to take the kingdom, and the more we understand that and value it, the more we shall pray as to those who are exalting themselves in it now.
We read of one "Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God", @2 Thessalonians 2: 4. But there is what hinders, and let it be understood, dear brethren, that we have a great deal to do with the hindering. God expects us to take account of it, to take account of the rapid rise of this spirit of exaltation. The enemy will use it to baffle the saints and to hinder the testimony, and God takes account of our interest in that way and answers our prayers, so that "he who now letteth will let", as it says, "until he be taken out of the way", and then again there is "what withholdeth", and that continues too. So that the prayers of the saints are that which hinders. The book of Daniel is to be looked
{375}
into in this respect; it is the key to the present modern world, and what marks it is that the prophet is deeply concerned in his soul, making earnest inquiries as to the matter, and, at the same time, supplicating God, afflicting his soul, in such a way that, at the very beginning of his prayer, Gabriel was sent to him.
Think of the interest of heaven in such a man, a man who observes things and feels as to them -- he is called a "man greatly beloved". What a glory that casts over our meeting for prayer! One often thinks of it, how, after the privileges of the first day of the week, the saints come together in so many places on the next day, what a glory is cast over them! Gabriel tells Daniel that he is sent to him and he tells him that he is a man greatly beloved. The admiration of God, as I might say, the admiration of heaven, enters into these meetings for prayer, and, as we understand and enter into that, they become not wearisome or uninteresting, as if we have no exercise before going to them, but full of buoyancy, for we are brought into the very precincts of heaven, if not into heaven itself, as at the golden altar before God. So Daniel speaks peculiarly about prayer, as one of those who have the golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints; prayers that are treasured by God. As we are told about this one who is coming, one who exalts himself in opposition to God, we should observe what is leading up to that; everything is on the divine calendar, and God makes our prayers to work out so that the items on that calendar are fulfilled according to His purpose.
Over against all this exaltation of man away from God, we have the exaltation of Christ, and I hope the Lord may show, through the Spirit, in what I have to say, the importance of the thought and the results accruing to God and to men. The first passage says, "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold
{376}
and hear". Which *ye behold and hear*, that is, dear brethren, the actual results are immediately introduced, they were there indeed before this statement was made. This remarkable address of Peter's, the first great gospel address after the descent of the Spirit, is, in the main, to explain what was there, what he could speak of as "this which *ye* behold and hear". It was no theoretic matter, it was a tangible thing, to be seen and heard.
What Jesus was as a Man, as in flesh, is also spoken of as seen and heard and handled and contemplated. John presents wonderful thoughts to us in his first letter as to the tangibleness of the incarnation, how substantial the thing was; God "manifested in flesh", as we are told elsewhere. There was a perfect manifestation of God in flesh, and, alongside of that, justification in the Spirit -- in the Spirit there was justification of the manifestation. That is to say, the works were morally good, they were of moral worth, they were all in favour of man; the manifestation of God was not against man -- "God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved", @John 3: 17. All His thoughts and calculations were in favour of man, and everything Jesus did miraculously justified Him. In one instance we get judgment -- and obviously for a very good reason -- the question of the fig-tree; every other work of Jesus was in favour of man, and every work was perfect in itself, every case of healing was perfect in itself, everything was finished. How like God that is -- He was justified in the Spirit.
Now we have the Spirit here Himself, not in Jesus here, but in the saints; it was in the saints that He was seen and heard -- and Peter speaks of that. A very great fact, which is presented here as the consequence of the exaltation of Christ -- "Therefore being", says Peter, "by the right hand of God exalted ... he hath shed forth this ..." It was there, it was a tangible thing, and what was it? Well, the saints were wonderfully
{377}
happy, they were full of the Holy Spirit. One speaks of these things with a strained feeling, because there is so little now of this filling. It is as well to measure things and to compare things, so as to be sober, and hence the bearing of the passage upon us at the present time is, What is there here? What is there in this place? Peter says, "Having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit" -- think of all that enters into that, the transaction between the Father and the Son. The Lord had said before He went up, "Father ... glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee". Now He is there glorified on high in this wonderful transaction, this reception of the Holy Spirit. He received it from the Father.
We are in the presence of the great mediatorial system, the great economy, into which God has come; it is not a question of light unapproachable. God has come out into the realm of creation so as to make Himself known. He has come into the realm of creation, for the heavens are included in that, in the establishment of the great wonderful economy, which is all in favour of man, including this wonderful transaction between the Father and the Son. "Having received", Peter says, "of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this". Think of all the holy thoughts between divine Persons up there, the bearing of all those thoughts is towards us. God remains in His full Deity, in light unapproachable. He remains God; there will never be any change in the majesty, in the inscrutability of God; yet He has come out in the wonderful economy under the appellation of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The three Persons are presented as having to say to One Another, and all in relation to us; even in the Lord's wonderful communication and prayer to His Father in @John 17, the whole chapter is about us, save, as I might say, verse 5, and there we have a little inlet, so to speak, into the inscrutable. He says, "And now, O Father, glorify thou me
{378}
with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was".
There is a transaction manifestly presented to our understanding in this record in the book of Acts, a transaction between the Father and the Son up there, and the bearing of it is towards us, so that Peter says, "having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear". The bearing of all this is in view of the establishment of christianity; the setting up here of a tangible system of things which is in favour of men; the most delightful things available here, to be seen and heard. This is a present thing, as the outcome of the exaltation of this blessed Man, of whom Peter had been speaking. The whole discourse is a divinely inspired explanation of what was there, and the bearing of it today is to raise the question with us. What is in this town -- what is in this district, to be seen and to be heard, that is of God? We may be much in evidence, of course, owing to the number of the saints that can be taken account of, but what is there that heaven can call attention to?
Now this is not a mere fanciful thing I am speaking of; heaven is far more intent on this meeting than any one here, far more intent, too, on the two gatherings in this place than any one else. We take in but little the intense interest of heaven in what is going on down here, to the end that there should be something that can be called attention to as in favour of man; something resulting from the exaltation of Christ.
See the wonderful colour, as I may say, the wonderful glory that comes over what is of God in this world, as we think of it as the outcome of the exaltation of Christ, but then there is the result of it here on behalf of man; let us take this in, that we are here on God's account. What else could we be? God, of course, is working out His eternal thoughts as to every one of us, but, as to our position in this world, of what use is it
{379}
at all except as it is representative of God and beneficial to man and, as God said, "Thou shalt glorify me", @Psalm 50: 15. The Lord, speaking to the Father, said, "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent". It is the saints viewed as down here; it is the most exalted thought of eternal life morally, involving the knowledge of the true God, and of Jesus Christ, the true Man; the representation of God in knowledge; the true God in Person in this setting, and the knowledge, too, of Jesus Christ -- not -- the "Son of God" there, but "Jesus Christ"; it is a question of what we are down here where the need is and where the testing is.
Well now, in @Acts 5 we have the exaltation of Christ presented as the means of making all this effective. In chapter 2 the point is what is to be seen and heard as a tangible thing in man's favour here on earth, but in chapter 5 the apostles¬ point -- both Peter and the other apostles testify to it -- is that God has exalted Jesus by His right hand to make Him Leader and Saviour "for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins". Now that is the next thing, dear brethren, and it enters into all our services, all our preachings, teachings and discourses of every kind; it is a question of making what is presented in chapter 2 effective in men. Hence, as exalted, Christ is now set before us as Leader; the initiative of everything must come from Him, and not only from Him personally, but from Himself exalted at the right hand of God. See the dignity attaching to the service! He is the Leader.
It is one of God's great principles to have a leader, and that Leader is Christ exalted. If He takes up this one, that one, and the other -- Paul, or Apollos, or Peter, or the other apostles -- He, as the Leader, takes each up. He is the great Leader, taking all initiative in the service. You can see how effective things will be if each learns to take his place behind the Lord; let Him take the initiative. He loves to let us do things
{380}
that we can do, but the gospels show unmistakably that all initiative is with Him. If He sends out the twelve two by two, it is not until He calls them up to the mountain that they might be with Him, that He might send them out to preach, that they might see the great ideal in the great Leader. "Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins". This enters into every gospel meeting, to every meeting for ministry, it is a question of what the Leader will do, what He will initiate. Leadership here makes the way so that we have repentance and remission of sins. He is the Saviour, too. A "leader and saviour, to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins"; that is to say, effectiveness depends on this, results for God depend on this, to making room for the Leader.
Think, dear brethren, of the magnitude, moral as well as literal, of the elevation of Jesus, exalted as a Leader and Saviour, to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins. What can we do? What can we do with souls? We can present the truth of Jesus, who gives repentance and remission of sins. Well, what a service that is. Repentance to bring men round to judge themselves as before God, and then to bring them the remission of sins. What a boon it is, dear brethren, whether to the saint or the sinner, the knowledge of the remission of sins which the Lord, the great Leader, as exalted, gives to us. Think of Him being occupied with a poor sinner here on earth, from that elevation at the right hand of God, to give repentance and remission of sins; that is the service of the great Apostle.
Then finally, in Philippi, where you might expect it, where love was collectively as the product of the work of God: in the epistle to the Philippians, this perfect jewel of truth is set down for us -- the mind that was in Christ Jesus. It is traced for us by the skilful hands of the Spirit, the path of the One who, "subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine
{381}
to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in the likeness of men; and having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross". Can language present anything greater? No, there is nothing greater. Language cannot present anything greater morally or literally than what is contained in those verses. "Wherefore also God highly exalted him, and granted him a name that which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of heavenly and earthly and infernal beings, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to God the Father's glory".
Now what I want to say about this wonderful passage is that it is the exaltation of Christ -- He is said to be "highly exalted"; it is not here at "the right hand of God", but "highly exalted". "Wherefore also God highly exalted him". What that word "highly" may mean as to measure, who can say? If we turn to Ephesians, we read that He has gone beyond all the heavens, that He has gone beyond the created realm into an uncreated realm, as to which, of course, our finite minds cannot say anything, it is beyond us. If we go to Hebrews we find the same thing, that He has passed through the heavens; yet He is our Priest, however high the exaltation. He never loses sight of the saints; He is interceding for us continually. Think of it -- making intercession for the saints continually; we hardly take it in, that in that glory He should be so engaged with us. What encouragement to draw near! "Such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens" (@Hebrews 7: 26), and yet He is there ever living to make intercession for us.
May we not move here with the utmost confidence, and yet in reverence and holiness! Think of that, every name of every saint is on that wonderful breastplate in that wonderful exaltation of our glorious High Priest
{382}
in heaven. Here the apostle, by the Spirit, is concerned as to finality, as to subjection. There may be those here now who are not subject to Christ as yet. Well, this passage is to remind you that, if you are not subject now, when blessing accrues through subjection, you will have to bow when there will be no blessing at all for you, and you will be actually in company with infernal beings in submitting to the authority of Christ -- "that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of heavenly and earthly and infernal beings, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to God the Father's glory". It is to show the finality, how the exaltation of Christ works out finally in the complete subjugation of all, and, not only that, but that every being will acknowledge, every being will confess the name, and in each case it is to the glory of God the Father. What a great result of the exaltation of Christ! He is highly exalted, and the result is complete subjugation, not merely by pressure, but that every being has to acknowledge that glorious name -- the name of Jesus. How one's heart is moved as one thinks of Jesus who has been down into death, who loves us with an everlasting love, that this is the end of everything as regards evil, all must not only go down by power, but by intelligence, as it were, owning the thing, that that name is worthy to be confessed and that God is glorified in the confession.
You will see, I believe, the importance of the thought that we might have before us the exaltation of Christ and what accrues from it, and how that finally there is complete adjustment, not only forced acknowledgment, but intelligent acknowledgment on the part of every being, every creature, to the supremacy of Christ, to the exalted name of Jesus. How worthy He is! How God, as it were, puts everything into that name, all the wealth of the Deity is in that name -- no less than that -- the name of Jesus; indeed it is Himself, it means Jehovah the Saviour. What a wonderful thing that a
{383}
Man is set up in such exaltation, and that the whole range of creation is brought round intelligently to own it to the glory of God the Father; God being the great end of all these things, that God might be glorified.
{384}
THE WORD OF THE CROSS
@John 18: 1 - 5, 15 - 18; @John 19: 25 - 27
These scriptures indicate positions occupied in relation to Christ, extending down the history of christendom and particularly bearing on our own times. The first is the position of Judas, who is said to have "stood with them", that is, with those who were avowed enemies of Christ. Although himself having had the status of apostle, and disciple, and companion of Jesus -- for the Lord speaks of him in Spirit in the Psalms as one with whom He "held sweet intercourse" -- he is now seen as standing with the avowed enemies of Christ. Peter, in the same chapter, is seen "standing with them and warming himself". Then we have the three Marys -- the Lord's mother, and her sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary of Magdala -- standing by the cross of Jesus. These severally represent persons, or sets of persons, to be observed now, and bearing on the last days, that is, our days peculiarly. It is for each of us to see which position he occupies.
Judas would represent the great system whose importance is largely based on its antiquity and on the professed possession of all that attaches to Christ. It claims everything, and excludes all others, repudiating any claims but its own. It is said of Judas here that he "knew the place"; he knew the garden where the Lord had often spent seasons with His own. That is exactly what attaches to the system of which I have spoken; they are in possession of all the secrets; they have used these professed secrets for their own enhancement as assuming to be representative of Christ, but in truth they betray Him. It is a solemn matter that this system exists, and it is standing openly and avowedly as with the enemies of Christ. It has taken up a position internationally and politically as amongst the nations; it is one of them.
{385}
Simon Peter, who had a heart that really loved Christ, and who had been outstanding in his service to Christ, represents here another set. He followed Jesus, and so did another disciple, of whom it is said that he was known to the high priest; and they went into the palace of the high priest. One of them was known to the high priest; that is the link, I believe, the key to this position. We have a great system around us which knows the lovers of Jesus. There were two who loved Jesus, Simon Peter and another; and of the other it is said that he was known to the high priest. If we pride ourselves on our acquaintance with such persons, we are in danger; we may be sure we shall be led into a false position in regard to Christ. That disciple was known to the high priest, and he went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest. He is in surroundings that are most dangerous, and the result shows that his influence, his leadership, caused another to come under the influence of the world. I speak of this, dear brethren, because we are so prone to court acquaintance with persons such as the high priest. Such acquaintance is dangerous, and particularly as one uses it to gain an entrance into the palace of the high priest. Can we stand in the palace of the high priest, can we be loyal to Christ in it? We may; one may stand, but another may be led into it and fall. Hence the importance, dear brethren, of avoiding all such acquaintances and friendships and associations as the palace of the high priest would suggest. We are likely to think well of the high priest if we are in his palace, whatever our more inner thoughts may be; we are pretty certain to come under his influence whilst in his house; and that, of course, includes all such acquaintances that we may form and pride ourselves in. They may be very little above us in this world's rank; but however much or little it may be, as entering into their palaces or houses on the grounds of personal friendship, we are certain to come under their influence; indeed we may go further, and stand
{386}
up and warm ourselves there. Warming ourselves -- for here it says, "it was cold" -- is innocent enough, but the point is the *connection* in which we are. It is very subtle, courting a person's friendship who is above us, and coming into his palace or house, and then sharing with him, even a cup of tea or a meal, but on the ground of personal friendship. It does not end there, because in the case of Simon Peter it culminated in being identified with the world, and in that position denying the Lord. That is a most serious matter, it is certain that if we are pursuing that line we shall suffer damage ourselves, or influence others so that they suffer damage.
Peter is seen here standing with them and warming himself. In the book of the Acts there is the instance of the great servant Paul, landing on the island of Melita; it was cold there, too, and the barbarians showed them no common kindness. They are called barbarians, and they lit a fire; it was an act of kindness, and not intended to influence the servant of God; that can be accepted. We can add to that. It is important for any of us who move about in service to add to what is found in the places we visit. It may be small, the fire may be weak, but it is no discredit or dishonour to the servant to gather sticks and add to what is there. There was a little heat, and the point was to add to that, and to share it; and that is what Paul did. He added to what was there. How different was the fire lit by those barbarians, having no distinction religiously at all, from the fire in the precincts of the palace of the high priest! Peter stood *with them* and warmed himself. It was the society that was there. Then the denial of the Lord Jesus -- how solemn that is! We have often spoken of this; I speak of it now, dear brethren, as representing a certain division of christendom. I have spoken of it in detail as applying to us, showing the danger to ourselves or others of cultivating such society, but I speak of it now as representing a great subdivision
{387}
of christendom. I have spoken of the greatest subdivision, represented in Judas. Peter represents another great subdivision, which is characterised by a high priest, and there are those who enter into his palace.
It is not now the so-called vicar of Christ that I am speaking of, but the high priest with a palace, and the danger of linking up with that. The second great subdivision of christendom is marked just in that way; it does not show open opposition to Christ, but it is marked by worldliness. What the Lord Jesus said about Sardis will help us: "If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come upon thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know at what hour I shall come upon thee". The Lord's remarks to this assembly point to its state in the world; it is not in open opposition to Christ, as Thyatira, where there was a vicious woman who taught His servants wicked things and practised them, but here it is deadness, and the Lord says He will come on them as He will come on the world, as a thief. It is worldliness, dear brethren. Those Peter is sharing with here are said to be servants and officers, they are not leaders, they are the servants and officers, servants of the leaders. Peter is sharing with them; it is a state of worldliness that is in mind; and the outcome of it is the denial of the Lord Jesus. It may not be an out-and-out denial as, alas, with Peter, but it is certain that worldliness will end in the denial of Christ in some degree.
In chapter 19 we have the other side of the picture, which is indeed what one would rest in -- the three Marys. Their name denotes suffering. As early as the passage of the Red Sea, Marah appears in Scripture; it is the idea of bitterness, and would point to true loyalty of heart at the present time. That is what these three represent; and I am speaking to those who may be classified as standing by the cross of Jesus -- standing by. Judas stood by with the open enemies of Christ; Peter shared the world's fire with the world, and denied Him; these three women are standing by the cross of
{388}
Jesus. We may introduce here the idea of the cross. There are those who use it; these systems of which I have spoken use it freely, but only to add to the evil, to adorn it. It is simply to adorn religious wickedness; whether it be those represented in Judas, or those represented in Peter, it is used to add to and adorn and accredit wickedness. So that to understand aright what is meant by these three women standing by the cross, we must have "the word of the cross". The words I have used are found in 1 Corinthians, very properly. Paul might allude to those women in his ministry. John would be very conversant with one of them, with the Lord's mother, and no doubt he at certain times would allude to the scene depicted in these verses.
Paul says, "the word of the cross is to them that perish foolishness", @1 Corinthians 1: 18. He does not say the cross is foolishness; the cross is used, as I said, by those systems. They adorn themselves with it, they do not regard it as foolishness; but "the word of the cross" is foolishness. In the Authorised Version it is "the preaching of the cross", but the proper expression is "the word of the cross", that is to say, the unfolding of it. We may rightly introduce that into this circle of the three Marys. How they would understand it, the word of the cross! This is foreign to the systems I have spoken of. They give no place, characteristically at least, to the *word* of the cross; they do to the literal thing, but not to the word of it. We may well inquire, dear brethren, how much we know of the word of the cross. The apostle Paul said to the christians at Corinth that he determined not "to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". That is not a popular way of presenting the truth. We may speak about the cross, and adorn ourselves with it as with jewellery; but to bring in the *word* of the cross would remove all that jewellery, it would bring out what the cross means; and that is what is needed. To those that perish it is foolishness.
{389}
If any are not interested in the word of the cross their christianity is questionable. One would think of the class, "them that perish". How solemn it is that there is such a class as that! There are two expressions, "them that perish", and "those that are lost". Paul uses both expressions; he says, "The word of the cross is to them that perish foolishness", and then, in 2 Corinthians, he says, "If also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost". There is a class of people known in heaven as lost. So that "the word of the cross" becomes a searching thing, as to whether we care for it; and if we do, it will class us with the three Marys. I hope every sister aspires to that, to stand with them by the cross of Jesus, not in a literal way, of course, but according to the word of the cross. They would listen with the keenest interest to every word of Paul as opening up the teaching of the cross, what it really means. Not only is the cross solemn in itself, but it is said in regard to the Lord's death on the cross, "Cursed is every one hanged upon a tree", @Galatians 3: 13. What humility and reverence is needed to ponder that fact, that the Lord Jesus hung there, and that the Man who hung there as crucified was accursed! One would hesitate to use the word, but that is the fact: "cursed is everyone hanged upon a tree". What are these three Marys saying as the word of the cross develops in the teaching of the apostles, and particularly the teaching of Paul? It meant that that precious Saviour, whose cross they stood by, was there under a curse; He was made a curse for us, dear brethren, *for us*. Would not they say, Yes, He was that for us? No one would say it more freely than the Lord's mother, despite what is said about her in the religious systems. What was it for? "That the blessing of Abraham might come to the nations in Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith", @Galatians 3: 14.
So you can see how these three Marys would listen to the word of the cross. Would that I could enlarge
{390}
on it! I hardly know a phase of truth more important at the present time than the word of the cross. It cuts at the very root of everything in the flesh, not only that death has been meted out to man in the flesh, but crucifixion. One who loved the Lord Jesus said, "I am crucified with Christ", @Galatians 2: 20. He also said, "Our old man has been crucified with him"; that is a collective thought and one would that we might all subscribe more freely to it and say, "I am crucified with Christ". The more we learn the flesh, the more we realise its meanness, how it is desperately wicked and utterly untrustworthy; for even a devoted servant like Peter could deny the Lord Jesus. As you think of the capabilities of the flesh, how important it is to look into the "word of the cross", because that signifies the unfolding of its meaning and bearing and full significance.
That is what comes out in the three Marys; but then the Lord sees another there, another who is standing there. The Spirit of God does not formally state at the outset that he was there. With suitable humility, because John is no doubt the writer of this gospel, he does not say he was there, he says that Jesus saw him there. That is beautiful. It is a question of what Jesus sees, and He sees everything, and every person. He is watching over us, and perhaps He gives us more credit than we think, at times. Whether John was just as near as the others, I cannot say; but Jesus saw him there. There were four there, thank God; and now the Lord is able to open up, as hanging upon the tree, a line of truth to us. He calls His mother "Woman" on the cross, He does not say, Mother. He is not calling attention to her; He is calling attention to that brother there. There were three Marys, but there was another. One would like to think of ourselves in that way, though feeble; how the Lord would love to accredit us with the fact that the shame of the cross is felt in our souls. John, as we are often reminded, in his writing views things abstractly; that is, if at any time the truth has a place
{391}
in my soul, the Lord reserves the right to accredit me with it and to disregard all else for the moment. It is not that all else is to be always disregarded, as we see in Peter's case. There was someone else whom the Lord could see standing by His cross, and He seizes that fact as an opportunity to unfold the truth. He has always the right to do that. The Lord does not forget one in the ministry He gives. He saw John standing there, and He is able to say something that He could not have said if he were not there. He says, "Woman, behold thy son" -- not Mother, but "Woman". That is to say, He places His mother according to the flesh in relation to John in holy affection.
The Lord has in mind to set us in relation with one another in holy affections. The words, "Woman, behold thy son", had not been said before; they could not have been said before. The Lord was setting aside all natural relationships: He was not to be known henceforth after the flesh (@2 Corinthians 5: 16). John's relation to the mother of the Lord Jesus is one of holy affection: she is to be his mother, and he is to be her son. Great and permanent gain accrues as we renounce what is natural -- not legitimate family relations, but what goes beyond that. If we make something of our family after the flesh, we are losing all the time. The Lord's desire is to set us in relation with one another in our affections; not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
The expression "Woman" may seem a hard word, but it is true, for the Lord is terminating all natural links; He is to be known in another way, and the brethren are to be known in another way, in the light of that, so that our affections go out in that way. It is another order of Man, the Holy Spirit in us maintaining us in that holy way. It says of John in this passage that "from that hour" he took her to his own home. Something accrued at once. It is not simply that he did so later on, but the Lord spoke to him and he acted on the spot. If the truth lays hold of us, breaking
{392}
all natural relationships in this sense, then what will happen? We shall take one another up in that light henceforth, not allowing natural things to interfere with our great heavenly calling. Are our distinctions too much for us to take certain ones to our own homes? That is what I had in mind as to the "word of the cross"; it helps us to take all saints into our affections. They are to be viewed in the light of the death of Christ, and not only that, but in the light of the resurrection and ascension of Christ. In @Luke 15 the father said, when his son returned, "Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it". That means that I have to bring the clothes, and clothe the saints with them. It is a question of the apprehension of Christ as He is, there; and our relations with one another are to be in that light -- the best possible. We could take all such to our own homes, could we not? That is how the dispensation is ending up, dear brethren. The Lord is drawing us together in holy affections so that we see our heavenly calling, and how the word of the cross settles the whole matter of man after the flesh and the relations attached to it.
{393}
INDIVIDUALITY
@James 5: 17, 18; @1 Kings 17: 1, 20 - 24; @1 Kings 18: 36 - 46
I desire to speak about individuality in divine things. Each believer is, initially at least, to stand on his own feet, just as the boards of the tabernacle were made to stand up. Aside from this, there is no possibility of blessing in a spiritual sense, or of having any part in divine things. "He that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him", @Hebrews 11: 6. This great matter must be taken up by each one individually.
Elijah is as good a representative of this feature of the truth as I know. His name signifies, Whose God is Jah (or Jehovah). Jah probably meaning God in the sense of what He is, God as Absolute. There is the historical God, speaking reverently; that is, God known in His ways here. Scripture contemplates His being regarded in this light, for we read of the encouragement of the Scriptures. They allude to God historically, how others knew Him; but then there is, Whose God is Jah, which goes further, and refers more to what He is in Himself. Of course, it is the same God, but the first refers to Him as known in His goodness and power and other attributes, while the other is God Himself viewed abstractly. That is, I apprehend, the root of all that we have in this remarkable saint and servant, Elijah the Tishbite. His God was God Himself. God said to Moses, when he inquired as to His name, "I AM", not I was, or I shall be, but "I AM". Elijah evidently had to do with God in that sense, for his name signifies it, and hence the originality of all that appears in him. Others followed, such as Elisha, who rather brought out the things he had learned from Elijah. Elijah is peculiarly original, and appears on the scene without any prophetic word preceding as in the case of Timothy, so that we need not inquire as to his
{394}
parentage, or as to his training. The man is what he is, and really every christian has to come to that. What he has been may or may not be disclosed. In Elijah's case it was not disclosed, but look at the man! Yet he is not a supernatural man, for were he such he would not be an example. He was a man of like passions as ourselves, so that we may all aspire to this as coming into the faith.
"He that cometh to God must believe that he is", not simply that He was; that is true enough, you will come to what He was, but you must believe that He is, and that is what marked Elijah. That he had early history is unquestionable, and that it enters into his name is unquestionable, but the Spirit of God has drawn a veil over that, which we cannot penetrate. It is what he is, and so with everyone, what he has been, what his education may have been, is of very little consequence alongside what he is, and this stands in relation to what God is. As having to do with God the believer has to face the fact as to what he is, so the apostle says, "By the grace of God I am what I am", @1 Corinthians 15: 10. He had been otherwise, he had been an insolent overbearing man, but by the grace of God he was not that now. It is the divine thought that everyone is to have a definite identity in the divine realm. You do not want to be one who passes in a crowd in the divine realm. What comes into mind in spirituality is definiteness and distinction -- what a person is as knowable to God. You may say that God knows everyone, and that is a fact, but then we have this statement, "if any man love God, the same is known of him". That kind of knowledge is a question of love. God, as it were, salutes you; He recognises you in the crowd. He picks you out. Everyone in heaven will have some such distinction, and now is the time to acquire that distinction. It is acquired on the principle of individuality in divine things. Each stands on his own feet, and has his own personal distinction, by the power of the Spirit of God.
{395}
As I said, Elijah had no recorded history; a veil is drawn over it. He is just Elijah the Tishbite, of the inhabitants of Gilead. The apostle James, hundreds of years after, referred to him as a man subject to like passions as ourselves, but then he says "he prayed". It does not tell us about his first prayer, but his name meant that Jah was his God. He penetrated into the reality of the Deity, as far as the creature can.
I may say here for our instruction, that this is supremely seen in Jesus. It was He who said, "My God and your God", but "My God" first. Why should I not understand Jesus¬ God, if He is His God and my God? This has peculiar import now in our own times, when there is ofttimes great isolation, persons being excommunicated from the religious world. What intercourse there was between Jesus and His God as He prayed all night! Think of the experience, dear brethren. We take off our shoes from our feet in alluding to it, but is it not within our reach to inquire spiritually into this, and to enter a little, in the power of the Spirit, alongside of Jesus, who is our Mediator, into the knowledge of God in this way? The overcomer is to be made a pillar in the temple of *His* God, and the name of *His* God, and the name of the city of *His* God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from *His* God, are to be written upon him. These great features belong to the God of Jesus -- God Himself -- God as known by Christ as a Man down here.
Elijah is introduced to us abruptly; but James says he was not a supernatural man, but was like ourselves, and in truth God takes up such persons who are subject to the same kind of feelings and influences. We do not know what kind of man he may have been, only that he was a Tishbite, of the inhabitants of Gilead. Here he is able to say to the king of Israel, "There shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word". What a man he is! He is having individual relationship and intercourse with God, or he
{396}
could never speak in this way. God has taken him up, the same kind of man as ourselves. It shows what God can do; the works of God are manifest in him. So he said to this monarch, 'There shall be no rain except at my word'. He does not say, Jehovah's word. He was conscious of the moral power he had, as representative of God. Is that not to be envied and desired? James has it in mind in his last chapter for the readers of his epistle -- a very wholesome, practical, and instructive epistle. James calls attention to Elijah, and he says he was a man of like passions to ourselves, but "he prayed with prayer". I am dwelling on the point of prayer, for this is evidently the secret of his power. He had got to God Himself, not simply as known historically. He speaks of Him later on as the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but it is his own God in these chapters, @1 Kings 17 and 18. I appeal to everyone as to whether He is your God. Is He Jah to you, or simply a God known historically? Do not misunderstand me, for He is the same God; but the more you know Him, the more you will know Him as He is in Himself. The living creatures in @Revelation 4 say, "Who was, and who is, and who is to come", but in chapter 1: 8, it is "Who is, and who was, and who is to come". The more I advance in the knowledge of God, the more I say "who is" and "my God". I also say, "the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ", and moreover I can say, "God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel", but I want to cherish that beautiful phrase, "my God".
Paul says, "My God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus", @Philippians 4: 19. What a God He was to Paul! Like Paul, Elijah knew God, and so he comes out and speaks to a monarch. Elijah had no public history, nor does he pretend to have any status before this monarch, but look at him, and listen to him speaking to Ahab! "There shall not be dew nor rain ... but according to my word". What a great man he is! I want to be something like that, a
{397}
representative of God, not only in an official way, but in moral power. There is not a word said about this prayer in the Old Testament, but the truth is that he prayed with prayer to God, and there was no rain for the space of three years and six months.
The second word follows on from the seventeenth chapter. Elijah has not shown himself to Ahab yet, but in chapter 18 he is told to show himself to Ahab. That is another thing. If I have moral power and am able to speak to a monarch, the time comes when the Lord says, 'Show yourself to him', but much history has intervened. God will not ask me to show myself to people unless I am worthy of being shown, and that brings out much. The Lord said to the leper, "Go, shew thyself to the priest". John the baptist was not shown immediately to Israel. It says that he was in the deserts till the day of his showing unto Israel. He was brought up, as every believer's child should be, as much as possible apart from that which ministers to the flesh. People give their children over to the world, by handing them over to be brought up in its ways. Not so with John the baptist; he was a child brought up in wilderness ways, until he was fit to be shown on God's behalf. You may be a good society man, accepted among unspiritual people, but you are not fit to be shown on God's behalf.
Here the time has come to end these sorrowful years of famine, and the Lord says to Elijah, "Go, shew thyself to Ahab". In the meantime he has been living by the Jordan, he has been fed by ravens, and then the brook dried up, and he is sent to the widow of Zarephath; she has a little meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse, and she is gathering two sticks that she may go in and dress it for herself and her son, that they may eat it and die. That is her story. What an experience! He is being prepared to be shown to the monarch, not simply to speak to him, but to be sent as representative of God.
{398}
In the seventeenth chapter the woman's boy dies. Elijah cries to God; it is a serious matter. I would seek to impress upon all of us the importance of secret relations with God Himself, and urgency in our prayers, so that we may appear in power before men, having individual distinction, so as to be representative of God before men.
He prayed and stretched himself on the child three times, and said, "O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again", and it happened. This is written for the encouragement of christians on the lines of individuality in the things of God. The widow says, "I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth". Such is the power of God in answer to prayer. Now God says, I am going to show you, not only to be listened to, but because of what you are. Is there a brother or sister who does not wish in their soul to be representative of God, and owned to be such?
Ahab had left God out altogether. He divided up the land. Obadiah going one way and Ahab another, to find a little bit of grass. Ahab was thinking only of the horses and mules -- a pitiful state of things. Obadiah was a fine man, but he was on the wrong side, and there are many like him. How many there are today who are on the wrong side, looking for a bit of grass to save the horses and mules alive, when our business is to feed the people of God! He knew how to feed the prophets of God with bread and water, and God knew he was such a man as that; but he was on the wrong side. He had indeed fed the prophets by fifties; he did not crowd them. A man like that belongs to the fellowship, for he can feed the brethren, as the Lord Jesus did. He fed the people, making them sit down by fifties in a company. Obadiah knew how to do it, but he was on the wrong side, occupied in looking for grass for the world's use. That is not a proper occupation for a man who knew how to feed the people of God.
{399}
May we be kept faithful to God and so be available to feed His people!
Now I come to the end, the final prayer in the eighteenth chapter. There are two prayers in this chapter, the first in regard to this great conflict into which he is drawn. Think of the power of this man; what a figure he is, coming down through the ages to us a mighty, valiant warrior of God, standing against Ahab and the eight hundred and fifty prophets of Baal and of the groves, who fed at Jezebel's table! The secret of it is that he knew God. He pursued his individual relations with God and he prayed this prayer: "Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel". It is not now "my God". He said that in the seventeenth chapter, but it is now Israel's God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel. If I am in public service, I must bring in God as known historically, with whom the people of God have had to do from the beginning. He is to be known as the same God, the God of Israel; so Elijah says, "Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant ... . Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again. Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench. And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they said, The Lord, he *is* the God; the Lord, he *is* the God".
It is not now that He is the God of Israel, but He is *God*. These people are brought back to God, not Elijah's God exactly, but God. This is recovery, and by one man; so it is a question for everyone of what one man can do, developing individually with God, and maintaining prayerful intercourse with God. All things are possible with God, and the greatest things can be accomplished on these lines.
{400}
My final thought is the second prayer which James alludes to. We are not given the words, but the attitude of the man of God, down upon the earth with his face between his knees. How urgent and exercised he is! Israel was in famine, as the people of God are today generally. The matter is urgent; it must be faced at once; we must go the whole length with God. The first time may not bring an answer, nor the second, nor the third, but the seventh does; so, as the servant of Elijah looks out to sea, he sees a cloud the size of a man's hand. "And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit", @James 5: 18.
My desire is to bring all of us into individuality in the things of God; not to make us independent, far otherwise, for as the boards of the tabernacle were made standing up, each was brought into relation with all the other boards. So it is as I pursue; I establish contact with God Himself, and hence this individual progress, and then victory and blessing. "The heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit". How great a thing it is to have part in the service of God, prayerful intercourse with God Himself!
{401}
LOVERS OF GOD
@2 Timothy 3: 1 - 4; @Romans 8: 28; @Judges 5: 31
My thought is to speak of lovers of God. That there are such in this world at the present time is undoubted. Indeed, Jehovah, as about to demand love from His people, said at Sinai that He had thousands of lovers even then -- a matter that must have been of great moment to Himself, for God is said to *be* love; love is *of Him*. And so *He* values, more than any, love in others. He loves it, or rather, He loves the lovers, His lovers. He loves them because they are of Him, and the love that they have is of Him, and so He was not in this sense in poverty even at Sinai when about to assert His right to men's hearts, to their love. He had lovers already, and so today. Many of us here could count them even by the thousands, were we put to the test -- thank God! -- and it is fair to assume that most here, if not all, are amongst them. Hence, how delightful to God is this meeting; one's heart is sensible already of being in an atmosphere, in this sense, in that one is speaking to lovers of God and that God is pleased with them, whilst at the same time He would desire more and more such. There is to be a constant increase of love, and the idea is introduced in this first scripture amid that sorrowful list, dear brethren, of persons, nominal christians -- a depressing list. What you will observe, especially if you are looking at the New Translation, is the recurrence of the word "love", but only once as applied in a good sense, as applied to persons who love God. We have in the passage for instance, "lovers of their own selves" -- a phrase that comes home in the way of a challenge as to how much selfishness may be lurking with us, although in the main we may be "lovers of God". Then it is said as to the word "covetous" -- "lovers of money", which is the proper rendering. If I love myself I shall certainly love money,
{402}
and we are told elsewhere that the love of it "is the root of all evil" -- a remarkable thing! -- and yet we may not discern that in our hearts there is that love, a love called the love of money, or covetousness. The passage is not treating of real christians, but *I am speaking* to real christians and suggesting that, although we are real christians and lovers of God, too, yet there may be something of this lurking in our hearts -- love of self and love of money, for they go together. Self is the most difficult to get rid of, I quite believe. It is surprising, and one has to admit it, how much of self there is in us, in oneself, at times quite unknown to us, through our minds moving in a certain groove. Indeed, we clothe self, we ornament it, without thinking that we are doing it, telling of our good deeds without meaning to do so in a premeditated way, but in our little tales we see to it that self, in some way or another, perhaps ornamented, is in the very middle of the picture.
Now, as James would say, "My brethren, these things ought not so to be", and the constant ministry of Christ, the ministry of His death in the power of the Spirit, is to lead us to discern self. We are told that the Lord Jesus came by water and blood, meaning that in becoming incarnate, He intended to die. He did not come into this world to live as a man in flesh. He *intended* to die. He came by water and blood. He must furnish the water and the blood, and these are in His death, that is, when the soldier's spear pierced His side on the cross, there came forth the means of cleansing; and then we are told that the Spirit is the Witness. He keeps on applying the water and the blood. That is the order in John's epistle. In the gospel, it is the blood and the water. The blood is the first mentioned as the fundamental thing, as the great fundamental doctrine of atonement, but the water is the first in view of christians being led to judge themselves -- not only what they do and say, but the *thing*, that thing self that
{403}
we so cling to and love. The Spirit constantly keeps reminding us of it, bringing before us the means of cleansing, for the water is for the removal of the person, so to say, in a moral sense, so that one can say, "I am crucified with Christ". What liberty there is in that! What victory when he looks at himself as not only worthy of death, but of crucifixion! He has found himself out to be so mean, so incorrigibly mean, that only crucifixion could meet the case: So he says, "I am crucified with Christ, and no longer live, *I*, but Christ lives in me". Christ takes the place of self -- the real Being, as it were, to actuate and control one, is Christ in the heart. "No longer live, *I*, but Christ lives in me; but in that I now live in flesh, I live by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me".
Then this love of money goes with love of self. Money is power. Other things are power. Knowledge is power according to man's estimate; and many other things that one could mention, but money is peculiarly power in this world. The love of it means that I want to acquire something to enhance myself. So that if self goes, if love of self goes, dear brethren, the love of money goes. Not that money may not be used, but there is a time when you have to apply Peter's judgment of this -- "Thy money go with thee to destruction". After that, what is it? It is only what you get for it. It is well to have a judgment like that as to it. The Spirit of God uses terms of scorn as to it by itself, viewed in this sense, as acquiring things in this world that enhance one in it and make one more powerful. Simon Magus would buy the Spirit of God with money. How revolting to the spiritual mind that money should be used in any sense to influence the service of God here. So Peter and John came down from Jerusalem to see what transpired in Samaria, and this man had money. How he acquired it we are not told -- no doubt by his magic arts; nefariously acquired, and he offers to
{404}
buy the blessed Spirit of God with money. Peter says, "Thy money go with thee to destruction". That is heavens scorn of the thing by itself. And so, beloved, the danger of the love of it! Young people think of it -- the increase of salaries; young wives think of it, as to what they may buy to adorn themselves. All that is the enemy's working, beloved brethren, among young people especially, "the love of money is the root of all evil".
Well, then, it says moreover here, non-lovers, or "having no love", in the end of the third verse, "for what is good". We are told what was loved -- self and money. Now, what is not loved. These things are most practical, and what is not loved is what is good. One might, of course, give a list of things that are good -- all that is of God is good. What an abundance of good there is, and yet in the last days, these very days in which we are living, nominal christians are non-lovers of God, having no love for what is good. Dear young people, let me appeal to you to classify the good, to look at it straight and see if you do not love it. Young sister, challenge your heart and say to yourself, Can it be possible that I do not love good? These verses depict what is all around us, as you can see in almost all countries, in England and in other so-called Protestant countries; on the Lord's day you see people going by the thousands out into the country, some of them in objectionable, unseemly attire. It is day of apostasy, and we have to face it, and it works out in this way. Timothy says, "no love for what is good". It is evil and only evil every day.
The apostle finally says, "lovers of pleasure". The enemy is building up his world in these modern times in order to gratify the great demand for pleasure. Pleasure has a great market abroad in christendom. The prices, the salaries, that are paid to the ministers of pleasure are fabulous. I am speaking of what I know, especially in countries that I am conversant with, the
{405}
salaries that are paid to persons who furnish degrading, filthy pleasures to people are enormous. There is a great market for pleasure and people love it. That is what marks these last days, and young brothers and sisters are to look into this matter and test their hearts as to whether they are in any sense in this stream of love of pleasure. Then he adds, "rather than lovers of God". God has been wonderfully set out, you know. He is no longer in thick darkness as in the Old Testament. In the tabernacle He dwelt behind the veil. There were no lights there. The candlestick was outside the veil. Jehovah dwelt in thick darkness, but now John says God is in the light. "God is light", and He is in the light. He is declared and He is revealed. He has been shining all these centuries, and now in these last days we are all tested as to whether we love Him, and the verdict here is, by the Spirit of God, that the generality of the profession are "lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God".
Well now, I go on to the second scripture, the positive side, just to point out what has oftentimes been brought before us. The apostle says, "We know not what we should pray for as we ought". Then he says, alluding to that, "we *do* know that all things work together for good to those who love God". Thank God for such a person as this great servant. We continually have reference to him in our minds, this great servant who is intended to represent the mind of the Lord as to christianity in its fulness. He says, "we *do* know" -- someone knew; he did, with others -- "that all things work together for good to those who love God". *All things*. Now that is victory, because the "all things" are workers, however adverse they may seem to be. Some of them may seem overwhelmingly adverse, but in time we shall prove that they are workers for good, that those seemingly adverse things are poised divinely, so as to work with what is not adverse, but manifestly in our favour, so as to produce good. It is the balancing,
{406}
as I may say, of the clouds. God balancing our circumstances perfectly, so that good is the result. You need them all -- all the circumstances, "all things", he says, "work together for good" -- but to a certain class. One loves to think that one is in that class, the class that love God. There are such in the world, "lovers of God", and "all things" -- dark clouds, north winds, on the one hand, and south winds on the other, are all perfectly poised by God who loves us, so that they should work together. It is a combination. The whole physical universe, dear brethren, is on that principle, one element working with another element. I believe the whole system if we understood it, is so perfectly balanced, so divinely poised, that what may seem to be adverse is working for what is good, to produce an effect, and that effect is for the good of those that love God. The varying winds and climatic conditions are for good physically in the universal system, and what they set forth are for good morally for those who love God. You see, dear brethren that this is victory. Anyone who understands it and accepts the combination that God orders, comes in for the good -- no such person can be overwhelmed; he sees that God is ordering things. Just as He has ordered the physical universe. He has ordered my circumstances, and all to the end that one thing should be produced, and that is good, thank God!
Well then, finally we have Deborah's song (for that is what is the theme of the chapter) -- "then sang Deborah", as you will observe, and Barak sang. This song is from victorious lips, triumphant lips, and the leader is a sister; the leader, too, in the great movement that overthrew the enemy. Deborah represents victory in sisters, beginning with victory over themselves, for she sat, as we are told, she judged Israel, dwelling under her own palm-tree -- the palm denoting undoubtedly her victory over herself. Otherwise how could she judge Israel? No true Israelite, viewed spiritually, would go to a person who is not self-judged, for judgment.
{407}
They came to her for judgment, we are told. Why did they do that? Because she was capable of judging. How had she become capable to judge? She had learned to judge herself, to acquire the victory over herself. "He that ruleth his spirit", we are told by the wise man, is better than he that takes a city. She did that, and she soon acquired a reputation among the spiritual for being capable of judging, and they came to her. We never need to advertise ourselves if we are self-judged. Those who advertise are conscious of the poverty of their commodity. It is as I am conscious of the wealth of my commodity that I use it, I know that those who need it will make a path to my door, and that is what they did to Deborah. A beaten path was made to that woman's door. Why? Because she was a self-judged person. They came to her for judgment and now she sings -- she and Barak. The chapter is well worth studying from this point of view, and it ends with this -- this beautiful note which I read: "Let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might". What a figure that is! She had spoken directly to Jehovah. "So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord", she says. I did not read that part, for it is not now a time for calling down retribution on the enemies of God; it is the period of grace; but then we have, "let them that love him be as the sun". It is like a jewel inserted after the tribute, after the appeal to Jehovah in regard to His enemies. It is set beautifully, not in the address to Jehovah, but as to the saints -- to us -- "let them that love him", as if it were to stand out before us as a great thought throughout the ages, that those who love God are to shine as the sun in his might. What an incentive, dear brethren, to be amongst the lovers of God! The sun in his might is beautifully presented in @Psalm 19, as many of you will remember. He is pictured by David in that psalm as a bridegroom going forth out of his chamber. A bridegroom -- it can only find full expression in Christ. No mortal man is capable of conveying the
{408}
divine thought in a bridegroom, only Christ. The sun is used as a symbol by David, and I may say here, dear brethren, that David stands for the heavenly side of the position, Solomon for the earthly. So David beautifully pictures Christ as "a bridegroom coming out of his chamber", rejoicing "as a strong man to run a race". That is Christ. Can we not advance the thought and think of Christ during all these centuries in this attractive powerful way, seeking and securing His bride through the gospel? That is what has been going on, but I am speaking now of the lovers of God, and how they are to shine like that. It really means that the warmth and the radiance that is pictured finds an expression in us. Lovers of God reflect God, and they shine in love and warmth, and the warmth of it here is "as the sun ... in his might".
In closing, one would say at this time to the dear brethren that we may see to it that we are lovers of God, and continue to be that, so that there may be the shining, the victorious shining, the beneficial shining, too, not only light but warmth, for it is the sun in his might -- as Matthew presents the Lord on the mount of transfiguration. His countenance characteristically in that gospel shone as the sun. It is Christ in His majestic glory, presently to appear in this world, but now to be reflected there in the lovers of God.
May the Lord help us to be amongst them, and to continue amongst them until the end.
{409}
FELLOWSHIP
@1 Corinthians 1: 9; @1 Corinthians 10: 15 - 22; @2 Corinthians 13: 14
The word translated 'communion' in these verses is 'fellowship', that is, joint participation in something involving mutual responsibility; not only responsibility to the Lord, but to those who are in the fellowship. There are fellowships in the world, such as Freemasonry, but ours is the fellowship of God's Son. That gives it its dignity. On the other hand it is the fellowship of His death. We are all bound up in that, and obligated to each other in regard of it. Then in the last verse it is the fellowship of the Holy Spirit.
First, as to the dignity of what we are brought into. It says, "God is faithful". The apostle reckoned on the faithfulness of God that the fellowship would be maintained in spite of conditions in Corinth. We need God and His faithfulness in view of the difficulties concerning the fellowship. The word 'faithfulness' is another key to the epistle -- God's faithfulness. In chapter 1 He is faithful in regard to the fellowship; in chapter 10, faithful in regard of any temptations that may befall us; in @2 Corinthians 1. He is faithful in regard of the promises. Who could stand without the faithfulness of God?
The fellowship has been brought down all the centuries, and come through Rome, being darkened there, but now it has been recovered. It is the faithfulness of God that has done it. God will reach His end; He will have His people, however few, to go on this principle which takes us out of all other fellowships, automatically shuts out all other fellowships, whatever they be. It is intolerant of all else; the fellowship of God's Son cannot admit of what is of this world, or what is contrary to His death, or contrary to the Holy Spirit. God is great enough, and has power enough to uphold His rights in it, so as to shut out all else that is contrary to it.
{410}
The thought of fellowship is one of the most important subjects in the two epistles. It is not local in itself; fellowship is general, but it works out locally. The economy of the assembly involves different local assemblies, but really there is only one fellowship. It involves the general thought, for He has called *us* -- "by whom ye have been called into the fellowship" and "for we all partake of that one loaf". They had been called, but what they had been called into was the same as Paul was in; they all partook of the one loaf. "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ? Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf", @1 Corinthians 10: 16, 17. The persons who would receive the ministry would have their part consciously in what is universal, but it would have a certain local expression. The economy of the assembly in its provisional side down here will cease when we enter on our heavenly position. She comes down from God out of heaven -- one great thought -- but at the present time the fellowship works out in localities, whether in this town, London, or New York. Here we are in heathen surroundings. In London we are in nominally Christian surroundings, but the position is the same in each place, for what is characteristic of the place is usually what Satan takes up in opposition. However great the difficulties, the faithfulness of God enables us to overcome them.
This fellowship is one of the means that God employs to maintain things through the whole of this dispensation. "Who shall also confirm you to the end, unimpeachable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord", implying that this is the means employed to keep us to the end. God is the dominating thought: Paul is apostle by God's will; the letter is to the assembly of God at Corinth, and he thanks God in respect of the grace of
{411}
God. It seems as if God has undertaken the matter; He had invaded Corinth in a most striking way. Paul is under great pressure. God had invaded the city through Paul and asserted His rights through him. The Lord said, Do not be afraid, I have much people in this city. He would see him through. It was a most difficult place, but the Lord would see him through, and so this epistle has the same thought: God would be with them now that Paul is away.
Fellowship is a real bond: "Jesus Christ our Lord". He is for us all, but then we are also for one another. There are many who readily admit that they are responsible to the Lord for everything they do, but they would perhaps hesitate to say that they are responsible to the brethren for everything. That the Lord should look into their affairs would be admitted, but if the brethren do, they complain; it is not their business. That is independency, because we are obligated to one another in the fellowship -- it is a protective obligation. If a person is worldly and wants worldly things, his worldliness involves the brethren; he is dragging the brethren into it: in this sense, what one does, all do. That is a serious side that many do not recognise. This matter of obligation to one another is a thing that ought to be observed. There are those who say, You are interfering in what is my business, and the Lord knows my heart. That is an indication of a state of soul incompatible with the fellowship.
Paul immediately uses condemnatory language of conditions at Corinth in verse 10; he says. There are divisions among you. "I am of Paul", and so on. That is what Christendom publicly has become. Paul is getting at the root of the evil, for sectarianism is just party spirit. The fellowship ought to convey that it is of God's Son, but it is fellowship with one another too. "If we walk in the light ... we have fellowship with one another", @1 @John 1: 7. The disciples in the beginning persevered in the apostles¬ teaching, then in their fellowship, then
{412}
in the breaking of bread and prayers. Authoritative teaching is the thing, not simply the Lord's authority; our teaching must be right. What do you believe? What is your doctrine? They persevered in the apostles¬ doctrine, whatever it was. The apostles were authoritative. When Peter was preaching, the people said to *Peter and the other apostles*, "What shall we do?" And Peter says, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 2: 37, 38. They recognised the authority of Christ in these men, for they were representative of Christ, so that they would want to know what Peter said in his last address, or what John said, or what Bartholomew said, or what Matthew said. I want to know what the apostles say. If we say, 'Well, I do not agree with that, I want to make baptism a leading point', we divide immediately. It should be a question of what the apostles say, what the apostles think. Their teaching would upset much that is taught at the present day.
Chapter 10 indicates the public boundaries, that is, the death of Christ, and we must not go outside these limits. The point is, What are *we* doing? The early Christians persevered in such and such things. The apostle says, "the cup of blessing which we bless"; that is what we are doing. What we are doing means the fellowship of the blood of Christ. He begins by saying, "flee from idolatry". Down there in that street, so to speak, at No. 10, is the heathen temple; No. 20 the Jewish synagogue; No. 40 the Christian assembly. What does a man see when he goes into the Christian assembly? Is he at liberty to go to the Jewish synagogue and the heathen temple, too? He is to judge judaism; it is grown old, about to pass away. The new covenant displaces the old. Heathendom is idolatrous. If a man goes into these three places and says, I enjoy them all, that man is not a Christian. If I enjoy all fellowships, it shows I have no part in true fellowship at all. Are we
{413}
spiritually intelligent? "I speak as to intelligent persons"( verse 15), that is persons who ought to be able to say what is what; *that* is idolatry, *that* is judaism, *that* is of God. We are going on with *one* thing, the death of Christ, and we cannot go on with anything else. This enters into our business and social relations, too. In the earlier part of the tenth chapter the allusion is to @Exodus 32. It is what is going on in Christendom in the absence of Christ -- "as for this Moses ... we wot not what is become of him", and they ask Aaron to make them a god, and he did. They were worshipping Jehovah, but they were also worshipping that calf. Christendom has become a mongrel thing where people assume that one thing is as good as another, putting things together that are positively opposed to one another. Think of the golden calf and Jehovah -- the priest of Jehovah administering that!
The word now is, "Who is on the Lord's side? ... Put every man his sword by his side ... slay every man his brother", that is, natural relationship of the closest kind, then his companion and his neighbour -- the social side. The slaying figuratively is separation, as in @2 Timothy 2: 19: "The Lord knows those that are his; and, Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity" -- a true Levite. You have the thought of *persons*, vessels to honour and to dishonour. Vessels to honour are such as you value. You not only have the Lord before you, but you have the vessels to honour. These have to be considered, and hence, "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those ..." -- that brings in the persons, so that, although we are in remnant times, we come back to the persons.
1 Corinthians and 2 Timothy together furnish us with the fellowship as it is now. It is very small publicly, and it has been imitated, and the imitation has decoyed many. That requires that I must take up the historical matter, the history of those who name
{414}
themselves as if they were in fellowship, but in truth they are not. If I am following righteousness, I must look into history. Scripture is full of history, especially the books of Chronicles. The writer begins with Adam and takes us right down to remnant times, and Luke takes up the thread and takes us to Paul (@Acts 28), in his own house ready to receive all those who came to him. The Jews came and left him -- arguing. That indicates the position; we must have history, we must come right down. Righteousness requires that I must look into all these things, if I am to arrive at the truth. The history will lead you through the generations of God on moral lines to "those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". It is the most wonderful position conceivable. You are not settling down to old things, past ministry, but the thought of glory and increased glory. It is the presence of God that gives us glory, and we want to get to that. Beholding the glory of the Lord, we are changed, (@2 Corinthians 3: 18). It speaks of Moses: Jehovah spoke to him face to face, and he saw His glory. You can understand his face shining.
The Lord takes up the hardest places. Corinth itself, one of the worst cities at that time. Here in India and Ceylon the conditions are hard, and we should be very sympathetic with our brethren, but a young man in this island has an opportunity that the angel Gabriel would be glad to have, to stand here for the Lord and gather up whatever there is for the Lord. The Lord is with any man that undertakes it, and if one takes up things and makes a vow, as it were, the Lord *will be* with him. An old sister may be an overcomer, but what is needed is young, fresh energy -- renewal of the mind, renewal in knowledge, renewal of the Holy Spirit. It is the renewal that God relies on for continuance of the testimony in any town.
"The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all". The fellowship of the Holy Spirit is a community
{415}
thought; the Spirit of God graciously comes down to a community thought, and we are in that. Think of the Holy Spirit in that -- what richness there is! In many places, such as India, there is great isolation; but where God has taken up one or two, it is God's territory and He would have us maintain it. "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ" comes first, and then "the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit" -- the Trinity, as we say, according to the general principle with God, coming in to establish the Corinthians. God is with His people in all circumstances.
{416}
CRUSES
@2 Kings 2: 19 - 22; @1 Kings 17: 12 - 16; @1 Kings 19: 4 - 8
I have read these scriptures because they speak of cruses. I have in mind to consider each cruse mentioned as representing a vessel; and each saint of God is to be regarded as a vessel. The Scriptures say that saints are "vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory", @Romans 9: 23. No doubt God has in mind to have vessels in glory, that we shall not be there merely as blessed people or sight-seers, but as usable. God will have use for each of the redeemed. One of them, Paul, is spoken of as an "elect vessel", meaning that he was outstanding; but clearly the idea attaches to each christian, and it applies now, for we are to be usable now by God. The governments of the world lay claim to almost everybody now, and rightly, as under God. It will be remembered that Joseph in his great administration under Pharaoh secured all Egypt for Pharaoh; he really made them all as purchased property in the sense of servants or servitude. Every Egyptian would be amenable legally to the behests of the king, not simply as a subject but as a born slave. That principle is applied in the world now in a very wide sense, and in a wider sense still it is applied by God; not simply that we are slaves as commonly understood (though every one who loves God loves the thought of being His slave), but it is an honourable position. Even our Lord Jesus Christ took a bondman's form -- the most touching thing perhaps in the Scriptures. He had served, according to the type, for six years, and could go out free, but instead of going out free He said, "I love my master, my wife, and my children, I will not go free", @Exodus 21: 5. So He became a Bondman for ever, and that is the true, immutable, unchangeable testimony of His death. He is the most wonderful of all vessels; indeed every other vessel hangs on Him, according to the Scriptures, as if
{417}
He supports us all in whatever service we may be called to. We can rely on Him both for example and support, and this, for time and eternity. God is putting in His claim, dear brethren, alongside of the claims of others, right in themselves, but God's claim is obviously final. The Lord Jesus said, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me"; that is the yoke He had Himself. What a yoke, the yoke of love! He stood before His Father and said He could do nothing without Him. He was there for His Father's will: "Not my will", He says, "but thine be done". And so the writer of the Revelation says, "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place; and he signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John", @Revelation 1: 1. So that those who are serving the Lord are in that position of bondmen. They are amenable and available to the Lord for the great service He has for them. The Lord is thus seen in the book of Revelation in such a time as the present, and in worse times to come. The bondmen who stand true are seen in this book as in triumph; they sing the song of Moses and the song of the Lamb; they are victorious over the beast and over the number of his name. The beast and the number of his name are not unknown now; we see now in the drift of things what is meant, especially in the number of his name. But these bondmen have gained a victory over that, they are standing on a sea of glass -- victorious transparency -- no darkness at all.
Well now, this cruse in @2 Kings 2 is a vessel usable for a certain purpose. It is a *new* one, suggesting any beginning that God makes, whether small or great, whether in an individual conversion or in the formation of a gathering of christians in any given locality; or whether in the beginning of christianity when God was moving out of an ancient system that He had inaugurated Himself and supported to a point. He was departing and inaugurating another order of things,
{418}
namely, christianity. This new cruse applies in any of these cases. I prefer now to use it in relation to christians, perhaps as christians just going on with the old things called by some distinctive name religiously, dating back for three or four hundred years or even fifteen or sixteen hundred years. In either case it is old, whereas christianity is ever new. The beginning of it in a believer, in a man or woman, is *new* birth. The Lord Jesus says, "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God", @John 3: 3. It is from top to bottom a thorough matter; otherwise he cannot see the kingdom of God. How many people in Christendom are put out of court by that, millions of them, because although nominally christians they are not born again and therefore do not fit into the type here. They are not new, and if they are not new, they do not contain any salt. They do not keep their households or themselves from corruption, nor do they influence the locality in which they reside against evil; whereas a real Christian does. He is new. Whatever modifications there may be, one who is born again is new. There is a new principle brought into his being. God has put it there. Elisha demanded a new cruse. The people had it. He did not bring it with him; he might have done so, but the point was to bring out what was in the locality, what was in the place. Did they have a new cruse? Did they have salt? They had both. So far so good, and the question arises whether what is being said applies to each one here. What about this matter of new birth? Nicodemus, although a great man, a great doctor or teacher in Israel, floundered about when the Lord mentioned this. He began with the natural, he was not above the level of the natural; he was incapable of spiritual thoughts although they were in the doctrines that he taught. And so it is today; there are teachers: but Paul says, "For if ye should have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not many fathers", @1 Corinthians 4: 15. There are many who overlook the most
{419}
important things in what they teach, and one is this matter of new birth. The Lord says to Nicodemus, 'You are the teacher of Israel and you do not know these things?' And then the Lord adds, not to simplify the matter but to develop the spiritual side, "Except any one be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (verse 5). He goes further: "That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit". It is a spiritual matter, dear brethren, and it is for each to see to it, whether it applies to me, or whether I am eliminated in this matter.
So the word is 'new', the cruse is new. Elisha wanted this one, he asked for it, and it may be the Spirit of God is asking it from someone here. Have you got this new thing? Why this cruse? Well, there were men in the place, the word is not used accidentally. There were sons of the prophets there too; they are not said to be men, although they were such, of course, literally. Indeed, there were said to be among them fifty strong men. But "the men of the city" are persons sensibly responsible in the place. Now pursuing my thought, I am not speaking for the moment of a locality, but of a person. Each person is responsible in himself, so that he represents in himself the idea of the man or men of the place. The human person is regarded as an institution in Scripture. The apostle Paul works it out in @Romans 7: he says, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law" (verse 25). "*I myself*" is the responsible being in the institution of his person; and he is resolving certain things. What is he resolving to do? He says, I am going to do the will of God. That is one of the finest resolutions one can make. If you resolve to put it off, it is one of the worst things you can do. This matter of accepting a certain responsibility is of first and last importance for every person. So Paul says, "*I myself*", and it is in that sense I am speaking tonight. The place was Jericho, a well-known city, a
{420}
historical place, but the men of the city called Elisha's attention to it, saying to him, "The situation of the city is good, as my lord sees; but the water is bad, and the land is barren". These are honest men; they are not taking the prophet around to see the sights of the town, and hiding, as I might say, the coarse, corrupt parts, the slums. That is what the flesh will do, but they are not doing that; they are just appealing to him as to what he sees himself. And the prophet sees you just as you are, let there be no mistake about that. If there is a real prophet dealing with you, there is no use hiding anything. It is just as well to be honest with yourself and with the prophet.
Take the woman of Samaria, as we often speak of her; we do not know her name but she has a name in heaven, written in the book, quite a notable one, no doubt. It is enough to say she was a woman of Samaria, and she was having dealings with the greatest of prophets. She says, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet", @John 4: 19. I "see" it: why did she use that word? Because she felt the penetrating power of His word. What was that word? Well, He says to her, "Go, call thy husband". How much that brings up every time; this marital matter, what a history behind it! "Go, call thy husband, and come here"; that is, you come with him. That brought the whole story up. She says, "I have not a husband". Jesus says, "Thou hast well said, I have not a husband; for thou hast had five husbands, and he whom now thou hast is not thy husband: this thou hast spoken truly". She was hiding other things, but the Lord saw the whole matter. The city was by no means pleasant, although she would make much of Samaria. Here they say, "The situation of the city is good, as my lord sees". Elisha took in the matter of the site of the city; he also took in its history. A woman called Rahab lived in that city once; she also has a name written in heaven. In manner of life, she was comparable with the woman of Samaria in her
{421}
unconverted days, but she came under the light of God and was converted. Elisha says nothing about that, but doubtless he knew. He might have said, Oh, yes; this city is pleasant, but what is going on in your city? But they are not hiding anything; they said, "but the water is bad, and the land is barren". Truly stated!
Well, I am not preaching a gospel sermon, but just bringing in the necessity for this vessel. Is there one in this city that is new? that is, one really converted to God? Can he contain the salt? Is he a man who will corrupt others through his influence, or will he through his influence and example convert or correct others? In this city of Jericho there was such a man as that and they brought him forward. The work of God always begins with what is already there; He begins with His own work and operates from that. How important, therefore, that my constitution shall be just right, that I am born again, that I know my sins forgiven through the redemptive work of the Lord Jesus, that I have the Holy Spirit come down from heaven from Christ, and that I am sealed with the Spirit! If these are so I am new; I am usable here in this place. I am being asked for, I am needed. Think of what a single christian can be, if God takes him up! Or, going back to the real antitype, think of what Jesus was as come down from heaven, how He went to the source of the waters and healed them -- for that is what happened. But I am dealing now with a christian, or one who professes to be a christian, and with the question of newness and usableness, of availability for the work of God; of the ability to change my own circumstances, to purify them, to purify the circumstances in the district around me among the brethren. I am not speaking of the world, because the world lies in the wicked one. Let no one ever think it can be reformed or converted or made suitable for God. It is abandoned by God, that is what the world is. "Now is the judgment of this world", the Lord says, @John 12: 31. I
{422}
quite admit that God holds it in a particular way at the moment for the sake of the gospel, but it is not getting better and never will be better. God will make a way through it for His people, but it is doomed, and we may as well accept that. Anybody who reads the book of Revelation can see that. So it is a question of helping the brethren; it is whether a vessel is available where there is need of one to be used of God. And what is required is newness.
Now this new thing was there in Jericho, the Jerichoites had it, and they had the salt as well. Salt as a type is used by the Lord several times; the passage most applicable to what I am saying is @Mark 9: 50, "Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another". The Lord says to His disciples, "Ye are the salt of the earth". The idea is that the believer can be used of God for purification, for healing the waters -- conditions, we will say, in the local meeting, conditions in the christian himself. This is a question of one man, one woman, one person being available to God as constituted new by the work of God, and able to take on this salt, that is, the power of preservation. And so, dear brethren, this matter comes very close to us. The Lord says, "Have salt in yourselves". Every gathering of the Lord's people requires this admonition. And then again, "Let your word be always with grace, seasoned with salt", @Colossians 4: 6; that is, whatever you say is to have an element of correction, of preservation, or refusal of corruption. There is no hope of our getting on without this type of conversation. Well now, this cruse is available; the salt is put into it, and Elisha goes to the source of the waters, and the source is purified. It says, "Thus saith Jehovah: I have healed these waters: there shall not be from thence any more death or barrenness. And the waters were healed to this day, according to the saying of Elisha which he spoke" (chapter 2: 21, 22). How remarkable is the recovery in this city! And it is at the initiative of the men, persons who are
{423}
responsible. Let us accept responsibility! If there is anything wrong, let there be no lack of men to take up the responsibility, to point out the difficulty and then to have what is needed, what is usable by God, for correction.
Now to proceed -- in the first book of Kings we have the thought of a cruse again. This time the person involved is the widow of Sarepta. She had a cruse in her house; the prophet did not ask for it, he asked for water: "Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel" (chapter 17: 10). That is, he has there the idea of a vessel in his mind. As I said at the beginning, each christian is a vessel. This time the prophet mentions the word "vessel", he does not mention the word "cruse" first; he mentions the word "vessel", meaning that each christian is available for use. When the Israelites came out of Egypt they demanded vessels, or utensils, from the Egyptians, and they gave them to them, meaning that each Israelite that came out of Egypt was himself a utensil; and that is true, dear brethren. There is nothing more true, and nothing more important, than that each one should hold himself as a vessel; as Paul says, "That each of you know how to possess his own vessel in sanctification and honour", @1 Thessalonians 4: 4.
Then the prophet asks for a morsel of bread, and the woman says she has "a handful of meal in a barrel". She was minimising it, but it was in a good place, in a vessel; "and a little oil in a cruse". Now what I want to say about this oil is that it does not fail. I suppose there is not a saint here that has not failed in some sense, but this one does not fail. The word used as to the cruse is that it did not "fail", but as to the barrel of meal, that it did not "waste". It is a very bad sign if a christian is wasteful. How often it is that we demand much and think we need so-and-so, whereas it is really wasteful. Others are in need and we are wasting what they need. Spiritual matters make it more serious, that I have something that could be of use to the people
{424}
of God and they are not getting it; I am wasting it, occupied with other things. A man says, "Lord, suffer me first to go away and bury my father. But Jesus said to him, Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead", @Matthew 8: 21, 22. Do not forget that injunction, whatever else you do or do not do. But the barrel of meal did not waste; it went on. It is a wonderful thing, for it was a time of famine. One could say a great deal about Elijah, what had happened earlier in his life; there is no more interesting history in Scripture than Elijah's. And now in this matter of a vessel, the barrel of meal that did not waste, and the cruse of oil that did not fail -- no wastefulness and no failure -- I can understand how Elijah would be full of heart in spite of the famine, because God was working. He works to get one brother or one sister who does not waste and who cares for things. The Lord Jesus says, "Gather together the fragments which are over and above, that nothing may be lost", @John 6: 12. It is a principle of christianity that nothing is to be lost. Not even a word of Samuel's fell to the ground. Everything is to be preserved without failure: here is a vessel that goes on and on and increases in power and volume. So the word is, "The meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the oil in the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the face of the earth! And she went and did according to the word of Elijah; and she, and he, and her house, ate a whole year. The meal in the barrel did not waste, neither did the oil in the cruse fail, according to the word of Jehovah which he had spoken through Elijah". That is, we have facts established; divine facts are being effected every day among us if we can only observe them. Here we have divine facts established, day in and day out, and week in and week out, for the whole period until relief came. The barrel of meal wasted not, and the oil in the cruse did not fail. And they ate, the prophet and the woman and her house -- a remarkable thing. She had
{425}
only her son, she minimises everything; but the Spirit of God calls her and her son a house. God always dignifies our position as we proceed with Him. So the house and the prophet were sustained by the non-waste of the barrel of meal and the non-failure of the oil in the cruse. Each thing is in a vessel. And so, dear brethren, how important to be vessels, each holding his vessel as I said before, unto sanctification and honour! Otherwise it cannot be used. We are to walk with vessels to honour. There are vessels to honour and vessels to dishonour, and the vessels to honour are the ones we are to associate with and the ones God can use. I would not for worlds be other than a vessel to honour, at least having that in mind. Surely God would have us to have that in mind, each holding his vessel unto sanctification and honour. As we dwell on this matter of non-failure and non-wastefulness, one is encouraged at the reality of what there is, what God has effected in persons at the present time, however small. That is the principle in these scriptures. However small the thing is, it is such as is of God, and if God can make that one thing genuine. He can make a million genuine. He makes a universe according to Christ. It is the smallness of God's things and the bigness of God's things.
Now when we come to chapter 19 we get Elijah fleeing from a wicked woman, Jezebel, because she had threatened to slay him, and according to what I read, "he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a certain broom-bush, and requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough: now, Jehovah, take my life; for I am not better than my fathers. And he lay down and slept under the broom-bush. And behold, an angel touched him, and said to him, Arise, eat! And he looked, and behold, at his head was a cake, baked on hot stones, and a cruse of water". He was lying down, but there was a cake baken on coals and a cruse of water at his head.
{426}
"And he ate and drank, and lay down again. And the angel of Jehovah came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise, eat; for the journey is too great for thee. And he arose, and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb the mount of God". What I have to say about this cruse and these cakes and these hot stones and this angel, all attending on the prophet, dear brethren, is that they together, and particularly the cruse, represent the providential ways of God with His people; a side that we sometimes overlook. And this service of God extends to wayward christians as well as to faithful christians. God never withdraws His eye from His people. As someone has said, If you turn away from God, He will shine on your back. That is our God. As you will remember, the Lord Jesus went after the two that turned away from the truth according to Luke's account and went off to Emmaus. He joined them on their way, "but their eyes were holden so as not to know him". That was, as it were, providential. God never withdraws His eye from us. Let us never give up heart. If some have elected to give up the light and depart, the Lord would say to us, "Will ye also go away?" What an appeal! Some had gone; John says "From that time many of his disciples went away back and walked no more with him", @John 6: 66. What an awful thing! But then, as I said, those two from Emmaus were real at the bottom and the Lord went with them. He walked, I suppose, eight miles or so each way to secure those two. And they walked the same distance, thank God for that. As soon as they got a touch in their hearts they returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven.
I say all that because Elijah here is a wayward Christian; he is fleeing from a wicked woman because she has threatened to kill him. But then, he had just stood up against eight hundred prophets and slain them. Why should he be afraid of a woman? His heart gave
{427}
out, as with many. God could have supported him; God could have kept Jezebel from killing him. Faith would have stood as bold as a lion, that "turneth not away for any". Elijah really was that, but he failed. He is fleeing and saying to God, 'Kill me Yourself'. Well, whether God killed him through Jezebel, or killed him Himself, the difference would not be very great, although I would rather fall into the hands of the Lord than into the hands of a wicked woman like Jezebel; but still, he would be killed. But God had other thoughts, and He has other thoughts about some of us here tonight. So there are providential circumstances in your history as you look back on it, and if they are providential, they are from God. The angel here represents what is providential. God has many things He can use in favour of His people and the first and greatest agency is angels; I mean in these providential matters. Now-a-days one is reminded of the many things God is using to preserve His people. He used the waters around Great Britain to preserve His people there. That is what I believe. He did it Himself. He can use other waters to preserve the saints, and I pray that He may. There is a great distance from the centre of opposition down to New Zealand and Australia; it is a long way, and that long way is in their favour; God may use it providentially. He uses rivers and mountains and weather; He uses snow and frost and He sends rain on the earth. God uses all these things. Why should I not ask Him to do it? Most of us do. But then, He has the greatest things, the angels of His power. The Lord says, "Or thinkest thou that I cannot now call upon my Father, and he will furnish me more than twelve legions of angels?" @Matthew 26: 53. Think of the power of that! In that sense we hardly realize what power is, dear brethren. The angels of His might, what one angel can do! One angel can take even Satan himself and bind him with a chain. That is what one angel can do, and we do not know how many there are. We
{428}
never hear of a census of angels, but there are myriads; and it says the Lord is coming with them, the holy myriads. What an army! No foul language there, no murderous spirit; they are holy angels, holy myriads.
Well, now, I refer to that because of this angel. What he is doing here is to bake a cake for a wayward Christian, or believer, and he is filling the cruse -- some sort of a flask, I suppose -- with water, and putting the cake and the cruse of water right down at the head of the wayward believer. Then he wakens him up, as it says, "And he lay down and slept under the broom-brush. And behold, an angel touched him, and said to him, Arise, eat!" as much as to say, 'Get up for breakfast'. What a thought for heaven to have! Because this came from heaven, it is a providential matter. There are thousands of these providential matters that sometimes we ignore, but they are really from God. They may be little things, but they are really from God, and it is for us to be on the alert, even if we are away from God. We should be on the alert for little things -- it may be in danger on the sea or the battlefield -- and see what God may do to save us. How many times this has been proved in these places of danger! And so it is that the angel is tending Elijah, and awakens him, as much as to say, 'Get up and eat your breakfast'. There was a cake, a hot one, prepared carefully and providentially, and the cruse of water. It was not very much, but it was providentially God's care for his erring child. Then the second time he lay down and went to sleep, and the angel waked him up again. He does not call him by name, he just says, "Arise, eat; for the journey is too great for thee". What tender words! If any one here has turned away from God, you may be sure the journey is too great for you. You may think you can get along by yourself, but you will find the journey is too great for you. And yet God says, 'Take this food I am providing for you'. He would remind you of His love for you. It is the same God that gave Jesus for
{429}
you that is giving you these cakes and the cruse of water, to testify that He has not changed. His love for you is the same. I could say much about the outcome, and how Elijah returned to his great service and was finally received up into heaven. He was the second to be so taken -- Enoch being the first -- and he appeared on the mount of transfiguration, talking to Jesus. So that we may well take him as an example of God's care, how God brings His erring child back to the true path and makes a great servant of him. May God bless the word!
{430}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD
@1 Corinthians 3: 16, 17; @Ephesians 2: 21; @Psalm 27: 4
These scriptures speak about the temple of God. The first scripture is addressed to a company of saints in a Greek city. The word 'temple' had a great place among the Greeks in a defiled and heathen sense; still, the word was well understood. It was a place where inquiry could be made. The answers in these heathen temples would be very evasive, very precarious, generally lies, and in other cases flattery. But in this scripture the word 'temple' is used divinely, in keeping with the word in @Psalm 27. It would apply, not to a literal building, but to a number of christians, a number of persons, and the address was to these very persons, about themselves. So that the apostle inquires of them, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God?" @1 Corinthians 3: 16. It would have been difficult in one way to say anything about them more extraordinary. Their knowledge of the use of the word 'temple' among the heathen would make it difficult for them to understand it as applied to themselves. So that the question was, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God?" -- "ye", *yourselves*. It was no empty suggestion, nor was it merely a potential one. It referred to what was actual.
It is easy to make us believe things about ourselves if they are flattering things; but a man of God, Elihu, said it was not his part to flatter; he said his Maker would soon take him away if he did so. So that we are to be careful in saying things to the brethren about themselves, lest we may be telling lies or flattering. It requires that one should *know* the saints to say things rightly to them, to say what is true to them. We shall not find much difficulty in speaking to each other and of each other in heaven. What we are will be very manifest; our very garb, our countenances, our place as
{431}
distinct from other families of the blest, will in themselves be enough to show what we are then. But to say of the saints what they are now is another matter, because we are in a mixed condition. That is a word that should be understood, because it requires discrimination; it requires the edge of the word of God, the sword of the Spirit, to bring out the mixedness of our condition. "For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4: 12. No other weapon but the word of God can do these things. It is a very sharp instrument, a dangerous one, too. It cuts both ways, so that in attempting to cut another you are apt to cut yourself very severely, and yet do yourself no good. So that in speaking of a mixed condition, how it beclouds what we are! One has to know the brethren to be able to speak rightly of them, and I am thankful to be in a position to know the brethren in these parts. The knowledge of the brethren helps you to minister to them. You have to take much for granted in those you do not know.
Now the apostle had spent eighteen months in this town of Corinth; so that he knew the brethren. He spent three years at Ephesus; you may be sure he knew them there still better. It is a great advantage to know the brethren. Hence he could say from present knowledge that the Corinthians were the temple of God, or rather, that they were that in character; "ye are the temple of God", that is the way it should read. There was no 'if' with him, it is what they *were*. They did not know it, maybe, and of course it was to their disadvantage if they did not; but he knew it. He had been there. How many a brother and sister he spoke to in his eighteen months there, and discovered that they had the Holy Spirit! Two persons who have the Holy Spirit, who have an ungrieved Spirit in them, have a link with
{432}
each other. There is no misunderstanding; they know each other. And that was the apostle's experience at Corinth. Immediately after a visit there he went up to Jerusalem. Suppose the brethren there had asked him, 'Paul, what about the brethren at Corinth?' He would have said, 'There is not one that can tell you better than I about them'. Indeed, in writing to them he said, "*Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men", @2 Corinthians 3: 2. He was no carping critic. He knew them and spoke the truth about them, but he would say a lot that was good about them; he could enlarge on the glories of the assembly at Corinth, as you see in the first nine verses of his first letter. "*Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts"; let us follow those words, "written in our hearts". Who wrote that letter in Paul's heart? God. Not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God. That is, God would advertise the assembly at Corinth by writing in Paul's heart about them, giving each of them a place in his affections; so that anyone listening to him speaking about them would know what a work God had wrought in that city.
And now he turns around to tell them what they are. This does not cover anything, but he says, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, and such are *ye*". So that it is very clear that he had no doubt at all as to what they were: they were the temple of God, that is, in a characteristic sense. And that is my first thought, dear brethren, that we might understand what this means, what we are, how we would be regarded in heaven. Suppose the angel Gabriel came into this meeting and told us what he knows of heaven's mind about us. What would he have to say? He would impress us with the favourableness of heaven's mind about us. Even if anyone of us has been delinquent, and who has not, alas! (Pardon my simple, homely way of telling the thing), the angel
{433}
would say, 'There has been a good time in heaven'. What was the good time? This one has been causing the brethren trouble, but he has repented. That would cause a good time! Heaven has been waiting for months and years; the joy has come now, and heaven is aglow about it. Repentance is morally one of the greatest things known in heaven. We can have nothing down here in a positive sense unless we have repentance preceding. Then he would say to us referring to any of the localities represented here, 'I tell you frankly that you have an assembly reputation in heaven'. Paul refers to speaking with the tongues of angels; that means they are good speakers, and would know how to enforce a thing, and Gabriel would know how to enforce this matter.
What I am speaking of now is not a meeting of a general character like this; it could not be said in a meeting like this, "ye are the temple of God". It is a local matter in the sense in which the word is used here; it is used in a characteristic sense only. It is not the whole idea, nor can any locality represent the whole idea; at most we can only represent what is characteristic. Not that there is not the whole idea, I shall come to that in a moment in Ephesians, but no locality can represent it. This letter contemplates the local position, and if we are to get on locally, we must accept this fact; but based on the fact that there is such a thing as temple of God in the town in which the brethren meet. If there are two companies opposed to one another, one of them cannot be the temple of God or anything like it. It is simply a deception and a mockery, and repugnant to heaven for any practising unrighteousness to assume that they are temple of God. They are not. This is a real matter. Paul had been in Corinth and he knew the persons, and he knew that the Holy Spirit dwelt in them and that He was in them collectively. Many and many a time had he enjoyed the presence and the power of the Spirit in ministry meetings and in assembly meetings,
{434}
so that he is speaking to them of what he knows, and telling them they are to know it too. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" It is not simply that He is there theoretically; He is dwelling there. Paul could see when he was in Corinth that the Spirit was restful there. That is what he wishes to impress upon them. That is the first point.
As to the persons meeting here today, we represent a good many companies of christians, each of which may be designated in its locality as "temple of God". It may be said to them, as said here: "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" Then the apostle warns anyone who defiles that wonderful temple, and adds that it is holy. The great difficulty with most of us is the want of holiness; that is what mars this whole matter. Intelligence will not make up the temple, though it has to do with it; but without holiness you cannot have it. You may be able to make good remarks, but they do not come in the power of the Spirit, in the power of holiness. That is the secret of the difficulty, you may be sure. So he carefully adds, "the temple of God is holy, and such are *ye*".
Well now, dear brethren, that is the impression I would seek to leave on all the companies that are represented here; for I fully believe from my observation in this district that in every gathering represented here there is some character of the temple of God. That is a great matter, an immense matter, but the apostle stresses the ideal of holiness, and that if there be any that corrupt the temple, God will destroy him. "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy". The word 'corrupt' here is the same as 'destroy'. And he goes on, "Let no one deceive himself: if any one thinks himself to be wise among you in this world, let him become foolish, that he may be wise" (verse 18). That is, what a man does in the meeting will react upon
{435}
himself. So that we are in a serious position in this group of gatherings. Heaven has taken much account of us, and has been helping us greatly, too. But the Lord says, "And to every one to whom much has been given, much shall be required from him", @Luke 12: 48. So that this matter of the temple and its holiness, its dependence on the Spirit in the place, not only in each person, but collectively, is of prime importance to us. Young people especially need to take home this great fact: "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy". This letter was written that it should be true of them characteristically, and continue to be so that the light of God might be diffused and shine amongst them.
Now the Ephesian side is taken up in order to have balance, and the verse I read indicates that the building grows, or increases, to a holy temple in the Lord. That is the next thing. It is a growing thing, an increasing thing. It is a test, dear brethren, as to what we profess to be and what we are. We are entitled in our localities, I say without hesitation, to accept the apostle's statement in the principle of it that "ye are temple of God". Let us accept it, and the obligations that go with it. But these obligations imply that there is to be growth or increase. So that it is a question of whether the garment we wore last year fits us now, because that is the test. You young people, can you look back a year and say, 'I enjoy the meetings more now than I did then?' Let every young person challenge himself. We often refer to Samuel, a typical saint; he was a saint from his youth, his boyhood. There was steady increase with him as year by year he needed a larger coat. John the baptist was another such. Gabriel speaking to Mary spoke of "the holy thing also which shall be born", referring to the Lord Jesus. That means substantially holy. None of us could be that; but in the Corinthian epistle the Spirit of God tells believing parents that their children are holy,
{436}
which is a very important matter. They are only provisionally holy, but there is responsibility attaching to every child. He is over against the unclean babes all around. They are children of unclean parents, but the babes of christians are clean. That is what the apostle says: "since otherwise indeed your children are unclean, but now they are holy", @1 Corinthians 7: 14. That is an important matter to start with in the family, to have holy babes, because it is a basis, a provisional basis, for intrinsic holiness. It is the basis for what I have been speaking about, the temple of God in the place.
So that if you can look back and say, I am getting on a little better; I enjoy the meetings more, and I read the Bible with a little more interest, then there is increase. Because it is like that. It is well to face facts, it is a beginning. It is a little here and a little there. And if you are humble before the Lord, He gives you assurance; He would say to you, 'Go on'. That is what Samuel did. And yet (and it is very remarkable), the Spirit of God expressly says after all this history about the little coat every year, "Now Samuel did not yet know Jehovah", @1 Samuel 3: 7. We often use that word 'yet'; it is a very good word, I think, in dealing with children; and they use it too, "Not yet". But they may say it too often, and God may say, 'I will say, Not yet; you may say those words so often -- Not yet; I will say, Never'. He may take you at your word and say, 'It is all over now; the time is gone'. Therefore, do not keep on saying, 'Not yet'. The Spirit of God said Samuel did not yet know, but he did come to know. The Lord spoke to him. When you are telling Him you are able to enjoy His things better, it may be that the Lord is just then calling you by name, Samuel, Samuel. That is what happens, and the Lord puts you on your faith. And you know what the Lord did; He told Samuel a lot of things that are spoken of and debated in the care meeting, showing God had confidence in him. It is a great matter to know that God
{437}
has confidence in you, that your parents have confidence in you, and the brethren have confidence in you. This matter of confidence is one of the greatest in moral things. So that Jehovah tells this boy things about Eli, a man who could be his great great grandfather. That is God. It is a very rare thing for God to tell boys about His things, but it is because He had confidence in that boy. So that, as I said before, if the temple of God is in this town, even in one or two persons, the next thing is growth, because that is Ephesians. It increases to something -- to a holy temple in the Lord. It is not now a holy temple in this town, or in Corinth, or in Ephesus even; it is in the Lord. It is a universal thought.
Well, if we have good times in the temple in that light, the Lord would say, 'What about the results? what about the bearing of all this?' Can I go afield thousands of miles and convey something of what I have been growing in? That is the idea. It grows, says the apostle, to a holy temple in the Lord: "in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord; in whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", @Ephesians 2: 21, 22. That "in the Lord" is as good in New Zealand as it is here. If I should go again to New Zealand, and they have been growing ever since my last visit, but I have not been growing, would they not, as I ministered, see my lack of growth? This is a universal matter. There must be uniformity and symmetry in it all; not one place shooting out unduly, but growth throughout. It is a building that is in mind, really a building composed of persons, but it grows to something, "a holy temple in the Lord". I might say, I have gift; I can go and preach and teach there; but what about this *holy* matter, and what about "in the Lord"? The Lord may make me feel that I am behind in the distant land where I have gone to serve.
So that, dear brethren, the point in the second section is that of increase, and that from my little meeting
{438}
where I am set, where I have my part in the holy temple locally, I can convey to other meetings thousands of miles away that it is the same thing. Paul, for instance, went up from Corinth to Jerusalem, which is a long distance. As he passed through he would see the brethren in different places, and what they would see in him and hear from him as to other gatherings would be the same as they were enjoying if they were going on with God. It is a matter of measure, he and they moving together. Paul said of the Thessalonians, for instance, that they took their measure from, or copied or imitated, the assemblies of God in Judaea. That would mean that if he went to an assembly in Judaea and came back to Thessalonica, he would find the same thing. It is a universal thought, and the building is growing to a holy temple in the Lord. That is fixedness. It is a certainty that universally there is such a thing in this world, growing unto a holy temple in the Lord; that we have actually arrived at it. We have grown into the idea. It is a great mental conception in the power of the Spirit that will come out to the millennium in a wonderful display of glory; but it is already here. The apostle says, 'I see it now as I move about'. Paul's account of the saints at Corinth would be a testimony to this. The growth was there, and the growth included himself.
You do not want to be out of this matter of increase, dear brethren, dear young people especially; because increase is going on, and the Lord is saying, 'If it is not going on, then there is nothing'. The little coat brought up every year determined the growth of Samuel. And so God applies that test to us from time to time. Something happens in the locality, that is the test, and then perhaps we find brethren who are not equal to the matter. They are just ordinary people talking about ordinary things, as people do. The coat does not fit, you see, the emergency brings out the measure. But if there has been increase, the measure will be brought out too,
{439}
that things can be taken up and dealt with according to divine principles. There is evidence of growth or increase to a holy temple in the Lord. That is how it will be in the millennial day. What a time we are going to have! I have been speaking of what we are, but think of what we are coming into! If we have ten cities to rule over, or five cities, we shall travel immense distances in the universe. We have to understand the letter of Scripture, and what an immense thing we are coming into, and what power will be there. Think of the instances in Scripture where people were carried away enormous distances by the sheer power of God. One man, Philip, raptured; the Spirit of God raptured him and he was found at Azotus. Probably that would be beyond anything we know of now in material things. That is what we are coming into. John says himself, "What we shall be has not yet been manifested", @1 @John 3: 2. We should be filled with faith and hope. Think of God! Think of the power that will be available in those days!
So that this matter of growth is to be taken into account; if I am not growing, I do not need a new coat, I am just the same year in and year out. But we are to be growing or increasing to a holy temple, not now in Corinth, but "in the Lord". That is universal, and will go on to the millennium. "In the Lord" is an exclusive idea, a dignified idea. It is the dignity of exclusiveness. It holds today as it will hold in the millennium. The position we are in today as having the Holy Spirit is exactly the same as it will be in the millennial day. It is "in the Lord". It is not now of heavenly choice, but of millennial administration that I am speaking. And so in that day everything will be accurately dealt with; no secret councils, but matters that come up will be dealt with in clarity as on a sea of glass. Think of the confidence that will be established in the heavenly city! It will have established itself as the very essence of confidence. "Jerusalem, coming
{440}
down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God. Her shining was like a most precious stone", @Revelation 21: 10, 11. I hope the brethren are following what I am saying. It establishes itself in infinite confidence in the universe, that is the idea. A holy temple in the Lord is a place where saints may go and ask questions with confidence and get all matters solved. I am speaking now as to saints on earth. Paul says, "Do ye not know that we shall judge angels?" @1 Corinthians 6: 3. People will come to us, as the Queen of Sheba came to Solomon, with hard questions, maybe, and they will be solved. Anything Solomon told her she believed; she had no doubt about it. So it will be then. Think of what God is working out in this very town at the present time, how He is impressing upon us what we are. And then the growth into the universal idea, not getting on in this world, but in that world, for it is "in the Lord". Nothing in this world is in the Lord, it is the very opposite. But "in the Lord" you are in a fixed position outside the world, and that goes on into the millennium.
What a time we shall have, travelling and conversing! Let no one think I am enlarging unduly on it; it is a practical thing. We are dealing with practical things in christianity. The apostle says, "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory to be revealed to us", @Romans 8: 18; and again, "While we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are for a time, but those that are not seen eternal", @2 Corinthians 4: 18. We are looking at those unseen things, and if we do look at them, what I am telling you will be intelligible to you, the things we are coming into. But I am speaking of the administrative side, because it is a temple in the Lord, and that has to do with the millennial day. We shall be inquired of and shall be able to answer the questions, so wonderfully constructed is the heavenly city. Now the point is whether we are growing into
{441}
that, wherever our local position is; because the word 'temple' is the same in each case and it is a holy temple. It is no mere theory; the persons who form it are holy.
Now the final word is in the Psalms, and as usual, that helps in experience. "One thing have I asked of Jehovah, that will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire of him in his temple", @Psalm 27: 4. Now I have come to the idea of desire. I have spoken of what we are locally, what we are as growing, what a great outlook we have; and now it is a question of desire, for that is what the verse begins with. "One thing have I asked of Jehovah", or, "One thing have I desired". It is not a mere mental desire; it is an asking for a thing. And what is this thing that the psalmist is asking for? It is not that he is wishing for a thing secretly; it is asked for. It is what I have made known to the Lord in prayer, and He knows it. And then he says, "that will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life". He says, 'I have asked for it, and I have sought after it. I did not get it right away'. I suppose everyone of us here can testify to that, that we did not get things right away that we asked for. But do not forget you asked for them; keep on asking. You do not get answers right away. God has His own way of acting because the answers to our prayers depend on growth, and it takes months to bring about growth for some things, maybe years. One thing I have asked of the Lord, and I have sought after it, and I am seeking after it yet. I am going to get it. I have confidence in the God I have asked. He has never disappointed me. He says to me maybe, 'There is something wrong with you'; perhaps there are hidden motives in your asking, and He keeps me waiting. But on whom am I waiting? God. The Psalmist says, 'I will seek after it'. He is not disappointed. It looks as if it is still in the future; it is in the future the way it is put in the psalm; but it
{442}
is desired and sought after, and now he tells us what it is: that he may dwell in the house of the Lord.
Jehovah says to Solomon, 'You did not ask for the life of your enemies, or for riches; you asked for wisdom, the very thing I wanted you to ask for, and I am going to give it to you; and in such great measure that there will be nobody like you'. The number of wise persons mentioned in @1 Kings 4: 31 is remarkable; their names are given and they are greatly distinguished for wisdom. But Solomon was wiser than them all. The longer you wait, the more you will get. This is a psalm of David, and it is included in the first book of Psalms, showing that David went through this and got his answer; he did not die without it. He speaks himself later about the formation of the house. Let us suppose that the ark was in the house of Abinadab at this time when David prayed this prayer. How could he get to the house of the Lord under those conditions? He would say, 'That house will not do; the ark is not properly cared for there'. David says, "We heard of it at Ephratah, we found it in the fields of the wood", @Psalm 132: 6. You could never behold the beauty of the Lord in the house without the ark, but David saw to it that the ark got to the house, a very central thought. He says, "That I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire of him in his temple". You may say, God is never seen. But He is seen, He has found a way of showing Himself. That is to say, all this beautiful furniture described in Exodus represents the beauties of Christ. God is in Christ. That is the idea. That is how David would find the beauty of the Lord in the house, because these things spoke of Christ. The ark spoke of Christ; the whole thing that was disclosed to Moses spoke of Christ. All stands related to Christ. Thomas says to Him, "My Lord and my God", @John 20: 28. Do not be afraid to say that to Christ. After the Lord had shown him His hands and His side, Thomas worshipfully says,
{443}
"My Lord and my God". He had missed Him on the previous first day of the week; he did not see Him then, but the ten did. As I said, that is the principle, that God is in Christ.
And so I do not believe David went to Abinadab's house. Though he made a mistake in taking the ark up, he had the idea of beholding the beauty of the Lord. Let us not forget that Christ is God, and that God is in Christ; and He is in the house, and that is among the brethren. The brethren are the house of God; and in the place Christ has among them His glory is seen. So that Moses says, "Let the beauty of Jehovah our God be upon us", @Psalm 90: 17; not, 'Let me see it' -- the beauty is there. He knew it was there; he had been on the mount. What did he see? Who can say what he saw in those forty days with Jehovah up there? It is said, 'They saw the Lord; they saw Jehovah; they saw the God of Israel'. You say, 'What did they see?' Well, it is for us to find out spiritually what they saw. It is a question of God, and God has found a way to show Himself. The furniture of the tabernacle brought out what God was, and that is what David was speaking about, what he would see -- "to behold the beauty of Jehovah". How he would contemplate the ark, and the tabernacle, and the candlestick and the cherubim! That is the idea, "to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire of him in his temple". That is, he would ask questions; but the first thing is to see God.
Let nobody hesitate at what I am saying. "They saw the God of Israel", it says, and, "They saw God, and ate and drank", @Exodus 24: 10, 11. It is morally impossible that God should hold Himself back; He must be visible in some way. He says of Moses, "The form of Jehovah doth he behold", @Numbers 12: 8. Not everybody, but Moses saw it on the mount, and probably at other times. So he tells us himself, 'I went into the sanctuary to speak to God'. Think of the light he had in his soul! He says it in a most princely chapter, in @Numbers 7.
{444}
He says, he went in to speak to God, and he heard a Voice, and he tells us where the Voice came from: from off the mercy-seat between the cherubim. God was there. He was as really there as He was in heaven. These things were real to him; God was there; the Voice was there. David had the same thought: "to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire of him in his temple". He saw something. You cannot imagine that we shall be in heaven without seeing something. Heaven is a place of visibility, of persons, the whole cream of the universe; but God Himself is there. 'God and the Lamb -- ¬tis well I know that source divine', that is the principle. It is a question of stirring ourselves up, and calling upon all that is within us as to these matters. How well do we know God in His house, so that we behold the beauty of the Lord? It is a matter of desire. The psalmist evidently had not reached it properly yet, and he asked for it, and sought it out. And then he tells us what it was he was seeking out, and it is the house, that he may enjoy the house of the Lord all the days of his life; not for a visit, but all the time. And then, "to inquire in his temple". The nearer you get to God, the more light you have about what to ask for. "Ask, and it shall be given to you", @Matthew 7: 7. Do not forget to ask, and ask much, that is, according to what governs the position. Keep on asking, and you will get it. You may have to wait, but God says, 'You are not ready yet; you are not great enough to get these answers'; because our minds travel much faster than our feet or our formation, and God knows the difference. But, He would say, you have asked them and I have heard you. Your requests are recorded. Be patient, and during the time of your patience you are growing; and when you come into the thing you asked for, you will be capable of enjoying it.
That is what I would leave with you, dear brethren: to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Do not forget to ask for it and seek after it. Keep on. Have it
{445}
greatly before you what you would ask for, and that it is a question of desire, that you want to dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of your life. It is really eternity.
{446}
REAL OR UNREAL?
@John 12: 4 - 6; @Acts 8: 9 - 24; @Luke 10: 38 - 42; @John 11: 20 - 27
I have learned by observation and report that most of my hearers are christians, and it is only right that I should preach to them according to all I know them to be. Scripture supports this principle of preaching to christians. Paul wrote to the Romans. He had in mind to visit them and to preach the gospel to them also. He had never been there. If he went to Rome as he intended (he did so, or rather he was taken there as a prisoner), he would, as having access to the meeting room of the brethren, preach to them. If they needed to have a gospel letter, they certainly needed a gospel preaching.
Then again, another fact arises as to the people of God as assembled as we are here now. That is that there are camp followers. Scripture says that, as Israel went out of Egypt, a large number of a mixture, a mixed multitude, went with them. In Exodus we are told that they went with the people. In Numbers we are told that they lusted, and that they caused the people to weep, so that these mixed people, this mixed multitude, needed to be converted. Israel represented, in the Exodus, those that were the people of God. Typically they were the people of God, but the mixed multitude were not the people of God. So it is today that a mixed multitude are among nominal christians and even among those whom we know to be genuine christians, among the dear brethren here tonight. A mixed multitude is usually present, whether few or many, and the principles of christianity require that we should take this into account. I address those here tonight, not accusing any who may belong to the mixed multitude, nondescript christians, having no attachment -- unattached people, therefore having no sense of obligation to anything, perhaps not even to
{447}
God. They may speak, or boast even, of their independence and the freedom of choice which they think belongs to independence. They are targets of the devil. They have really no protection against him, and this is a very solemn matter, because they are quite unaware of their exposure and the consequences of that exposure. In keeping along with the people of God they retain their independence. They are immune to the rules, the government of the house of God. The apostle's remark: "That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3: 15) has no reference to them, in their minds. They may come to meetings like this and retain all that independency. In the mind of heaven they are just camp followers. Not that heaven resents their presence, nor is there any evidence that it resented the presence of the camp followers in the wilderness, but it certainly resented their lusting, and their provocation of Israel to weep and to complain.
In the wilderness the presence of God was understood and was there in the midst of the people. A godly father might look out of the door of his tent and see the divine fire, the symbol of the divine presence there and return to his rest comfortably, his children, as it were, with him in bed. The divine protection is there, but we suppose some of them are not with them. Some of them hiked off in the wilderness with other persons of their age. What they can see in the wilderness is very little, but still children are wayward and restless and like to escape parental domination, and any father who missed one of his boys would say he is not under the protection of that pillar. Some beast may kill him. Some devil may get hold of you. You have gone out among the camp followers. You are not taken into account in the camps. The camps were governed by the pillar of the cloud. When it moved, they moved, but there is nothing said of the camp followers in regard
{448}
to that. They are independent. They are people who have shown that everything is optional, even to going out and exposing themselves to the wolves, the lions, or the wild beasts.
The Lord Jesus was among the wild beasts in the wilderness. None of them overcame Him, but they did overcome a young man such as I was speaking of, but now you are here where there are no wolves or lions. You are amongst the people of God, the camp of God, to whom the pillar of fire and the pillar of cloud refer. And so every parent lies down comfortably, if all his children are with him in the tent, and he sees they are under the divine fire and protection. They are in salvation. They are where God is.
And so it is that everyone who is not in the fellowship is among the camp followers. When the people are numbered, six hundred thousand, twenty years old and upward, no camp follower is numbered. You have selected that and God leaves you there, but in christianity, as I was saying, we are all concerned about you. All of us who belong to the camp want you in. As Moses said to one wilderness child, "Come thou with us, and we will do thee good". That is what we say to any camp follower here. Israelites are not children of the wilderness. They are children of God. They are going to heaven, to this Canaan, and this meeting is for you, but, as I was saying, I am speaking to the Lord's people, because they need help from the gospel, as well as the camp followers. For the camp followers the word is, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom". Unless you come under the law of God in the camp, wisdom is not yours. The fear of God is a part of the testimony, to proclaim the beginning of wisdom, but the saints themselves need the gospel. I need it, I am sure. I love to listen to the gospel as it is preached. It is always fragrant and always instructive, and it always appeals to the heart as well as to the conscience. It is a peculiar matter with God, the glad
{449}
tidings of God concerning His Son, the great theme above, and the Holy Spirit coming down here in power shows that it should be heard, that everyone should hear, and that the speaking should be intelligible.
And so, in considering the dear brethren here, it is for the moment to say that certain ones such as I have described may be amongst us, numbered amongst us. These three persons of whom I have read were nominally not camp followers. They were not a mixed multitude. Judas was an apostle. Simon was a convert nominally and consorted with the great evangelist, Philip. He was not a sceptic. And then Martha was known to the saints. She invited the Lord Jesus into her house. She is not a camp follower. She is an interested person, and she has a sister who is a real lover of Christ, and not only a lover of Christ, but one who loved to listen to what Christ said, so that Martha belongs to the real ones.
Now Judas was an outstanding person in the profession, and so it is that one may be a preacher today, not a camp follower. I am not speaking to them now, but to persons who take up their position as christians and are recognized as christians. Judas was an apostle. He was an outstanding christian from the ordinary point of view, but he was a thief. Think of a man passing muster amongst the most outstanding of the servants of God, and yet he was a thief. He needed the gospel more than anybody, and yet he could preach it. May I not venture to say that Judas had converts. I believe he worked miracles. He was one that had immediate access to Christ. He was committed to the bag. He kept the money.
Now why am I speaking like this? Because of the possibility of persons -- I am not accusing anybody, nor have I one single person especially in mind -- but we may be among the front ranks of the converts of a servant of God and yet be lost. Take that word into your heart. Paul says, "Lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway", @1 Corinthians 9: 27.
{450}
I do not think Paul ever thought he would be a castaway. He says, "For I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day", @2 Timothy 1: 12. He committed his soul to Jesus. Jesus spoke to him from heaven when he was an out-and-out persecutor of the saints, and he says to the Lord, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" @Acts 9: 6: That is how he began. Is there anyone in here who is not a persecutor like Paul, but who would speak evil of the Lord's people? The Lord would say to you tonight, "Why persecutest thou me?" You are persecuting Christ in speaking of the Lord's people, traducing them. But now, as speaking of the reality of his conversion, how real it was! -- he says, "I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day". Paul, as a convert, would come out triumphant in that day. "That day" is a familiar term. It is the day of divine discrimination, the day, if I might say, in the valley of decision. Are we all ready for it? Are we sure that we have committed to Him what He will keep against that day? Paul knew that. He had no question about it, but he is speaking about others. He has said elsewhere, "These things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself and to Apollos for your sakes", @1 Corinthians 4: 6. "Lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway". And that word 'castaway' means that you will never see God, will never see Christ, but will exist with the devil and his angels. Surely there is no love in us christians to have persons in our midst claiming to be christians, nominally christians, and yet not that -- it is no love at all not to warn them. Our kindness is questionable. Why should it be left in that way? Let us tell them, and that is what we are doing now.
Well now. Judas was a preacher. He was reckoned among the brethren and among the apostles. Many of
{451}
you are saying, 'I would like to ask questions about Judas. Why did the Lord ever take him on?' If you were to ask the Lord, He might say, 'Ask me something about yourself'. A man said to the Lord once, "Lord, are there few that be saved?" The Lord says, 'That is no question for you. You see whether you are saved'. There is not time enough to answer these questions. The time should be occupied with getting people saved. He says, "Strive to enter in at the strait gate", because there is a wide gate. If you ask such questions, you may be just going in the wide gate, down the broad way to destruction. Don't ask why Judas became an apostle. Ask yourself the question, 'Am I going to be like Judas, doing something among the people of God, and yet a castaway?' God is impressing us with the reality of things and the danger we are talking about, getting into the broad way and never getting out of it. It leads you to the lake of fire. Do not say to me, 'Do not use that word, the lake of fire'. It is a good word, a warning word for the light-hearted people who are glib enough in talking about certain things, and yet they are neglecting their own precious souls. You are neglecting the matter of forgiveness of sins without which you will never see God. If you die, you will die in your sins, and you will be raised, too, in your sins, and you will be sent to eternal damnation in your sins. You will be suffering then, and you will never be without it.
Well, now. Judas was a thief. I do not need to go over the history of Judas. I suppose you all know that he was lost, and yet he was not really a hater of Christ. You may say, 'Well, I have respect for the Lord Jesus and for the saints'. I have no doubt Judas did. Judas was remorseful when he found that his thirty pieces of silver led to the Lord being crucified. He was sorry for it. Hatred of Christ was not his sin. His sin was that he was a thief. The Lord said he was a devil; but when the actual concrete thing comes to light, he is
{452}
a thief. He has his eye on money. I am warning you people about money. There are great opportunities now of earning big salaries, and the devil would use that to allure you to get big salaries and to use the salary to make much of yourself in the world. Lust! Judas was a lustful man. He was a luster after money, and that brought him into eternal perdition. He was so fond of money that he sold his Master for thirty pieces of silver. He did not hate the Lord. He was remorseful when he found that his wretched conduct led to the Lord being crucified, and he killed himself. What an awful thing sin is in people. It is the product of lust. Lust, when it has conceived, gives birth to sin, and sin, when it is finished, brings forth death. It brought forth death for him. He hanged himself by his own hand. Let us not trifle with these things. Young people, do not be lustful. "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world". Judas was a characteristically lustful man, and he lusted after money, but he slew himself with remorse. He was never saved. He never will be. He is one of the most solemn characters in the Scriptures.
Well, now, Simon, about whom I read in Acts, had money. He was not lustful after it. He already had it, maybe from his magic arts. Palm readers and the like make money. They get money for what they do. Anyway, he had money. His lust was the lust for power. He wanted to be a great man, and he was. The devil made him a great man, but it is wonderful to see that a preacher of the gospel came into the town and preached the gospel, and Simon became a convert. He believed Philip. Scripture says that. It says, "To whom they all gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God. And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched them with sorceries. But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptised, both men
{453}
and women. Then Simon himself believed also: and when he was baptised, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were done". Well, surely he is the outstanding convert in this campaign of Philip's. That is what most people would say. The newspapers would maybe take account of him, this man whose name was great. He was "the great power of God" in the community and, if you please, he is converted. Surely he is becoming the talk of the town. Simon is converted. Not only is he converted, but he is baptised. Not only is he baptised, but he is wondering at the things that are being done by the Spirit of God in Philip. Can there be a question about him? That is what most people would say. Many people would make a thousand times more of Simon's confession than the confession of the others. Well, he is consorting with Philip. He is at Philip's preachings, and he is wondering at what is happening. Surely he is a saved man, but is he? Does the fact that you consort with the Lord's people, attend the meetings, and profess to enjoy what is said prove that you are a christian? It does not. God alone knows what the motives are behind your attendance at the meetings of the christians. You are making a point of it that you are in every way like them. What they are enjoying, you are enjoying. You cannot make any money at that, but he is hoping to. He has been a great man, and he hopes to be one again in another way. He says, 'This is greater than the thing I have had, and maybe I will get into it'. Well, the other christians did not get the Holy Spirit, and Simon would say, 'Well, they are not much different from me'. Nobody is talking about the Holy Spirit. It is a question of listening to Philip and rejoicing in the light that came from the gospel so far. Jerusalem had an eye on that. If you are attending meetings and behaving as a christian and you are not a child of God, Jerusalem has an eye on you, and is going to send someone -- the Spirit of God.
{454}
Peter and John came down from Jerusalem. Heaven is attentive to this matter. Samaria had heard the word of God, but that does not mean that everybody in Samaria had heard the word of God, nor does it mean that everyone in this town has believed, but Simon had. Jerusalem did not hear about Simon. I am not saying that -- the scripture does not say so. They are concerned about the work of God in Samaria, and they send out two men, Peter and John, to see about this matter of the Holy Spirit. If you have not got the Holy Spirit, you will be exposed when John and Peter come down. Those who are really subject to the gospel will get the Holy Spirit. That is what the scripture says, that God gives the Holy Spirit to those who obey Him. You may not get it automatically as you believe, but you will get it. You should not be without it. Peter and John come down, and they pray there. It is a question now of the Holy Spirit. He had not come on any of them. This is a serious matter. Philip would be praying constantly about this matter. Why are these converts not getting the Spirit, and why is not this great man, Simon? What a fine preacher he will be when he gets the Spirit. The most spiritual of us may fail to discern you. You are among the people of God perhaps for other motives than genuine ones. Peter and John, when they came down, "prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit; for he was not yet fallen upon any of them, only they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. Then they laid their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Spirit". Well, what about Simon? Did he get the Holy Spirit? Well, now, listen to the next verse, "But Simon, having seen that by the laying on of the hands of the apostles the Holy Spirit was given, offered them money, saying, Give to me also this power, that on whomsoever I may lay hands he may receive the Holy Spirit". He did not ask for the Holy Spirit in the ordinary sense of the word. He was concerned in the bottom of his heart all the time about power to give
{455}
the Spirit to other people. 'What a great thing this would be', he says in his heart. That is to say, he has the lust for power in his heart -- power to make himself great in this world. That is what he had in mind -- the desire to give the Holy Spirit to other people. Think of the distortion, the darkness in his mind. Peter says, "Thy money go with thee to destruction". It is a most solemn thing that he should be imposing upon the people of God, careful to be just like them, and yet when Jerusalem comes in in prayer, there is a real uprising of evil in his case. The rest of the saints apparently get the Holy Spirit. It is in the saints. It belongs to believers. It is a certainty that those who believe in the Lord Jesus and get forgiveness will get the Holy Spirit. It is your portion. God gives the Holy Spirit, it says, to those who believe. Simon wants to be a great man. He is lustful for power, and he is hoping that he will get it on these lines among these christians. He is consorting with Philip. He is behaving as one of them, but Peter says, "Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money". You are using that; you are attempting to get the power to give the Holy Spirit like that -- and it is abominable to heaven. "Thy money perish with thee". He might say to Peter and John, 'I will give you money. You need it for travelling'. Peter had been using money. It was the Lord's money. Barnabas had been putting his money, donations, at Peter's feet, and he had been using it for service, but not that money. "Thy money perish with thee". That is a most solemn thing. It shows the awfulness and the reality of God's operations among His people when anybody assumes to be one of His people who is not and is governed by other motives.
Well now, there is a considerable difference between this man and Judas. There is no hope for Judas at all. There is no evidence that the disciples of the Lord even prayed for him. He is a son of perdition, and there is
{456}
no hope for him, but there is hope for Simon. Peter says, "Thy money perish with thee". Let us just say, I would like to be fair to everybody, there is a question now and there is hope. So it says Peter tells him his money is to go with him to perdition, because it is defiled money. It is a terrible thing he is thinking of. He says, "Because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money". It is an insult to God, an apostate idea. And then he goes on to say, "Repent". If there is anybody here within the range of what I am saying, there is hope for you, bad as your case is. I would say now to you in grace, 'There is hope for you'. I am far from saying that a man like Simon is a lost soul, that he will never be saved. Peter says to him, "Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee". He is not a devil. He is not called a devil. He is a lustful man and wants power. But still Peter says, 'Repent. There is hope for you'. And that is what I would say to anybody here tonight, that the real way out of that terrible condition is repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. You will be brought into the christian circle and get the benefit of it. Peter said, "Repent therefore of this thy wickedness and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me". That is all. That is where Simon is left, and I cannot tell you whether Simon was ever converted, but I can tell you that there is hope for him. He says to Peter, "Pray ye to the Lord for me", and the Spirit of God says no more. It is a questionable case. He disappears from the pages of the Bible at this point. Whether he will appear again as one of the saved in the future who can tell? Let us hope he will. I speak of it thus so that, if there is anyone
{457}
who is exercised here, there is hope for you on the line of repentance.
Well now, there is only just a moment for Martha. You can see how she is with the people of God. She is not like Judas or Simon. She has a sister and a brother whom Jesus loved, and John tells us that he loved her too. John tells us that. Luke does not. If we were just to read Luke, we would have to say that Martha's case is also questionable. If there are any here like her, you cannot afford to risk John coming in to tell the final tale.
Martha criticised the Lord, and yet she received Him into her house and closed the door, and said in effect, 'Lord, You are not right'. "Dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone?" She is impeaching the Lord Jesus, and the Lord says, "Martha, Martha, thou are careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful". He did not say, 'You are insulting Me after inviting Me into your house'. He says, "Thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful", and I would say to any sister here tonight who is given to criticism of the brethren, 'Do not forget the beam that is in your own eye'. I would say to anyone in that category, 'Be careful whom you are dyeing with a questionable reputation'. People will say they are not sure whether she has gone to be with the Lord, but John comes in to save the position and tells us that the Lord loved her, and that He loved Mary and Lazarus, and he tells us that when the Lord Jesus came to Bethany after Lazarus had died. You know, when death takes place in a family, it stirs us all up. It is intended to. Did the Lord have in His mind that Martha might be saved through the death of Lazarus? Did He allow Lazarus to die? He stayed away two days that Lazarus might die. Was it not to save Martha? How far the Lord goes, how much pains He takes with us to take away that stigma of positive unbelief of heart. The Lord knew better. He knew that Martha
{458}
had something, and He stayed away two days for Lazarus to die. How many husbands have been taken that wives might be saved, and the loss of a wife so that the husband might be saved, the loss of parents that children might be saved.
So the Lord had been to Bethany before, and He came to Bethany in His own time, and Martha is the first to go to meet Him. There is hope for her now. When she heard that Jesus was coming into the village, she went out to meet Him. John is delighted to tell us about this sister. She is no longer in question. In his next chapter he says she was one of those that served when the Lord Jesus came there the second time, six days after this. Now she comes, and she meets the Lord. What does she say now? She does not say to the Lord, 'You are letting Mary sit there when she should be helping me', but there is a little bit of criticism yet in her. It is a habit. How long the habit of criticism takes to die. It is an antichristian habit. And so she says to the Lord, "If thou hadst been here, my brother had not died". Why did she not say, 'Lord, I am glad You are here'. Well, the Lord took the blame. It is John's account of things. I want everybody here who may be under question through criticism, or the like, to learn how the matter worked out. Martha said to Jesus, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died. But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee". What does all that mean? That means that the Lord Jesus is just the same in her mind -- a man who would pray to God and God would answer him. It is a poor thing if that is your estimate of Christ. You are in a dangerous way. But the Lord is ready to help her when He answers this sceptical remark of hers. "Lord", she says, "... I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee". You think that is very pious, but it is not pious. It is infidelity. Our hearts are full of infidelity. 'You can just pray to God and God will do it'. The Lord can
{459}
do it Himself. He is God. "If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins". If you do not believe in His deity, you will die in your sins. She did not believe in His deity so far. She said, 'You are a pious man'. Well, the Lord says to her, "Thy brother shall rise again". That is what was dearest to her heart, that her brother should rise again. But undoubtedly what was to become dearest to her heart was that the Person who raised her brother was the Son of God, that He is God Himself. This knowledge eclipses all. Let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he believes that I am He, that he believes and knows Me. Is there anyone here that does not hold dearest in his soul the deity of Christ. If so, he will die in his sins. John's whole story here is to bring out that He is more than a pious man. He is God Himself. So the Lord says to her, "Thy brother shall rise again". That would touch our hearts. She needed to know that He was before her, and every one of us here needs to know that Jesus is our God. He is "declared to be the Son of God with power", @Romans 1: 4. Let us not be ignorant about this, without the great thought of the Lord Jesus in our souls, for our enjoyment and salvation and deliverance, for our everlasting pleasure in heaven. So He says to Martha, "Thy brother shall rise again", and Martha says to Him, "I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day". She is just an orthodox person. The Lord is dealing with her as to her faith in Christ. "If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins", is what He says. Get into this truth, the truth of the Son of God. Martha says, "I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day". It is a mere orthodox truth. The truth is that christians will rise before the last day. The dead in Christ shall rise first, and those that are here shall be changed, but the rest of the dead shall remain for a thousand years after that, and that will be the last day. If you want to be assured now in your soul of God and Christ, get the truth of the Son of God. Martha did not
{460}
have it yet, but she is going to get it. So the Lord says to her, "I am the resurrection and the life". This is light to her soul. "I am the resurrection, and the life". "I am the resurrection", not I will raise people, but "I am the resurrection". He is the resurrection Himself. There is no resurrection without Him, nothing but hell. This is important, infinitely important if we are to be in salvation. So He says to her, "He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live". This is you, Martha. You are not up to this yet, but you are coming to it. So the Lord says, "Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die". You say, 'I don't quite understand that'. I often said that myself, but I think I understand it now. The Lord is not always concerned to teach us just by the rule of 1, 2, 3 or a, b, c. Martha is now taking in light. The Lord knew it. She was a good case in spite of her scepticism. She is no Judas, she is no Simon. She is a good case. So the Lord says to her. "Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die". First he says, "He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live", and then, "Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die". That is the first word she gets. The Lord is clinching the truth in her soul. "He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live". That goes back to Abraham, to David. They lived and believed. "Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness". "Though he were dead, yet shall he live". That is the first truth. He got faith before he died. "Though he were dead, yet shall he live". Get into that class, the class of people that, although they die, they shall live. Most of us that are here, if we die, we shall yet live. Then the next statement which the Lord makes is, "Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die". That is another class. That is a class of people that will never die. You say, 'I don't know about that'. I am trying to get you to know about it and believe it. If the Lord Jesus were to come tonight, most of the people
{461}
in this hall would never die. Living and believing in Him, we never die. If He came tonight, we would never die. What a glorious thought that is. If the Lord Jesus came now, I would not die. Preaching in here to you, I would never die. It is a matter of history. It is a matter of time. But myriads will be in that class. When the Lord Jesus descends from heaven with a shout, the dead in Christ shall rise first. They will come out of their graves first, before we are changed, and then we which are alive and remain will be changed. That is part of the gospel, that there are people that will never die. There are many of the people here tonight that will never die. If the Lord came now, none of us christians would die. That is a glorious thought. I hope you will always keep it in your hearts. But if you do die, the first statement covers you. You shall be raised because you have believed.
Well now, the Lord simply clinches this matter of a soul here. He says to Martha in verse 26, "Believest thou this?" What I have been reading -- do we believe it? That is the challenge. The gospel always comes round to that -- the question of faith. On the principle of faith to faith, do we believe? Well, she says to the Lord, "Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world", and when she said that she went her way. She is a changed woman. It is a finished matter. There are discrepancies later, but it is a finished matter with her. "Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ" is her confession. It is one of the great confessions of faith in the Scriptures. Face this matter. I would urge each one here to come to the decision that she came to and make a confession clearly and definitely. "I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world".
