{1}
IT IS WELL WITH THE CHILD
(*Word at the Burial of a Child*)
@2 Samuel 12:16 - 23
The brethren, I am sure, will perceive the applicability of this passage to our present circumstances; indeed, nothing is more characteristic of Scripture than its way of taking account of human circumstances, especially circumstances causing grief among God's people. The Scriptures themselves afford comfort, for the "comfort of the scriptures" (@Romans 15:4) is spoken of, and there is comfort at the present time in the passage I read; and help, too, as one hopes, particularly for those most affected. They are in our minds, knowing that they need comfort. The Scriptures will not fail in this respect, nor will the brethren fail. There will be comfort from the Scriptures and from the brethren. Indeed, the Spirit is here for comfort and to help us in our efforts to serve each other at such a time. We have the Lord above touched with the feelings of our infirmities, and the Spirit here who makes intercession with groanings that cannot be uttered. These are operative in the saints, and so this passage enters into the moment, and, in order that it should be qualified, other passages may be introduced.
Our brother has mentioned in prayer one that is appropriate at the moment: a mother bereaved by the death of an only child. It is a touching scripture involving one specially affected; it was the Shunammite mentioned in @2 Kings 4. She had the experience of being bereft of her only child, a son divinely given according to promise; and she knew what to do. That is what is in mind in reading this scripture, that we all might know how to take this solemn situation, and particularly those immediately
{2}
affected; that they should know how to take the sorrow. We are to be taught in these circumstances so as to know how to think and what to do. The Shunammite would go to the man of God. She knew where to go -- a most important matter. Our beloved brother and sister, the parents of this dear child who is now lying here dead, undoubtedly have already learned where to go, and have gone there; and as having gone, they will know how to be here at this moment. The Shunammite knew. She knew that all nature was to be barred, and so placed the child on Elisha's bed. She went to the man of God, and he understood there was deep concern in her heart. We can indeed be thankful for a man of God. Elisha is also a type of Christ, and *He* knows. He knows what is going on in the hearts of the bereaved. Elisha discerned that the Shunammite was deeply moved -- perhaps too deeply affected to make visible expression of it, for there is sorrow that is incapable of visible expression. We know how it applies to the Lord. He sorrowed alone on the cross, and thus He knows what sorrow is. He knows what bereavement is, too, and enters into it with the bereaved ones. So the prophet directs his servant to ask her, "Is it well with thee? is it well with thy husband? is it well with the child? And she said, It is well" (@2 Kings 4:26). That is an answer that has to be studied. The Holy Spirit helps us to do this. The woman kept her thoughts on the man of God. So there is need for the bereaved ones here to keep their thoughts where they should be -- on our High Priest above. The Shunammite's thoughts were on Elisha. She had gone a long way for him and would have him go back with her. If the child was to be raised, he must be where he is.
In the passage read, it is a solemn fact that the child is *not* raised. The word 'dead' is mentioned about eight times, and not without purpose. In
{3}
other similar circumstances, we have the resurrection of the person involved. The child of the Shunammite was to be raised *immediately*. That was in the purpose of God. The daughter of Jairus was to be raised. The Lord went all the way to raise her at the urgent request of her father. The young man at the gate of Nain was raised. These instances are recorded, all culminating in the desired end; but not in David's case. So it is solemn, and I read it because it affords instruction, particularly for those directly affected. They need instruction, and they need comfort, and they need to know what to do, and maybe they need to change their attitude. Possibly many of us have not had this idea of change of attitude in such circumstances.
It is a question for us as to what really commands us at such a time -- how far nature has sway or how far the Spirit of God has sway, and so David, we are told, besought God for the child, Will he live? But he not only besought God for the child; he fasted and went in and lay all night upon the earth. "And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from the earth; but he would not, and he ate no bread with them" -- a suitable attitude in a most solemn time. He is a feeling man, and he had good reason to feel, and he felt rightly; his attitude was perfect. His lying on the earth was perfect while the child lived. "And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I thought, Who knows? perhaps Jehovah will be gracious to me, that the child may live". He reasoned rightly, as a man of God would. He knew what to do, and he knew how to feel, and God honoured him. God took account of him. Heaven was looking on, as now, for these occasions are not simply to exercise men; they are occasions for heaven.
Heaven is looking on the bereaved -- the *living*. We are all of interest to heaven, but especially the
{4}
bereaved -- how they have been, how they are now, and how they are going to be in regard to all this. David is perfect up to this point in his attitude, and he explains his attitude. He says, "While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I thought, Who knows? perhaps Jehovah will be gracious to me" -- not to the child, but to *me*. At least, that was the great thought, that the child should live. He knew what it involved to be deprived of the child, but he knew God. That is the point -- how far our knowledge of God will stand by us at such a time, for we are dealing with *Him*. So David says, "Who knows? perhaps Jehovah will be gracious to me, that the child may live". But later he says, "Now he is dead".
Now that is the solemn fact that always comes up in these cases, as it has come up even at this very moment. Our dear ones are taken away, and not only have they fallen asleep in Jesus, but we have as at this moment to say, She is dead; the child is dead. It is a solemn fact for the parents; it was a more solemn fact for David. The word 'dead' is used, as I said, many times in the passage. Is not the Spirit of God stressing it through this scripture -- the reality of death? But then there is no penalty. "Their angels in the heavens continually behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens" (@Matthew 18:10). The Lord Jesus Himself furnishes us with this fact; so, as understanding it, we can leave her. It is well for the child, indeed. We can all say that without any question. It runs through the Scriptures. No doubt many of us can say it feelingly as to the loved ones of each of us who have fallen asleep, that it is well with them. Let us rest in it, therefore. So David says here, "But now he is dead". We have come to this solemn fact. There is going to be no resurrection now, no immediate relief in that sense. There was in relation to the daughter of Jairus; there was in relation to Lazarus -- there was peculiar
{5}
relief for his sisters; there was for the mother of the young man of Nain; there was in relation to the Shunammite's son. The prophet sends for the mother of the child and delivered to her her son, and she went away -- profoundly affected. But there is no such possibility now. Intelligence teaches us that resurrection must be awaited. There are to be more needed results, results in the parents and the grandparents, in all of us -- more important immediately than the actual resurrection of the dear child. Her time is coming.
The resurrection is a great future event, a certain future event. That is the hope of our hearts; that there is to be a resurrection of the dead. The Lord speaks of it: "But that the dead rise, even Moses shewed in the section of the bush, when he called the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob; but he is not God of the dead but of the living; for all live for him" (@Luke 20:37,38). They are with God; they are in His keeping. As to their bodies, they are in Machpelah, so to speak. It is all a question of time as to that. The event is certain; and so David says here, "But now he is dead, why should I fast? Can I bring him back again?" Beautiful intelligence and beautiful resignation! It is a lesson for us all. We are to know how to feel and act at such a time, bringing God into it. So he goes on to say, "I shall go to him, but he will not return to me"; that is to say, the Spirit of God is telling us in this passage to face realities, the realities that are visible to us. David shows by his attitude that he was a victorious man as seen in this passage. It is said in verse 20, "Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his clothing, and entered into the house of Jehovah and worshipped". Is this not the desired result? Is this not the state we are to be in? Is it well with the child? Better for her than ever it could be here.
{6}
This is a terrible world in which to bring up children. Even for this reason we can say, It is well with the child. There may be circumstances, of course, that we have to leave with those who have to go through them, but it is well with the child. There is no thought of change at all with David; it is a fixed matter. Let us accept this, that what God does is done with accuracy, with purpose, and above all, with love behind it. It is done; it is a finished incident governed by divine love. We are all on the way, as the child was. She has gone to the end; not now to the resurrection. She is awaiting it as we are. However long it will be for her, it will be for us.
But David is not now weeping and mourning. Why should he, if things are well as according to the will of God? For it is a fixed matter with God that the child is not to return, and faith sees that it is a fixed matter -- "I shall go to him, but he will not return to me". That is the suitable attitude of mind. We must accept the fixedness of it, which is God's will; and so it is said, "he changed his apparel"; that is, he is not a mourner. Not that I am saying a word about the grief in the hearts of the parents -- not at all. But why should we deny God His rights? How do we wish to appear before God? If we put on mourning, it is not for God's eye. God is not looking for that. David, it is said, "changed his apparel". It had been perhaps mourning, but not now. It is a question of God now. These incidents occasion great history. They are great matters in the history of the persons immediately involved; great matters for all of us. They are education spiritually. We should all learn by them. "He changed his apparel". We are not going to make any show before men unnecessarily. There may be certain seemliness in mourning, but we have to think of God and what kind of garments He looks for, and what kind of garments are suitable for persons who accept His
{7}
will. David says, He will not come back to me, but I shall go to him. So he has to tread his way, and he resolves to do it, with God, with other apparel. He changed his apparel, "and entered into the house of Jehovah and worshipped". He is starting well after this great sorrow, this historical matter that has come down the ages.
It is not so much to tell us about the child and the antecedents, but the remarkableness in David, a great saint, in facing such a matter, and knowing what attitude to take up, and how to behave afterwards. He is going to be a worshipper of God. With the child, it is well. David is not going further into this matter. He says, I shall go to him; he is not coming back to me. He had many a sorrow in his house afterwards -- terrible ones followed -- but this was peculiarly poignant. In the meanwhile, David is not to be a mourner or useless in the service of God, but rather a worshipper, a priest as well as king. I believe his whole outlook was changed. The sorrow had been of immense importance in his history. He became a worshipper perhaps as he had never been before. He has an insight into the future, into the realm, too, of the living.
We have access to that through the precious death of the Lord. He said to one, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise". What a wonderful thing! Paul had a look into it. He does not tell us what he *saw*, but what he *heard*, which is more important. This is a hearing time, what God is saying; and as we take these things to heart our spiritual depth and outlook will be greatly enhanced.
{8}
ADVANTAGES OF COMING TOGETHER
@Exodus 20:24; @Isaiah 40:28 - 31; @Isaiah 56:1 - 8
J.T. The advantages of coming together are in mind. Many other scriptures might be mentioned, but these will suffice to begin with as suggesting certain advantages in the saints coming together. There are promises involved. The first scripture read promises certain positive blessing. "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee". The next scripture speaks of mounting up, and would allude to the prayer meeting; and @Isaiah 56, too, affords a rich promise to those who attend the prayers for the saints in the house of prayer. You feel it needful to call attention to the gain of such occasions. Others might be attended, as has been remarked in the New Testament -- all the assembly gatherings, but these three have special promises. The first, where Jehovah makes His name to be remembered: "I will come unto thee, and bless thee". This scripture especially enters into the *assembly service*, in which we have the Lord's supper. There is a coming to us and blessing us; that is what the believer looks for. We are entitled to look for it. There is a promise attached to it, and God is always ready to fulfil his promises.
C.A.M. It speaks of burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. Do you consider a reading like this as a peace-offering?
J.T. I think these meetings take on that character. We are sons of peace professedly, and what we have and share together, God is pleased to join in and partake of. Divine Persons partake of what we have, and the Lord says, "Children, have ye anything to eat?" (@John 21:5). This chapter is one of divine
{9}
rights. It is pre-eminently a chapter of divine rights, God's rights in His people and what we have; not a father like Job who was evidently content to be absent from the feasts of his children. God loves to be with us and share with us in what we have, so that we take Him into account in our assemblages.
R.W.S. This promise comes early in the book, does it not, in a section that is not fully developed? Why is that? I thought of Sinai, and we have not yet reached the tabernacle system. God is better known later on in the book, and yet he says, under these circumstances, "I will come to thee, and bless thee".
J.T. He made certain overtures carrying premiums in chapter 19:2 - 6: "And they ... encamped in the wilderness; and Israel encamped there before the mountain. And Moses went up to God, and Jehovah called to him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel: Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself. And now, if ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my own possession out of all the peoples -- for all the earth is mine -- and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation". Indeed, this is the overture that God made, and the remaining part of chapter 19 is what the apostle alludes to in Hebrews as causing trembling and fear, as if God would, before He comes to chapter 20, give people to understand that He was God, and they were the people, and that He was to be feared. The chapter is all preliminary in view of what is in mind, the setting up of the tabernacle, in which everything would be requisite for their drawing near in type, but this proposal comes in in chapter 20, showing that God is severe and reminds us that He is God and we are His people, and we have to learn to
{10}
be *reverent* and to be subject, and yet He has thoughts and affections for us, but He wants us to be with Him in a subdued and appreciative way; so that at the end of chapter 19 it is to impress them with His greatness, what the flesh is in them, that it is to be held in check, so that it is said "Go down, testify to the people that they break not through to Jehovah to gaze, and many of them perish" (verse 21). That is the rude natural gaze that often comes into meetings, and it is irreverent. We have to learn to sit reverently when we are in the presence of God. And so it goes on, "And the priests also, who come near to Jehovah, shall hallow themselves, lest Jehovah break forth on them" (verse 22). Even the priests are in danger of severity in not being in a right state.
Well, that is what characterises the end of chapter 19 after God comes out. It says in verse 16, "And it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings and a heavy cloud on the mountain, and the sound of the trumpet exceeding loud; and the whole people that was in the camp trembled. And Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the foot of the mountain. And the whole of mount Sinai smoked, because Jehovah descended on it in fire; and its smoke ascended as the smoke of a furnace; and the whole mountain shook greatly. And the sound of the trumpet increased and became exceeding loud" (verses 16 - 19). All this is to impress us now that we are having to do with God. "God is greatly to be feared in the council of the saints" (@Psalm 89:7). It is not that His affections are not ever ready to show themselves, but He would impress us with the need of reverence, especially young people, that they are in the presence of God, not in fleshly feelings but reverential feelings. Chapter 20 follows. In chapter 19 it formally states His rights in ten words, making His demands on us. Then it is said
{11}
in verse 18: "And all the people saw the thunderings, and the flames, and the sound of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking; and when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood afar off, and said to Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die. And Moses said to the people, Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not. And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near to the obscurity where God was" (verses 18 - 21). All this is most salutary, because the flesh in Israel is the same as it is in us; and the flesh in us is the same as in them, and in our assemblies God is telling us that we need to be reverential. We are not in an ordinary meeting; we are to be subdued, and then He makes this promise, Wherever he causes His name to be remembered "I will come unto thee". It is not in the distance, or in the terrors of Sinai. He will come to us where His Name is remembered; that is, where He is held in reverential regard. He comes to us. He does not come to any company of Christians. He comes to persons who are in a certain state; those who remember Him and have affection for Him.
F.N.W. Is there a lesson in this matter of reverence in the opening part of the book where Moses sees the flame coming out of the bramble bush; perhaps a despised position in the locality, yet God would say the surroundings are holy ground?
J.T. That is the leading thought in the book. It really looks on to the wilderness position and the tabernacle in it; God is there in comparative outward littleness. He is there not to recognise the flesh, but deals with it unsparingly. Nevertheless God's discipline, no matter how severe it may be, does not destroy us. The bush was not consumed; the saints are not consumed. He has a way with us and keeps us alive in spite of the things He has to deal with,
{12}
but He will deal with flesh. "God is greatly to be feared in the council of the saints, and terrible for all that are round about him" (@Psalm 89:7).
A.A.T. Why does the apostle in @Hebrews 12 speak of the things that we have come to? That we have not come to mount Sinai.
J.T. That is the difference of the dispensation, but these chapters whilst you would view the contrast, they have to be used typically, too. God is here; they are not merely in contrast to Christianity. There are types of Christianity in this very section, and these types carry with them the thought of fear, that God requires to be feared and held in reverence. In that same chapter we are told He is a consuming fire, not simply was, but is, in Christianity. That is very solemn.
F.S.C. That comes in in Deuteronomy. It says there also our God is a consuming fire.
J.T. Just so; the flesh is flesh. He is just as severe on the flesh in us as He was on them. So that @1 Corinthians 11:30 brings that out: "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep".
C.A.M. It is a remarkable thing that Naaman, after the change of man took place, had some sense of the holiness of God. He built an altar of earth immediately, did he not?
J.T. Yes; he brought the earth with him; as if the earth were sanctified by Elisha, showing that the saints¬ feet and persons affect the earth. God respects where they are.
A.R. What does it represent typically, this altar of earth?
J.T. It alludes to Christ's becoming man. There are two altars here. The first is the altar of earth, and the other is the altar of stone. The altar of earth is to be provided. It says in verse 25, "If thou make me an altar of stone", that is, if you are
{13}
able to do that. The first altar gives us a status with God, even if we have not a stone altar. We can go on religiously. That is, there is not very much; we apprehend the humanity of Christ and that we are of His order. That gives us a status with God, but the altar of stone is relatively greater. It is a question of what He is in resurrection, in an abiding condition. What is to be observed in this section is the need of the saints fearing God in the assembly, coming together as we are now.
A.B.P. The frequent reference to the Lord's pathway in taking part in the service of praise on Lord's day would be like the altar of earth.
J.T. Yes; it would be the beginning of our meeting. We come together; that is the very lowest ground, so to say; it is divine ground but relatively lower than the altar of stone. The first is what Christ is as man, and the second is what He is divinely in resurrection.
J.A.P. When you speak of the fear of God, what does that mean? In what sense do we fear God?
J.T. If you are giggling and laughing and talking with one another in the presence of God it is not fearing God. Sometimes young people do that; they forget they are in the presence of God. That is what chapter 19 means. In the beginning of that chapter He shows what beautiful thoughts He has about us. I will make you a nation of priests. A nation of priests will not do anything wrong in the assembly. They will be reverent. That was His thought for them. But in order to come to that, they have to learn how severe God is on the flesh, as we are together in assembly. Sin inside is far more serious than sin outside.
R.W.S. Because they already said in chapter 19:8, "All that Jehovah has spoken will we do". Is not God right in holding us to this committal?
J.T. Just so. It is on the principle of covenant.
{14}
He is teaching us how to become covenanters. He is a covenant God and He is looking for a covenant people; people who know how to keep a covenant and know how to behave themselves in the covenant. "Behold, ... I will consummate a new covenant".
G.V.D. We were considering last Lord's day in Westfield @John 14. I was wondering whether the thought there of keeping the Lord's commandments, and then His coming to us, and the Father, would fit in with this chapter, which begins with the rights of God and God coming to us.
J.T. It does indeed. The passage begins with, "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (verse 15). That is the first command He speaks of in that section. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, *he* it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and *I* will love him" (verse 21). All is on that line, so at the beginning of this chapter, God is intimating His thoughts, and they accept what He proposes. He says, I am entering into a covenant with you. Now it is a question of whether your behaviour is equal to Mine, because I am holy, and I am looking to you to be holy. The covenant extends that way.
F.S.C. Was Moses taught at the burning bush, when the voice says, "Loose thy sandals from off thy feet" (@Exodus 3:5)?
J.T. That is the idea exactly. We have to learn to be reverential in the presence of God. When he saw that he turned aside to look at it, He called to him, Moses, Moses, as much as to say, You are an interesting person to me; you have a sense of reverence in your soul, and from then on it is one thing after another in the building up of what is of God in Moses¬ soul.
J.S. Did he get light in his soul when he saw it was not consumed?
J.T. Yes; he says, I will turn aside to see why
{15}
it is not consumed. This whole book is telling us that we have to learn to be reverent.
A.A.T. I suppose that is why when we come into the meeting-room, we take our hats off.
J.T. Quite so, and the sisters keep them on. That is required. It would be a shame for them to take them off.
Rem. Going back to the two altars, we see there is a difference in them; the altar of earth is connected with an offering and a sacrifice, but the altar of stone is different, is it not? "And if thou make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone; for if thou lift up thy sharp tool upon it, thou hast profaned it" (@Exodus 20:25). All human activity is left out.
J.T. That is right. We are on higher ground. Stone is permanency. It alludes to the permanency of Christ now. Of course, He is always Man, but this stone is permanency.
W.W.M. Do you think the apostle had in mind what you are speaking of now, when he says, "Ye are temple of God"? That represents us as together. It would bring about a great sense of reverence.
J.T. Quite so, "... and the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy" (@1 Corinthians 3:16,17). That is, anything that is contrary to the temple brought in. We must not forget it is in Christianity. That is not at mount Sinai, that is in Christianity, and God can destroy even now.
A.R. God says to Moses in chapter 19:10,11, "Go to the people, and hallow them today and tomorrow, and let them wash their clothes; and let them be ready for the third day; for on the third day Jehovah will come down before the eyes of all the people on mount Sinai". It would be the idea of a meeting, would it not?
J.T. Yes; that is the idea. Moses brought the
{16}
people out to meet God. That is just what it says. They were brought out to meet God, but our Moses brings us out to meet God on the first day of the week. The Lord has His supper. That is His matter, but it all has in mind our meeting God, and this chapter from that point on is to impress us with Him, so that even the priests are mentioned before we get the priestly order. We do not get the priestly order until we come to chapter 28, but the priests are mentioned here. They were even warned for even they may not be right, so it says in chapter 19:22, "And the priests also, who come near to Jehovah, shall hallow themselves, lest Jehovah break forth on them"; that is, we have the priestly place, but if we do not behave ourselves, then we may look for discipline. "On this account, many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep" (@1 Corinthians 11:30). The behaviour among us brings that about.
A.B.P. Would you explain the steps and the possibility of exposing the nakedness, what that may signify in priestly service?
J.T. This is a higher order, I think, of the service. It is progressive order. The altar of earth is on lower ground relatively. He says, "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me, and shalt sacrifice on it thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen". It does not say what altar or what earth is to be used. It is just earth, pretty much what Adam was. That is what he was. That is what his name means, so that it is humanity that is in mind, and therefore there are not the same requirements, save the offerings are to be there. And moreover, in verse 24 there is no 'if'. It is imperative. If we are to be there before God at all, we must have an altar. But in verse 25 it says, "And if thou make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone; for if thou lift up thy
{17}
sharp tool upon it, thou hast profaned it". That would mean, I think, that human innovation is excluded, and we know how the worship of God throughout Christendom is largely human innovation, from the cathedrals up or down, it is all that, almost all that. That is what is in mind. God does not accept that, that is rejected. And if there are steps to it, that would mean you want to elevate yourself in that; so that they have a regular hierarchy and all that goes with the hierarchy. That is the gross evil that is alluded to here that is not acceptable to God. It is to be the simplicity of the Christ, as Paul says, in our assembling ourselves together. It is the Son of God we apprehend, so that before coming down from the mountain, it is said, Jesus alone with themselves. It is just that and no more.
A.B.P. In a sense does it link on with the original sin of Adam? One that lifted himself up in pride caused man to lift himself up, that they would be as gods knowing good and evil and exposed his nakedness in that sense.
J.T. Just so; it is the natural mind brought into it.
A.C. Is that why David says in @Psalm 34, "Taste and see that Jehovah is good: blessed is the man that trusteth in him! Fear Jehovah, ye his saints"; and then in verse 11, "Come, ye sons, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of Jehovah"? Is that the reverential side?
J.T. Quite so; that is a great lesson to remember; the innovations; the lifting up of a tool. "Thou shalt not build it of hewn stone; for if thou lift up thy sharp tool upon it, thou hast profaned it". I would say it is Christ and the saints as we are according to God; lifting up the tool is just human skill or man's device.
A.P.T. Would holiness be a further thought in regard to reverence?
{18}
J.T. It is quite evident you cannot get holiness without reverence. Reverence, you might say, is the first principle, in our coming together, as we are now or at any time. It is what is becoming publicly. It is quite obvious there can be no holiness without it. It leads on to holiness, I would think. You do not want to be different from God. This is covenanting here; the stress is on the covenant. We are dealing with a covenant God and He looks for a covenant people. We are not out of accord with Him.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that expression you were referring to, the simplicity as to Christ; that alludes to the beginning and Satan coming in, does it not? It is remarkable how it really goes back to the beginning, whether you think of the earth or whether you think of the spiritual matter.
J.T. "As the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ" (@2 Corinthians 11:3). Another thing that comes in in that section is measure. God is a God of measure, and we are to be measurers, too. Well, I thought it was just as well to call attention to these great facts in a personal way as to these meetings. They are increasing in number; special meetings, but as to all our meetings, of course. Then in connection with this matter of idolatry: "Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens. Ye shall not make beside me gods of silver, and ye shall not make to you gods of gold" (verses 22,23). All this is anticipating the evils of Christendom, and the evils of Judaism, too. It is to shut out idolatry.
J.S. It crept in when the disciples said, "Teacher, see what stones" (@Mark 13:1) in connection with the temple.
J.T. They called His attention to the greatness of the stones. Of course, those stones were in their places, but that was divinely ordered under David and Solomon. These gods of silver and gods of gold -- they are two precious metals. The one is more
{19}
precious than the other, and the use of them might make idolatry more acceptable; they are the material used for making idols. So Isaiah by the Spirit ironically says, "He chooseth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth a pine, and the rain maketh it grow. And it shall be for a man to burn, and he taketh thereof, and warmeth himself; he kindleth it also, and baketh bread; he maketh also a god, and worshippeth it" (@Isaiah 44:14,15). Well, that is absurd. It is simply outrageously irreverent and wicked, because he ought to see it; his own common senses ought to show him the folly of it. But gold -- well, that might be something that would represent God in a more exalted way than a common tree -- or silver. But that is what God is alluding to here; what Christianity has adopted in the way of finery. It is one of the great features of Rome, refinement in building, etc. used for the worship of God.
J.S. That crept in in regard of the temple; the Lord pronounced judgment upon it.
J.T. Still, I do not think the point was to condemn the material then, because He says it is My Father's house. He accepted that. It is what man devises that is in mind here.
C.A.M. Peter, in speaking of the service of praise and what God gets, shows how delivered he was from that. "Knowing that ye have been redeemed, not by corruptible things, as silver or gold" (@1 Peter 1:18). If they had followed Peter they would be delivered from all that.
J.T. Yes; it is how the enemy deceives the human mind, as if these metals being so precious might make idolatry somewhat more acceptable.
R.W.S. Is that the attempt of the enemy now, to make gold hinder the service of God today; over-time work and Sunday work and things of that nature? Is that the same principle?
{20}
J.T. Well, it certainly borders on idolatry, because it is said, "covetousness which is idolatry" (@Colossians 3:5). Where people are sacrificing their privileges for the sake of double wages and the like, it is very much like idolatry. Of course there are exceptions that cannot be avoided, but where money is simply the question, it is not too much to say it is just idolatry.
A.B.P. Would Rachel's failing to get to the end of the journey have any bearing on her love for the household idols?
J.T. That may be; quite so.
F.S.C. God used precaution at mount Sinai; He calls it mount Horeb in @Deuteronomy 4:15,16. It says, "And take great heed to your souls (for ye saw no form on the day that Jehovah spoke to you in Horeb from the midst of the fire), lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a graven image".
J.T. Yes; he stresses that; they saw no form. So the attractive side here is, "Where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee", showing there would be no distance. Chapter 19 shows great distance; the people were not to go up; they were not to go beyond the barriers, but this passage contemplates nearness.
Ques. Do we get a circumscribed area here now, "All places where I shall make my name to be remembered"? Is that circumscribed?
J.T. I think not; I think it involves nearness, that is, where God makes His name to be remembered. It is no effort of yours. It is God's work in your soul. There is nothing to deter God at all under these circumstances, where he makes His name to be remembered. It is really akin to the Lord's supper, a divine memorial, so the Lord can come in amongst us without any hesitation.
Rem. You would allude, I suppose, to the assembly, would you?
J.T. Yes; I take this to be an allusion to the
{21}
Lord's supper, where His name is remembered. So He comes. It is so different from the distance in chapter 19, showing that we are progressing here. Well, in going through this book, we see in chapter 24 how the people are invited up to where God is, eating and drinking in His presence. There is no fear there at all because what He has in His mind is that we should be near to Him, a people near to Him.
A.R. You have been referring lately to the idea of promises connected with our meetings. Apparently there is a promise connected with this first meeting.
J.T. That is what I thought, the idea of the promises attaching to the assembly when we come together in assembly, the things that are promised to us, and God loves to fulfil His promises, and this is one; not only that He comes, but He blesses us under these circumstances.
J.S. Does chapter 19 show that He was the Mediator?
J.T. The need of the Mediator runs right through this book. The law is ordained through angels in the hand of a mediator. This chapter is the chapter of it.
A.R. At the end of Luke, His hands are lifted up in blessing. The idea here is He is coming down with His hands outstretched. Is that the idea?
J.T. Quite so. When the tabernacle is built, He came down and came into it. He calls out for His people to be near to Him. Leviticus is the answer to that.
A.A.T. Is the wording in @Exodus 20, "I will come unto thee and bless thee", to the individual, or do you apply that to the company?
J.T. The bearing of it is collective. This is all collective instruction, because it all begins with their being there. Look at the beginning of chapter 19. It is said, "In the third month after the departure of the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai:
{22}
they departed from Rephidim, and came into the wilderness of Sinai, and encamped in the wilderness; and Israel encamped there before the mountain". That is the whole company, and then Moses went up to God, and God spoke to him and told him what to tell them, and he came down to the people, and they said, "All that Jehovah has spoken will we do!" So it is a collective position. That is plain enough.
A.A.T. I used to read it as if it was an individual blessing, but I can see how great a thing it is, especially in regard to the Supper.
J.T. It is a collective blessing. When we come to the book of drawing near, that is, Leviticus, everything is to be done according to order. You have a priesthood and order, every requisite for offering so that you bring a sheep to be slain, and the priests use it and present it to God, and you are accepted, but it is all a collective idea. Each individual retains his individuality, but he is moving, and thinking, and feeling in relation to all Israel. Numbers is to bring out that we are apportioned in relation to one another, each tribe by itself and then every three tribes by themselves, and then the whole twelve tribes by themselves.
A.A.T. In the application of that to the New Testament and the Supper, is it not so that, in connection with the service of God, it is not so much what we get in the way of blessing but what we are able to give Him?
J.T. Both things are true. The promise is to us here, "I will come unto thee, and bless thee". That is an encouragement for us, but then on the other hand, we have these offerings, you see, both before and after verse 24, the altar of earth and the offerings; and then the stone altar also, so that God gets His portion. But what He is saying here is that He will bless you. It is a promise, and it is a great thing to have in mind, and be in a condition for it.
{23}
C.A.M. Is it safe to say that we could not be in the presence of God without some change coming over us? We would not be truly there and be the same afterwards.
J.T. Quite so; God is there to influence us and impress us. "I will come unto thee, and bless thee". That is an encouragement for us. We should count on that. He loves us to remind Him of the promises that He makes.
R.W.S. Is there a variety of blessing connected with each of the meetings on the assembly calendar? Is the blessing of the memorial different from the blessing of the prayer meeting?
J.T. I think it would be well to look at the prayer meeting. It is, you might say, a promise in the end of @Isaiah 40. It is a chapter that speaks of God in His greatness, in His creation, and it says, "Dost thou not know, hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not nor tireth? There is no searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the faint; and to him that hath no might, he increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint and shall tire". It is not natural, relying on natural strength "and the young men shall stumble and fall; but they that wait upon Jehovah shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not tire; they shall walk, and not faint" (verses 28 - 31). That is a fine promise. You go out of the prayer meetings stronger than when you came in. If you go to a dance or a football game, or the like, you will be tired out at the end; but not at the prayer meetings; it is the very reverse. You renew your strength and mount up. Is that not what you find?
R.W.S. It is often a test after the Lord's day and weekend meetings, it is very testing as to the prayer
{24}
meeting, because of being so tired. This scripture would cover that.
J.T. Yes; it is wash-day and other things on Monday interfere and people think nothing of staying at home. With many there is no idea of delinquence in staying at home on Monday. They think the Lord's supper is the day of the feast, and they stop there, but this one is quite as important, and especially in chapter 56 where we have a formal statement of the house of prayer; God's house of prayer, and what God is telling us now is that we will be less tired when we come home from the prayer meeting than when we went.
J.S. Is that what Christ can do?
J.T. Quite so; it is the presence of God, you know. The description is very beautiful. "They that wait upon Jehovah shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not tire; they shall walk, and not faint". That is a divine promise to every brother and sister, in view of the meeting for prayer.
T.M. In @Acts 16 we have the prayer meeting in Lydia's house, a praise meeting in the jail and a reading meeting in the jailor's house.
J.T. Why do you say the prayer meeting was in Lydia's house? They did not have it there. The prayer meeting was in the prison. As they prayed they praised. And then the Bible reading was in the jailor's house. The preaching was in the jail, too.
A.B.P. Maybe our brother has in mind the prayer at the river bank.
J.T. But he did not say that. Lydia used to go there to that prayer meeting. That is another thing.
Ques. How would you apply the thought there: "they that wait upon Jehovah shall renew their strength"? How do you apply the waiting upon Jehovah?
J.T. That is the attitude we are in in our meetings
{25}
for prayer. You are just elevated to a priestly position and the fragrance of Christ, our great Priest above. We are linked up with heaven; we are in the presence of the whole divine system; heaven here on the earth.
A.A.T. I think many could say 'amen' to these remarks you are making and they are good, but what about the men who are at the camps and cannot come to the prayer meeting? Surely there is a promise for them.
J.T. There is indeed. God has promised to be a little sanctuary to them. "Yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary" (@Ezekiel 11:16). That is a special matter where they are hindered. Take John the apostle at Patmos. He was in prison, and the Lord came to him.
A.A.T. I heard a very interesting case this last week of a young man who was very anxious to pray, and a radio was playing and the noise in the barracks was such that it was very difficult for him to pray. He sought a place and went off to the linen room and was quiet there. It turned out very happily in his case in the end because he was questioned as to why he was in there.
J.T. That is all very interesting. We have a young brother with us from one of the camps. How do you get on? Where do you pray?
R.H.S. I pray in my tent.
J.T. Do the men see you pray?
R.H.S. They see me every night.
J.T. It is really better if you can do it in spite of the radio; carry on with God. We hear a good deal of that and it is very encouraging. The Lord supports the young men carrying on their service of prayer to God in public.
R.W.S. Perhaps if we came to the prayer meetings more regularly the young men would come home from the camps sooner.
J.T. That is the idea. I think they are the pivot
{26}
of the whole position. How long is it going to be for them? God is listening to us about our young brethren.
A.P.T. Are they not doing that in @Acts 12? They are praying and Peter came. Was not God in that, to bring him back?
J.T. Just so. That is when Peter was in prison and the doors were opened for him.
D.P. Why are the youth and young men not sustained here?
J.T. They just represent nature. "Even the youths shall faint and shall tire, and the young men shall stumble and fall". They are not priests at all; they are just representative of human strength. At a football game or the like they would get tired; working or walking they would get tired. The point here is that a praying people do not get tired; they get rested and run afterwards. "They shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not tire; they shall walk, and not faint". That is after the meeting is over, you might say. At least that goes through. The others are just natural persons. So it says, "And the Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit" (@Isaiah 31:3).
F.S.C. Is it inferred that we become like God? The everlasting God does not faint or tire.
J.T. That is just the point here; that is what it says. "Dost thou not know, hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not nor tireth?" And again we have, "Behold, he that keepeth Israel will neither slumber nor sleep" (@Psalm 121:4).
F.N.W. It says they shall stumble. Do you think God's ability to keep us without stumbling, according to Jude, depends upon our availability to Him in this way at the prayer meeting?
J.T. I am sure it does. I am sure there is no one here who is truly a priest in the meeting for
{27}
prayer that cannot verify this truth, that you are stronger afterwards than before.
R.W.S. Do you mean we reach God as rapidly as God drew us to Himself, because eagles¬ wings are mentioned here as well as in Exodus?
J.T. Yes; mounting up would mean, I suppose, we are getting nearer to the centre of the system, because the prayer meeting is part of the system. The system is centred in Christ in heaven, and we just get nearer to it.
Ques. Would you link up in any way the thought of divine dignity as set out in persons who pray?
J.T. It must be delightful to God to look upon us as we are in true priestly attire in the meeting for prayer, as each brother stands up before Him and the others join in in Spirit. It is pleasing to God in the centre of the system. There is the fragrance of Christ attending to it.
A.P.T. Is it not a greater thought really than the earthly altar? It is the golden altar.
J.T. Quite so; the prayer meeting is the golden altar.
J.S. Do we stand up assembly-wise?
J.T. Quite so; we stand up in relation to one another. It is really that, only we are in a priestly attitude.
A.B.P. Does @John 8 show this working out in the life of the Lord Jesus? In the end of chapter 7, they all went to their own homes, but Jesus went to the mount of Olives, and early in the morning He was in the temple teaching the people.
J.T. Just so. It would show the priestly energy that was there.
A.R. The last scripture you read refers to making "them joyful in my house of prayer". Is that how you are affected as the meeting is proceeding?
J.T. That is another side. We often allude to it in our prayer meetings. It reads, the alien and the
{28}
eunuch, they are people who have little or no earthly or natural prospects, "For thus saith Jehovah: Unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and hold fast to my covenant, even unto them will I give in my house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and daughters; I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. Also the sons of the alien, that join themselves to Jehovah, to minister unto him and to love the name of Jehovah, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and holdeth fast to my covenant; even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar: for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples". This passage, I think, brings us to the full height of the position in God's house. He says "my house" the universal bearing of it. Can we afford to miss that? We certainly cannot, because that is all we have come to in the meeting for prayer.
Ques. Why do you think chapter 56 begins with the thought of keeping judgment and doing righteousness?
J.T. It is the beginning with us, what you are in a practical way. The idea of the prayer meeting rises from the son of the alien, what he comes into.
Rem. The thought of judgment is mentioned much in the assembly gospel, Matthew.
J.T. Yes, and righteousness, too.
C.A.M. I was thinking of this matter of the alien. I suppose Luke was a Gentile, and we know how full of prayer his gospel is. It ends with it.
J.T. Very good, quite so.
J.H. Peter and John moved up towards the prayer meeting full of joy, did they not?
J.T. Quite so; it was the hour of prayer.
{29}
A.B.P. What bearing does the thought of having no earthly outlook have in relation to prayer? It would not be prayer for ourselves, would it? It would be having God's interests at heart.
J.T. I think that is how we finish here, when God calls it "my house". "For my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples". That is what we finish with. So that it seems as if you are brought into the current of God's mind, how universal His house is. Your own things, you might say, gradually slip away from you altogether. It is God.
A.B.P. It would link on then, would it, with the idea of widowhood? The widow in the house cast in all her living. Certainly her living was not much of a worry to her. She would be something like a eunuch.
J.A.P. In @Revelation 8, is it right to say that God caused the angel to add the incense to the prayers of the saints, as if He were pleased with them?
J.T. That is an angel priest; it is Christ Himself. But notice, all the saints are in mind -- the prayers of all saints, showing how wide it is. So here, "my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples". I think we gradually come into the divine current in the prayer meeting, and we see what God's interests are, how wide they are.
A.R. Would this go beyond "all saints"? It says, "All the peoples". I was thinking of the scripture that says, "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men; for kings and all that are in dignity" (@1 Timothy 2:1,2). Is that the idea?
J.T. That is exactly what it is, culminating in Paul's ministry in 1 Timothy.
F.N.W. You have stressed a good deal lately as to the matter of joy. Would this chapter have a certain moral sequence?
J.T. I think God is showing what is available in
{30}
the prayer meeting; how orderly it is; beginning with righteousness, and then bringing in two kinds of people, the alien and the eunuch. They are naturally at a disadvantage, but all their disadvantages vanish in the house of God. They come in for everything the heart could wish for. They get into the current of God's thoughts, and what a domain He has.
J.S. In @John 9 do we have one of the outcasts of Israel?
J.T. Just so; he gets a place in the house.
F.N.W. Would it flow from the keeping of the Sabbath which would link with @Exodus 20 and the loving of the Name of Jehovah in @Exodus 21?
J.T. The keeping of the Sabbath has to be understood here. It is connected both with the eunuch and the alien. I suppose the thought is of covenanting. The Sabbath is the sign of it. For us it would be whatever God has covenanted with us, and whatever we are brought into in a sense of covenant, that we have the sign of it. That is keeping the Sabbath, whatever it denotes, that we are in direct relation with God and He is in direct relation with us.
A.R. These stated meetings enter into that. In the millennium heaven will affect the earth publicly on the principle of rule in a moral sense. It affects the earth now by prayer just as much.
J.T. I am sure it is a determining factor, and what the persons are that are involved. We are praying for those brethren who are suffering from these circumstances. There is no question about it, they are sufferers. The very best circumstances that any one of them are in does not preclude the idea of suffering as a Christian. I believe that is the pivot of the whole position. The more we keep that before God in our prayers, the quicker will be the end.
D.P. Is the house of God a wider thought than the assembly?
{31}
J.T. I do not think so. The word is, "In order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3:15). They are co-extensive, I would say; the house of God and the assembly of God. Did you have anything especially in your mind?
D.P. No; I just wondered about it.
J.T. The kingdom is a wider thought than the house, or the assembly, because it is simply a question of profession. Persons may be in it that have not the Spirit, but no one may be in the house of God without the Spirit. So that Peter says, "For the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come; but if first from us, what shall be the end of those who obey not the glad tidings of God?" (@1 Peter 4:17). The 'us' means real Christians.
R.W.S. The Lord in @Luke 18:1 spoke a parable, "to them to the purport that they should always pray and not faint". Is that not an encouraging scripture today? In view of protracted things we are to go on praying and not lose heart as if God is not hearing it.
J.T. As has been remarked, no doubt he was a Gentile; it is generally understood that he was, and so an alien, but see what a place he has in this instruction of prayer. It is he that tells us that the disciples asked the Lord to teach them to pray, and the Lord answered them immediately and said, "When ye pray, say, Father" (@Luke 11:2).
J.H. Would you say Peter would say 'Amen' after the experience in @Acts 10, when he saw the sheet come down? I think he would say 'Amen' to the alien praying in the house of prayer.
J.T. The sheet represented the alien. We are told in @Ephesians 2:12 just what we are; "aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise" (@Ephesians 2:12).
{32}
F.S.C. It says, the sons of aliens. Why does it say it that way?
J.T. It would not make any difference to the real meaning. Their fathers may not have added to their welcome; the generation would not add to their welcome. It is what grace makes an alien such as Ephesians contemplates. Ephesians tells us so much about our having been aliens. We are brought into the very greatest things in Ephesians.
J.A.P. Does @Deuteronomy 26:5 fit in with that thought? "A perishing Aramaean was my father".
J.T. Just so; he was an alien in that sense, but brought into the nearness to God in grace.
C.A.M. Referring to what you said about the house of God in that section of @Luke 11 speaking about prayer, the section does not end really until you have the Spirit. Do you think that really that would be the normal status of one that prayed? He would really reach that through desire. They would have the Spirit.
J.T. I think so; it is the great finishing touch of the furnishings that are depicted in that passage in the first ten verses. "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him" (@Luke 11:13). The Lord is implying that the whole point in prayer requires the Spirit. It is not simply that you have a right formula, but you must have the Spirit; that is the meaning of the passage. And then the next thing you get is the man that was dumb. What could he do? Well, the Lord was casting him out. The thing is to pray that we might get the Holy Spirit, as much as to say if there is a dumb brother the thing is to pray that he might get the Holy Spirit. If a man does not pray habitually in the prayer meeting, you wonder if he has the Holy Spirit, else how could he refrain?
{33}
KEEPING SPIRITUAL THINGS
@Luke 2:19,51; @Genesis 37:11; @2 Timothy 1:14
These scriptures are intimately related, so that I hope I shall not find any difficulty in linking them in the ministry of the truth. They speak of things being *kept* -- spiritual things. The basis is laid in them, I think, for the existence of Christianity without the written page. In eternity, we shall not be referring to the written page. Whatever there will be, it will not be kept in storehouses but in the intelligences and affections of persons, and this fact obviously suggests great richness in that day, and great variety and great freshness. It is difficult to place ourselves in a timeless state of things, because we are accustomed to time. We could hardly think save as in time, but God would help us to participate in a limitless state of things, and that we should be accustomed to variety -- never idle or disinterested; never, as it were, looking out of the window. And these scriptures lay the basis for power to keep things -- things that are worth keeping. The first three scriptures read speak of things directly connected with the Lord Jesus: first, in His babehood; the second, in His boyhood and the third, in His young manhood. They involve, therefore, grounding in the knowledge of Christ; that we acquire a knowledge of Him that remains with us. Much indeed, is forgotten, one knows, even of the best things, but the Scriptures would suggest, especially in these passages, the need of discrimination in what comes to us, and to hold certain features, as Mary would keep certain things in her mind; the word 'mind' being suggestive of the place where these things are kept in the organism of a person. And then you ponder them in the heart,
{34}
the heart being suggestive of a remarkable combination of other elements in the make-up of a being. It is in the midst, as we might say, the midst of the person; and it is fed by other features (speaking of it now as in a moral sense, though the same is true in a physical sense) so that the understanding is connected with it, and the affections sometimes chiefly connected with it. And so we can understand how Mary the mother of our Lord enters into the Scriptures in this connection -- a woman of outstanding distinction, but the distinction I am seeking to bring forward is not such as is formally accorded to her. It is what she herself takes on. She is the author of it in herself, which is an important matter, for we are chiefly looking for favours and advantages through others; whereas we have great power of according advantage each of us to himself. And this is what develops in connection with Mary, the mother of our Lord. She is distinguished above women, as we all know, and she is a woman of introspective power, which every Christian should be, having the power of introspection. She says, "My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour" (@Luke 1:47). She distinguished between her soul and her spirit. Perhaps few of us have attempted to do this. It is important to distinguish introspectively so that we may discover what we are capable of, what are the departments, as it were. The ego is the head of each department and co-ordinates them, but it is important to learn the departments and the avenues to them, and not to go into the wrong one at any time, nor to operate in it.
So first of all we have in Mary, the mother of our Lord, a representative of a Christian who has very tender affections at this time -- very tender; her Babe was just born. Her first babe, the Babe of babes, the Lord of glory. She was not oblivious to all this, either. One of the most important dignitaries
{35}
in heaven had told her about the Babe -- Gabriel, a very sympathetic man, a priestly angel, really. We are not wanting in such a Person, dear brethren. The Lord of glory Himself is our priestly Angel; indeed, He is spoken of as an Angel in Scripture, as a Priest. And He is especially sympathetic with us, especially young mothers, and Mary was a young mother, and she was the mother of a great Child: "the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God" (verse 35). That was told her, so that she may be taken as one who would always be sympathetic with young mothers. Of course, she became a mother in Israel. It would take more than one child to make her that, and she had a good many children; but I am speaking now of the Lord Jesus, and He was her first-born, and her affections are all young. In the midst of much that was going on, for it is a chapter of activity, first of all the political world was in great activity and all was in relation to her and her husband and above all her Child that was to be born. The whole Roman world was set in motion for that, that the Child should be born in Bethlehem; and then heaven is aglow about this matter. Shepherds were occupied with their sheep probably, all tender work, livestock, sheep, by night, and the angel of the Lord is there by them. We are not told who he was, but the glory of the Lord shone round about them. That is the religious political world was changed into a sanctuary, as we might say, such is the life of faith. And the angel unfolds the great fact to the shepherds, and presently a multitude of the heavenly host was with them; not their own host, the Jewish host, but the heavenly one. Heaven came down in volume, so to speak, so as to make itself felt as to what heaven really is when there is something going on that interests heaven, and they were saying certain things, no doubt, in language intelligible to the shepherds --
{36}
"glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men" (@Luke 2:14), pointing out great things for the world, great things on the earth. Well, the heavenly host returned to its place, and the shepherds went to Bethlehem and related what had happened, and Mary, we are told, kept these things in her mind -- pondered them in her heart. For she had a mind, and she knew she had a mind, and she knew what it was for -- to hold things that are valuable as treasure, and then to take them out to ponder them as opportunity offers. It is quite right to take a Bible and read a passage such as I am reading now, @Luke 2, but it is another thing and really a greater thing morally to take the thing out of your own heart. It is there as a repository of your own, and you take it out and think over it. It is a remarkable matter; a matter to be noticed; that is to say, babehood; the babehood of the Lord Jesus and the things that attached to it. What movements there were in relation to it; heavenly movements particularly! What sayings there were! Who was absorbing them? The shepherds did anyway, although perhaps with a certain intelligence different from hers as men, and as shepherds, yet they could hardly be expected to have the same tender affections as the affections of a mother. That is what Mary had. Even Joseph could not have what she had, nor could any of the apostles have what she had; not an angel could have what she had. There is no one who could have what she had but herself, but she had it, and she knew she had it, and she placed it in the safest repository -- within her, and she could take it out and go over it. What thoughts arose in her mind! She could distinguish between her soul and her spirit, as she does in her song. She would distinguish between her heart, too, and her soul, as I said. The soul is the lower affections; it is not an organ; it is a moral element. No doctor can discover
{37}
the soul with his instruments. He can get the heart. Nor can he get to the mind. Man is a spiritual and moral being, so that she could take these wonderful things that she had there in her mind, in her repository, at any time and go over them. How that would enhance her spiritual growth, as she went over them!
Well now, that is number one. It ought to appeal to all young mothers here, young persons; for God is taking account of us in all our relations. He works in us, too, in relation to our respective ages, so that nothing should be left out in our calculations. As it says, "Run, speak to this young man" (@Zechariah 2:4). Not '*this* man' but "this *young* man", so it is that we are taken account of in our circumstances in that way, in our ages; the ages of our growth. So this is number one; the Lord Jesus Himself as a Babe. He is the subject of the things that Mary kept in her heart and pondered. She is seen in the first chapter of Acts according to this. The link is that she is there in the upper room. There is nothing said about what she said or what she was to do, but she was there, and every spiritual mind would say, I understand why she is there and I will value that. What conversations could be carried on with her by any of the apostles, especially by John! I have no doubt that John would always take her into the upper room. She was his mother. The Lord had dignified him by giving him such a mother, and Mary would value, too, the place that John had in the Lord's heart. He was the disciple whom Jesus loved. She could compare her love with his love, and it is well to compare loves. She would compare her love to his love for Christ, and she could compare, too, what she realised of the love of Christ with what John realised of the love of Christ. That would be a link, the great permanent link and will be the link between them for ever and for ever. They will not be in
{38}
eternity as mother and son, but they were down here in the making-time.
Well, number two is still Mary, but now she has just been through an experience in which she did not shine. We are up and down, the most spiritual of us. It is still Christ; it is still her Son, but now it is the Boy, Jesus. She had gone a day's journey with her husband back home to Nazareth. They did not know the Lord Jesus was not in the company. Many are like that. They do not miss spiritual things; staying at home from the meetings is nothing at all. The meeting is in the category of my activities but I may not miss it. I may not value it, and therefore, I may not miss it. They did not know the Lord was not with them, dear as He was to her, precious as He ought to be to her. She took no attention as to whether He was in the company or not for a whole day, neither did Joseph. And so what ensues is the boyhood life of Jesus, which ought to be supremely interesting to her; to see her Son develop and grow as Hannah of old. She came to where Samuel was with a little coat every year. Mary just overlooked this, and she went along and talked to the neighbours. Who knows what she was saying? When Jesus is left out we are apt to say things that are not too good. We are out of the realm of safety in our minds when we overlook the Lord, leave Him out of our calculations. There is a great deal of very useless talk where the Lord and the meetings are overlooked and missed, and where the things that are said in them are not attended to. But she came back, she and her husband, and the boyhood life of Jesus is proceeding. It was active, "The boy Jesus" He is called. There was a meeting of doctors in the temple and He was there. That is where they found Him. What an example for all young people, to be where divine instruction is being dealt out and spoken of! The doctors are persons
{39}
who know, I mean, in the principle of the thing. He was both hearing and asking questions. He was not out in the edge of the company; He was sitting in the midst of the doctors. That illustrates His boyhood life. And Mary -- well, she was full of superiority of a mother who had such a Son, but she has forgotten that she had neglected Him. We will never get right about a thing until we own it to someone, certainly we must challenge our own consciences about it before we can get right, before we have power to deal with matters. "Thy father and I have sought thee distressed", she says to Him. Think of her saying that to Him in the presence of the doctors in the temple -- the Lord of glory, no less. Let us never leave that out of our souls or hearts -- His Person is unchangeable, mysterious, of course, in a Babe or a Boy, that it should be there, but it is there. "Thy father and I have sought thee distressed". That was a reproof. Think of reproving the Lord! Martha did that, too. We are apt to do it. The Lord Jesus says to His mother, "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" You and my father, that is the 'ye'. In fact, she is not called Mary here, it is the mother; that is the person who had a long acquaintance with Him in a motherly capacity, but she had failed on that point. It is the mother here in this part of the passage, "Did ye not know that I *ought* to be". It is no question of my fancy or my joy, but "I *ought* to be occupied in my Father's business". He rebuked her in the most beautiful way. Well, that is number two, so it is a question of gathering up something in spite of my failure. She did not fail in this, to pick up something out of the incident; it is a sort of salvage. It is said of her in verse 51, "And his mother kept all these things in her heart". She kept them all. She would not have kept her own saying surely. She would be ashamed of them for ever, that she rebuked
{40}
the Lord; but all the things that Jesus said, that is the point. She kept them in her heart. The boyhood of Jesus, it is part of her life, part of the food, part of the meat-offering. It is most holy. And that is really what she kept. That is what it was; it was a meat-offering -- what He was in His boyhood. She had the babehood state already and now she has His boyhood, so after all, she has not lost. "If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things" (@1 John 3:20). Her heart would have condemned her for rebuking her Son, but God was greater than her heart and knoweth all things. So that she had these things in her heart, but she was not overcome with her failure. It is a question of how quickly we can recover ourselves, and that is what she represents when she becomes still the constructive repository of things relating to the Lord Jesus. It is a building up of things in her heart. "Keep thy heart more than anything that is guarded" (@Proverbs 4:23). She was keeping it in spite of the breakdown in the temple. Probably she showed a little temper in what she said to him, quite possible. But she changed. She is still what she was really; she is treasuring things relating to Christ here in His boyhood.
Well, now, going to Genesis, the Lord is here typically at seventeen years of age, which I would say is a little above boyhood. He is getting into young manhood, and he is in a very mixed state of things externally. He is keeping sheep with his brothers. Some of them were naughty brothers. They were sons of the maidservants. Young schoolboys are apt to be very naughty in their remarks, learning them from others, and these young fellows were like that; and Joseph, we are told, reported to his father what they were saying. It says, "And Joseph brought to his father an evil report of them" (chapter 37:2). So it is for young brothers, I am calling on
{41}
young brothers potentially even if you are not actually yet -- to see to it that you are not picking up bad language at school or on the streets. This is no mere empty exhortation. It is a real matter with young boys and girls of Christian parents. You are said to be *holy*. The Lord Jesus is said to have been holy as born, intrinsically holy -- "that holy thing" (@Luke 1:35). He is substantially holy, but you as born of Christian parents are said to be holy, too; not substantially holy. You need new birth for that -- to be converted and receive the Holy Spirit, but still you are here as holy, and it is important to see that our mouths are not made filthy by things we gather up and use. Joseph had to do with that in young brothers, and he told his father about it. It is a very safe-guarding thing to tell your father of anything you hear of that kind especially if your own brothers are guilty. It is a safeguard. That is what Joseph did, and we are told his father loved him. So that he has got a heart for Christ. Jacob had a heart for Christ. He had a heart for Rachel. He loved Rachel, but he loved Joseph and he made him a coat of many colours, a vest it is -- the word 'vest' would indicate it is an inner garment and allude to the glories of Christ. The deeper you go in the knowledge of him, the more the glories. But then I must go on to bring out the situation. Jacob found himself capable of keeping something that was of value, that as it were, he salvaged from all this, in the midst of envy. The brothers envied Joseph, a type of the Lord, but his father rebuked him. Jacob was not quite right, just as Mary was not quite right in the way she spoke to the Lord; so Jacob was not quite right here. He rebuked him. He said, "Shall we indeed come, I and thy mother and thy brethren, to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?" (verse 10). Well, that is the fact; it is the inference; take it as you like. But he did take it. How long he kept it in the repository,
{42}
he would take it out and see that was the truth of God, and that the prophet Joseph had unfolded things, a parable I might call it, in his dream. It was a dream, "I have dreamt another dream, and behold, the sun, and the moon and eleven stars bowed down to me" (verse 9). He counted eleven and left himself out. He was one of them, but the eleven bowed down to him. That was prophetic of the glory of Christ. Some day Jacob will heartily enjoy that when he understands how his son was a type of the great and glorious Saviour we all love and revere as "God over all, blessed for ever". It is a dream about the firmament, but the other dream was about the earth -- the dream about the sheaves. I am only referring to all these things which are a group of things together, but it is to focus our minds on this old brother. He is not so old yet, but he is fairly old. He is wrongly rebuking his son, but at the same time, he has got the power of recovery. God takes account of that. When you do something out of accord with right feeling, recover yourself quickly. Do not let it stand. Deal with it at once, and you are saved from it. He dealt at once with the matter of rebuking his son; he kept the saying. It is a question of Christ and His young manhood, the Lord Jesus. We have nothing about Him until he was thirty, in Luke, after this incident that I read of in chapter 2, but we have a great deal about Joseph before he became great, and that is really excess. The Old Testament fills out what is really excess in the New Testament, and what things are seen in Joseph between seventeen and thirty! He was thirty when he stood before Pharaoh. He is now seventeen years old and preserved. What virtue was in the young man! What glory shone -- typical glory! I am speaking of that. I am speaking of Christ; what the Lord was in the years from His boyhood until He was a Man of thirty. The eye of
{43}
heaven was upon Him undoubtedly, and so it is that we get in Joseph what we do not get in Luke. We can fill up the years, with the young man, as I might say, the young man of Genesis. That is what I consider Joseph to be. He is the young man of Genesis. Genesis is a book of old men; it is characterised by old men, but he is the young man; not simply a young man of Genesis, but *the* young man. His father came to see him. The point I am making, dear brethren, is to get ourselves right when we are wrong, especially as regarding the traits of Christ in one another. Get right about them at once. That is what I am seeking to show. Jacob got right; nevertheless he observed the saying. He kept it really; that is the word. He kept the saying, so that Christ is seen in Joseph; the young man Joseph is kept. This wonderful saying is kept, this wonderful dream about the sun and the moon and the stars -- heaven brought down into the scope of his father and mother and eleven brothers -- thirteen. They would bow down to him. Let us learn to bow down! It is a fine lesson to learn, to accustom ourselves to bow down to One who is superior, divinely superior. The Lord Jesus is God. "For he is thy Lord, and worship thou him" (@Psalm 45:11). Jacob would learn that.
Well now, to sum up we shall come to Timothy. The writer is now an old man, and he is saying in effect there are precious things to be kept in the heart. The Lord is going to take him and these precious things are to remain here. They are not to be taken away with Paul. "And the things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men, such as shall be competent to instruct others also" (@2 Timothy 2:2). That is the idea, so that Timothy is to be left here, a young man. His teacher is going to be taken away from him. It reminds us of Elijah, the teacher of Elisha
{44}
at the banks of the Jordan. What a scene it was! His master was to be taken away from him that very day, and he says, I know it. Whatever the sons of the prophets might say and think they knew better, they did not know better. They did not know as well as a man like Elisha. Elijah was to be taken up. This epistle contemplates Paul about to be taken up, as it were, from Timothy. What is Timothy to do with the ministry? Well, he says, I have it all written down. Maybe he did. There were books, but Paul was not content with the books. He does speak in this very epistle about a library. The books, he says; the parchments; bring them to me. He wanted to have those books, but he does not say anything about that in this chapter. He says to Timothy, "Keep, by the Holy Spirit ... the good deposit entrusted". Now I left out two or three words: "which dwells in us". If Paul is going, the Holy Spirit is remaining, and He is actually remaining in a dwelling place, and Timothy was that dwelling place. What a wonderful thing that is! The books may be burned, but the author of the books, the Holy Spirit, is not only a visitor, in Timothy, He is a dweller. That means He has conditions of dwelling. The Spirit will dwell as we give Him conditions, but He is there in all His capacity to function. So the apostle implies that the things you have -- you have got maybe through me or others -- are not to be discarded at all. They are to be retained. You have them, but the point is how (and it would apply to Jacob as it would to Mary). Ultimately all Mary had, if it were to be kept, it must be by the Spirit. The Spirit alone would enable her to keep undamaged the precious things she had in her soul, in her heart and her mind relative to the Lord Jesus. It is the Holy Spirit. "Keep, by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us, the good deposit entrusted". That is how that matter is to stand as far as I see it, in the present
{45}
upheaval; how things are to be kept. The bookcases are certainly not reliable. They can never be anything but aids; that is, what supports is what you have got in your own soul, what the Spirit gives. Anything beyond that may be useless, or worse, if you rely on what you read; whereas it is the good deposit that is to be kept, not by the books but by the Spirit; that it has a dwelling place in the heart. It is really one of the most wonderful things that Paul could say to any servant that He dwells in us. But we are to keep by Him the good deposit. What we have got of the knowledge of God and Christ and the Spirit Himself and the assembly and the whole range of truth is to be kept not simply in the books but by the Spirit in our own souls. All the inwards are brought into action and always functioning so that there is freshness and power in our persons. May God bless these thoughts!
{46}
THE INFLUENCE OF HEAVEN -- READING 1
@Luke 2:8 - 15; @Luke 3:21,22
The thought of *heaven* is prominent in Luke. The time of the Lord's receiving up is mentioned in chapter 9 of this gospel, and in the last chapter He goes up speedily, no mention being made of His forty days of sojourn after He arose, as if the position in heaven was urgent, that it should be reached. The word 'suddenly' is used in chapter 2 and also chapter 24:4, "two men suddenly stood by them in shining raiment". With this thought in mind we might get help, for the time of our ascending is drawing near, so that we should be ready for it.
Malachi is urgent, too, in the way he presents the Lord as arising with healing in His wings (chapter 4:2); there is a further suggestion of readiness in verses 5 and 6, "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and terrible day of Jehovah. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers". Elijah's ministry takes family relations into account. In our time, not only are the children out of order, but the parents, too. So there seems to be a correspondence there and a link with Luke; Elijah being mentioned in chapter 1.
A great heavenly personage comes in, Gabriel who has to do with Zacharias and Elizabeth, and then Mary; then the verses read bring in heaven in volume. The heavenly seed takes precedence in the earth, although full provision is made for the earth. "On the earth peace, good pleasure in men"; then in chapter 19:38 it is "peace in heaven", earth is left where it was because of what the Lord found there,
{47}
and the heavenly thing is introduced in what we have now in the assembly. Gabriel is a priestly angel and points to great times, heavenly times in view, having great interest in the saints, to do the best for us.
The book of Acts is to stress faith; the disciples were gazing on heaven literally, it was a question of sight with them, they had seen the Lord going up; but a cloud receives Him. The literal stops for the moment -- it is faith henceforth; that is, the dispensation of faith was then inaugurated. Of course, the Lord while He was here stressed faith, but the era had not been properly inaugurated until He was out of sight. Thomas would have the natural convinced; the Lord convinces the natural, but said, "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed" (@John 20:29). Blessing is attached to it.
The 'fear nots' in Luke make an interesting subject. There are occasions of fear, but there are occasions of not fearing, and this is one -- @Luke 2:10. Heaven is so favourable; the shepherds represent people who are doing their duty, they are occupied with livestock, with what is living; so that heaven comes to them with these words, "And the angel said to them, Fear not, for, behold, I announce to you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all the people; for today a Saviour has been born to you in David's city, who is Christ the Lord". These men are greatly honoured; they receive a direct announcement of the gospel. In this whole section down to verse 20 they are doing their part, which is in keeping with Luke -- "praising God". There was united action, there was one flock. "Abiding without" suggests unselfishness. These occasions are evidences of sacrifice, because obstacles arise to hinder these meetings; the enemy disagrees with them because they are helping the saints. With gasoline and food restrictions the tendency is to give up coming together, but faith wants to go on. God is with us if we want
{48}
to go on. Difficulties are there, but we pray about the difficulties. "I am with you" says the Lord in @Haggai 1:13. Satan threatens and does get victories, but they are due to our negligence. The point is to go on, suffer and go on, because the enemy will stop us if he can, and if he does we say the Lord has ordered it -- but the Lord may say, You are not praying.
"The shepherds said to one another, Let us make our way then now as far as Bethlehem, and let us see this thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has made known to us". They want to see, they are progressive, and Mary comes in, too, as progressive, so that we have a repository of the truth in this section. All fear being banished from their hearts, you can see they are made praisers -- praisers of God; glorifying and praising God, just as in the end of the gospel it says the disciples were continually in the temple praising and blessing God. That is the line in Luke.
Glory is the effulgence of something -- look at @Hebrews 1. It is said of the Lord that He is the effulgence; that is, the glory of Deity ... and the expression of His substance. Effulgence (look at note) is that which fully presents the glory which is in something else. 'Expression' is akin to it but not quite the same, it goes deeper because it refers to this sub-stratum of Deity -- Christ expressed that. Effulgence of glory -- it was a question of the glory of Deity in a vessel. The glory is in something else; it is great enough to shine in Him. It is not military glory, or creational glory; it has something to do with redemption, in the servant, the Christ, the Lord.
The babe wrapped in swaddling clothes is a sign, it is very touching, it is God's way. He begins small but the greatness is there, it is hidden. Swaddling clothes are the right kind of clothing, and He is in a manger, which is not what He should have had, but it is God's way to His beginning and it is no accident.
{49}
There was no room in the inn, it does not seem as though there was antipathy, but God comes in and accepts things as they are. His life was not jeopardised by the manger. When He is baptised He will have other clothes on, when He comes out of the water He will have different clothes on, everything is suitable. Everything is in perfect order in Luke. He came in in a manger, but presently He will come in as a warrior.
You begin to be an attendant; there were eye witnesses and attendants on the Word. You say, I would like to do something for that Babe. I would like to give Him the best room in my house. The shepherds did not seem to do anything, they saw the Babe and praised God, but as light comes into our souls we want to look after that Person as much as we can. The shepherds did not handle the Babe, the proper handler at the time was the mother. The greatest priest that ever was could not do better than Mary at that time; it was a question of what was suitable.
It says, "Lo, an angel of the Lord was there by them" (the shepherds), but in verse 13 it is, "Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host". The angel is the forerunner, the shepherds look on and are moved; now the testimony is moving and there is the multitude with the angel. It is to support what is going on. The word 'host' is remarkable, it shows interest and is a great testimony, they are declaring the mind of heaven in volume. The shepherds came into this great matter and became priests of God, and we want to be in that.
When this great scene is over the shepherds moved to Bethlehem. "And it came to pass, as the angels departed from them into heaven, that the shepherds said to one another, Let us make our way then now as far as Bethlehem, and let us see this thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has made known to us".
{50}
The great scene that had been displayed before their eyes would have been just historical if they had not moved, but as they move they are in line with the testimony, the concrete thing is not in the angels, but the Babe. "They came with haste", notice, "and found both Mary and Joseph, and the babe" -- the parents and then the Babe. (In Matthew the magi found the boy Jesus with his mother.) "And having seen it they made known about the country the thing which had been said to them concerning this child. And all who heard it wondered at the things said to them by the shepherds. But Mary kept all these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart". That is the good deposit, somebody is going to keep the treasure, it is treasured in the heart of love. And then "the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all things which they had heard and seen, as it had been said to them". They returned to their local position; things would be better where they came from. Luke would say, there must be results and these results are to continue. The great scene that came before the vision of the shepherds is to impress them; we must follow these men out, we go on with the heavenly. We are being formed for heavenly part in the glory. Luke is preparing us for Paul's assembly. We are being made heavenly in Luke at the very outset.
THE INFLUENCE OF HEAVEN -- READING 2
@Luke 9:28 - 36; @Luke 10:17 - 24
We did not touch on verses 21 and 22 of chapter 3 this morning, but we should notice heaven coming down, first in one angel accompanied by heavenly light, of which we often sing as making all things bright, and the volume of angelic personages were
{51}
noted bringing heaven down, as it were, but in angels, not yet in men. The scripture for this reading will show how men come out from heaven in relation to what is below.
These two verses of chapter 3 are to be taken in relation to the babyhood of Christ, the condescension of the Person, and then there is growth; He grew, we are told, in wisdom and stature. His baptism is noted and He is praying in relation to it. It is said that "The heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon him; and a voice came out of heaven, *Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". We do not get that in relation to the babyhood of Christ, nor even the boyhood, but the manhood. God waited for those thirty years to announce this word, but it is in keeping with what is down here, that is, the Lord's own movements -- having been baptised and praying, as it says. It is a question of what was here according to the divine viewpoint, what came out in the Babe. The Lord here in a world of evil and about to carry on the service of God is seen praying. It points to the importance of prayer in relation to the divine scheme. It brings up the whole question as to 'why' prayer. This gospel stresses prayer and the intelligent inquiry as to why. It is linked up both here and in the passage in chapter 9:28,29. It says, "He went up into a mountain to pray. And as he prayed the fashion of his countenance became different".
God is signalising this attitude of the Lord's as a Man down here; there is something secret and mysterious as to the power of prayer, and how it glorifies God and brings out this voice; heaven sees it in a Man. It is part of the constitution, I suppose, that God designed in man, that he was to be an intelligent dependent being. The law of creation, is there anything in it to correspond? We have to ponder over Romans 8:19, which says, "For the
{52}
anxious looking out of the creature expects the revelation of the sons of God". Then we have, "For we know that the whole creation groans together and travails in pain together until now. And not only that, but even *we* ourselves ... groan in ourselves, awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body". And then one other scripture says (verse 26), "In like manner the Spirit joins also its help to our weakness; for we do not know what we should pray for as is fitting, but the Spirit itself makes intercession with groanings which cannot be uttered". Now it is to bring that out as to whether it is something to be looked into spiritually as to the why and wherefore of prayer and whether heaven descends in principle to the lower creation.
Daniel is an outstanding example of one who prayed in relation to a place on earth. He is called a man greatly beloved. Here the Lord is seen by heaven baptised, which would mean intelligent apprehension of what was suitable to God at that time. And then, being baptised and *praying*; one is the intelligent acceptance of God's judgment on conditions as they are, and the other is dependence on God in those conditions.
Alluding to Elijah, he was a man that was urgent; he put his face between his knees, a remarkable foreshadowing of what is seen here -- the Lord prayed all night; (chapter 6). Clearly he would be praying for something perfectly known to him that it would happen, whatever it was, whether it brings out the antagonism of what was known to be there. Paul said, Satan hindered us. Well, why should that be said? If God is all-powerful why should Satan hinder? Is it the want of prayer? What is prayer, what is the power of it, and the absence of it -- does it mean that Satan has advantage? Constantly we hear people say, God will overrule, God has ordered it. But what about the matter of prayer, has it been
{53}
wanting? The Lord shows here it was not wanting in Him; it is being baptised and *praying*, that is His attitude.
You get God's assurance about a thing; you cannot be happy until you do. There is too much of this saying, God has ordered or allowed it, and God can prevent or stop it. But what can I do? The word is, "faith removes mountains". It does not say God -- but *faith* does it (God does the thing, of course). It shows the power it must have in the universe, it is inscrutable, really, because it is not simply what is said, but it is faith; the prayer of faith shall heal the sick, it is the thing itself. God does not pray; it is constitutional in the creature, how far it goes down to man or angels is a question, but clearly it is intended to be constitutional in manhood. There is sometimes an element of fatalism with us; has Satan got some advantage on our side for want of prayer? The Lord said to Ananias in regard of Saul of Tarsus, Behold he prayeth. He is constitutionally right, because the Lord says -- not that he is going to pray -- but he is *doing* it.
I think the Lord is just leading the way in these passages for us, first in baptism, which is the acceptance of God's judgment on the conditions that exist. The judgment would not refer to Jesus, but He is identifying Himself with it as baptized -- and then He is praying. That is to say, it is the God and man position -- God in covenant. There is an obligation on the part of man mediatorially as before God that the thing must go through and that it depends upon my prayers, too. The mediatorial position is always present and we are included in it now as having the Spirit, and it makes you avoid mere glibness in dealing with these matters.
It is really a dispensational position that the Lord is inaugurating by example and it is owned in heaven; therefore, it is said the Holy Spirit descended in a
{54}
bodily form. The Deity is here, the Son is here in manhood praying, and the heavens are opened and the Spirit descends. He is not said to be sent here, He descended "in a bodily form as a dove upon him; and a voice came out of heaven, *Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". That is the Deity, I apprehend, in a mediatorial position.
This mediatorial position is carried forward into chapter 9 which enlarges on the kingdom. The Lord said (verse 27), "I say unto you of a truth, There are some of those standing here who shall not taste death until they shall have seen the kingdom of God". That is a direct link with what we have looked at in chapter 3. And then verse 28, "And it came to pass after these words, about eight days, that taking Peter and John and James he went up into a mountain to pray". That is what He went up for according to this gospel. "And as he prayed the fashion of his countenance became different and his raiment white and effulgent. And lo, two men talked with him". Now it says that they were Moses and Elias and they spoke about His departure which He was about to accomplish in Jerusalem. It is the Lord Jesus in direct touch with heaven, and heaven comes out not in angelic form, but in human form. And as He is praying the fashion of His countenance became different and his raiment white and effulgent. So that now we have heavenly company come down. It is not exactly the mount of heaven, but it is very near. Heaven comes in in known personages in the testimony. We should become accustomed to heaven's way and this constitutional way in regard to this mediatorial system, because the mediatorial system shall continue after we leave.
As to the raiment, it is not swaddling clothes -- that belongs to a certain state -- as the depths God will reach, but now it is Manhood answering to
{55}
Adam as figure of the coming one. Adam was never a babe, never a boy -- nothing but a man. It is the clothing of a *man* that is changed. Clothing represents what the man is.
The idea of the kingdom belongs to God, there must be that in God that is always dominant; that God may be all in all. The Lord Jesus delivers up the kingdom to His God and Father. These references to His own personal kingdom are to bring Him personally into view and make Him personally dear to us and known in His greatness, too. Chapter 3 brings in what Christ was down here as the object of the Father's affections, and prayer entered into that; He would be the Son of the Father's love.
It would seem as if experience with God in His testimony must be seen in men. That is another side of the position that we are coming into, such as the heavenly, that experience with God must have part in this matter. These two men come out of heaven, they appear in glory. How are they capable of appearing in glory? Clearly it is an allusion to their history. From Adam God has been working out His own scheme and that scheme involves experience with God here below. There are persons in the divine realm that we are going to converse with and keep company with, they belong to the system, and that is what is in mind here. Peter, James and John are admitted into that experience with God in relation to Christ; they are speaking to Him. That gives them a certain moral distinction. We ought to learn to value men who have experience, because they belong to the divine scheme of things; the young brothers and sisters are slow to learn this. Moses and Elijah appear in glory, as if they take the lead; they talk with Him and speak of His departure which He was to accomplish in Jerusalem. That is another part of the great thing that they are engaged with; they understand and know about it. We do
{56}
not know what the personal histories of Gabriel and Michael were; Moses is a man whose history is given us fully; Elijah's is not, he came in in a crisis. The point is that we are going to be in this kingdom of God which is seen here, and we have to do with persons of experience. Moses and Elias are finished products, they are brought in prepared beforehand to express this thought of experience, that it is a part of the divine scheme, and now is the time to acquire it. Peter and the others here are to be fitted, for they are to evangelise.
The fact that Moses and Elias appeared in glory is an additional compliment to them, that they were able to converse with Jesus. The greatness of the glory did not hamper them, showing the liberty we may have. We are to be constituted to take up that place, that we are able to converse with Jesus. We will meet Jesus in those courts above, and we will be able to introduce the conversation, and He will listen to us. It is to accustom us to the things in mind for us; the Lord knows how to be mutual. Moses and Elias knew what to speak about, what was in keeping with the moment. They are not talking about His ascension, they are talking of His exodus, alluding to what Moses was well accustomed to, of Israel going out of Egypt.
In the next reference (verse 51), it is said, "When the days of his receiving up were fulfilled". We have now got the counterpart, it is not His departure -- the departure is what you leave -- the receiving up refers to heaven. What a history Jerusalem had; the Lord is going out a certain way, by the gibbet. There are just a few words about it here, but volumes have been filled about the subject, as John says, the world itself could not contain the books. Peter and James and John are learning the mutuality of heaven and they ought to work it out in their part in the assembly later. What liberty Moses and Elijah had. That
{57}
liberty is to be accorded to me. Sonship gives me status; I belong with Christ.
Now Peter and those with him were oppressed with sleep; it shows how little had been effected yet in them, how much work had to be done on them. "But having fully awoke up they saw his glory, and the two men who stood with him. And it came to pass as they departed from him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here; and let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias: not knowing what he said". Meaning, how much is to be effected in this brother; and so it is in our meetings -- how much is to be effected in me that I might join into this matter constitutionally. This is to bring out how far these three brothers had got, as I was saying, "Not knowing what he said". How incongruous! "But as he was saying these things, there came a cloud and overshadowed them, and they feared as they entered into the cloud: and there was a voice out of the cloud saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him". Meaning, all this is for those three brothers; it is for all of us, of course, as to what is to be effected in us, as I should know what I am saying. This heavenly matter is a mutual thing; He would awaken us to bring us into the thing, that we have part in it as knowing and as having a status. Am I in keeping with that status?
The first lesson in the educational system is to listen to this one Person, the Son of the Father's love. He is to be listened to at all times; they must hear Him. We do not pray to Moses or to Elijah, nor to Mary; Jesus is the only teacher -- "My Teacher", Mary Magdalene said; she was learning. "Jesus alone with themselves" (@Mark 9:8) -- that is the nucleus of the new system. Mary in chapter 10 was in keeping with the position on the mount. The matter of His departure is one thing, receiving up is another, the glorious reception He received up
{58}
there in heaven! "And it came to pass when the days of his receiving up were fulfilled, that *he* stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem" (verse 51).
In chapter 10 I thought we might see the same subject of heaven in relation to service here below. The Lord appointed seventy others and sent them out two and two, thirty-five pairs of brothers sent to testify, and they come back with shades of success. "And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the demons are subject to us through thy name". This is a subject that belongs to what we are saying, that heaven has to be cleared of the devil, we are not going to be there in company with him. "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven. Behold, I give you the power of treading upon serpents and scorpions and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall in anywise injure you". Thus the whole matter of service is cleared up and the Lord is saying a much greater thing as to their work. All the power they needed was available to heal the sick and the like, and there was also experience. So that in the Lord's service we are to remember the greatness of divine power against Satan that has compelled him to fall, not descend, but *fall*. Demons are simply emissaries of the devil. Satan himself falls, he is not cast out here, but he falls which would mean that he had lost his place, his exploits are over, he has got to go because greater things have come about. Heaven would be filled with persons who have renown, persons who have names. Satan lost his renown, he has no name at all really.
That is a settled matter now, the matter of the devil and the power in service, yet He says, "rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens". It is a question of renown, the renown that we acquire by the Spirit of God. The saints are taking the place of the devil in all his renown there; certain great men
{59}
now are doing great things. It opens up the road to us as to what we shall see when we get there, and the habit of getting acquainted with one another and giving due credit to everything that is a part of the name. The mighty men are coming into light one after another; it is taking on the whole armour of God. We have already alluded to prayer. It is a question of what you are since you got the Spirit of God, but they had acquired renown through certain relations with Christ.
So it says, "In the same hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit and said, I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes". That is, the Lord is capable of being affected in any given time by happenings. Great things are happening in the world, but spiritual brothers are getting help in their souls, acquiring a name. Romans helps us in that because the apostle mentions persons that are to be saluted. As to the babes, I suppose that would revert back to when the disciples began under the Father's hand, then they were making headway, they were further on now. That is, God took them on without any human sophistication. Even a man like Paul, He took him on, but he would himself accept that he was taken on as a babe, he had to learn everything.
I think you come on here to the perfecting work in the Lord's mind. It says, "And having turned to the disciples privately he said, Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see". They are getting on now. It says He rejoiced in His spirit; He saw something in Peter or some of them that indicated there was a work of God. When Peter made his confession there was an immediate work of God. Undoubtedly the Lord takes on certain ones to make outstanding what He has in mind as to all.
{60}
THE INFLUENCE OF HEAVEN -- READING 3
@Luke 11:1 - 13; @Luke 15:7 - 10
The subject selected so far in its subdivisions is associated with certain circumstances, the heavenly side appearing to enforce certain other features of the truth. Yesterday afternoon we looked at chapter 10 following on the scene on the mount; chapter 10 dealing with the service of God. The Lord selected seventy others besides the apostles and they were successful over the emissaries of the devil. The Lord introduced the heavenly to balance the experience that the servants had and evidently to influence them in view of further service. The individual example of the effect of the truth in that section is in Mary at the end of chapter 10, as if the Spirit of God would afford us examples of the truth as we look into it. Mary, it is said, having sat at the feet of Jesus, was listening to His word. That is a characteristic feature, an example for us not to be overcome by our own business or household affairs, but to pay attention to what Jesus says first. Then this individual side develops into the collective position into which this heavenly truth should enter.
In chapter 11 we reach the Father who is of heaven, He gives the Holy Spirit to those who ask Him; it brings out the Father in a characteristic way. He answers us as His children if we seek the Spirit, for we cannot be locally right in the assembly save as having the Spirit. Then chapter 15 is an evangelic position into which the heavenly enters, that is, the joy of it, the joy of heaven coming into the preaching of the gospel.
The "praying in a certain place" would refer to what existed in the place, and therefore now the
{61}
immediate concern is the circumstances in this district, whether the Spirit has full place in the gatherings. When He ceased, one of His disciples said to Him, 'Teach us to pray'. The disciple is like Mary, the learner; she was listening to the word; now He would teach her to pray. He would wish all the other disciples would teach her to pray. The inference is they did not know how. Remitting and forgiving sins by the Holy Spirit has to come in for spiritual help in a local meeting. That is the seeking, leading up to the Father who is of heaven. The idea is, I am of Chicago or I am of New York. The preposition 'of' denotes that the person is characteristic of the place.
The Father is characteristic of heaven, it is the Father who is of heaven. He gives the Spirit in that connection to those who ask Him. The last Adam, the second man, is of heaven, or out of heaven; he is characterised by the place. In @Romans 8 the Spirit's position in connection with prayer is adding its help to our weakness, for we do not know what we should pray for as we ought. It is a chapter unfolding the truth of the Holy Spirit. He makes intercession for us according to God, so that we have an immense means of learning by the Spirit. The first half of this chapter in Romans seems to be especially devoted to the Spirit and what we have in Him, and amongst the things mentioned is that He adds His help to our weaknesses. So that explains the word -- "became strong out of weakness" (@Hebrews 11:34). It is a subjective condition, so that the Spirit comes into our prayers, things are amplified by the Spirit as you proceed in prayer.
If we are honest men and women we want help locally. The Lord is in some position that required prayer. The link would be what happened in Martha's house. There is one person there who is governed by the heavenly truth, "This is my beloved Son, hear him" (chapter 9:35); but Martha is entirely ignoring it. Luke is
{62}
concerned about the public position and Martha is discrediting it in her house although nominally in fellowship; she opens the house to the Lord and receives Him, but as inside she attacks Him and attacks her sister. Her sister is thoroughly in accord with the Lord and what was said about Him on the mount, but the Lord is praying that Martha might be set right.
One line of the truth before us is prayer. The Lord is seen praying after He is baptised; that belongs to the baptised company of persons -- praying. The disciples observed Him, as the Lord is not presented as praying with them, they are by themselves. This disciple would have observed the Lord's attitude in His prayer to His Father. Martha's attack on the Lord and her sister is grouped with the Lord praying in a certain place and how He taught the disciples. Some members of the household are with the truth and some not; the more talkative are usually not with the truth, there is a divided household. Mary would be saying, I wish I had more power with my sister. The Lord said, Martha, Martha. He announced her name twice, as much as to imply that she was of importance in His mind, and would have her set right. Luke leaves her not set right; he does not say that she hearkened to the Lord's word. John brings in the abstract side, that she was a true person at heart; he tells us that she got right about the matter of the resurrection; she confessed the truth. There is a counter element that is almost invariably to be found in every local meeting. That element is Martha, she is a sort of responsible one because it is her house. We learn to save such a situation by thinking of the Father's name first, and then the order of the kingdom. When ye pray, say, Father.
The prayer meeting has come into great prominence. The position really begins in New Zealand, as we
{63}
have often noted, and runs on to the end of Monday. The meeting for prayer is the culmination on the Monday. This section is to show the importance of the meeting for prayer and that we should know how to pray, whom to address. When ye pray, say, Father, the Lord said. That is what He is teaching here, and He is telling us that the Father is of heaven, and as of heaven with fatherly feelings; He gives the best there is. It does not appear that He prayed with the disciples; in every instance He is seemingly by Himself. He departed from them even in Gethsemane, a stone's throw away from them. I suppose it is to preserve His personal dignity.
This is a very important matter because the prayer meeting is connected with the house of God, although the house of God is not properly a local thought, there is only one house of God. There are many assemblies, but only one house; the bearing is universal, the prayer is universal. There are certain brothers who are habitually silent, which is a very humbling and sorrowful thing, because Luke would say about the young man of Nain as he comes into life spiritually, that he began to speak, as if that was the idea -- priesthood is in prospect. Why should we not all pray if it is open for us to do so? This disciple was concerned about all the brethren praying, and not praying, but knowing how to pray. A brother going about in service never forgets the local position in which he is.
The Lord prayed all night, we are told, but that would not be suitable for a prayer meeting. In a local position brevity is important. Another important thing is the question of forgiveness: "Remit us our sins, for we also remit to everyone indebted to us". I forgive habitually and look to others to forgive, too. There cannot be wholesome conditions without mutual forgiveness; confess your sins one to another. The Lord is stressing grace, complete pouring out of grace.
{64}
Something will come out of it; we confess our faults to one another and pray for one another. You cannot keep on forgiving a heretic, the scripture balances itself. The greatest burden usually in a locality is household conditions. The local condition is supposed to be more or less healthy, that is what the Lord is basing these instructions on. He says, "Lead us not into temptation". You wonder why that is said; it is a solemn thing if I get into a position under the influence of sin and I sin. Why should it happen? So the prayer is brought into that in this passage. He says further, "Who among you shall have a friend, and shall go to him at midnight and say to him, Friend ...". That is the urgency of prayer, what it effects, that it is greater than friendship, it has greater influence than friendship.
There is definiteness in asking for three loaves. The power of prayer is accentuated, keep on praying. It says, "I say to you, Although he will not get up and give them to him because he is his friend, because of his shamelessness, at any rate, he will rise and give him as many as he wants". Meaning that the man is so affected by being disturbed by this urgency he gives him as many as he wishes. So the Lord says, "Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you. For everyone that asks receives; and he that seeks finds and to him that knocks it will be opened". That is very encouraging for us locally, the power of prayer.
The Lord will use you as you pray; He will not go past you if he can use you. There is on Monday nights a great demand on vessels for the answers to the prayers. We want to be ready to be used, in the prayers being effectuated.
Verses 10 - 12 bring out fatherly qualities and how they are available, in prayer, to the children, and then he says, "If therefore ye, being evil, know how
{65}
to give good gifts to your children, how much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him"? So that the Father who is of heaven is the point before us. He is characteristic of heaven, His attitude is giving. The Father is thus available to us and gives us the very best. The local company and the assembly generally are to be reflective of what is heavenly, and the Father is thinking of that. Under the government of God we are set in circumstances that fit us for certain services, and God takes us up and uses us in that way. He groups circumstances or facts to bring out the great truth of the dispensation from the standpoint of grace. Heaven comes into view, that is what Paul had in mind -- the heavenly truth. Jehovah says as to His house, "my house is a house of prayer" (@Luke 19:46). He made certain persons great there, so that we get well rewarded in going to the prayer meeting. The prayer of faith shall heal the sick. This is a wonderful weapon of service. Luke would understand what diseases mean. We belong to the mediatorial position and as receiving the Spirit we come into it formally and the Spirit is ready to add His help to our weaknesses; so that we should be on the praying side of the matter. The Lord leads the way in it; there is something in it beyond words -- it is a subtle thing.
The ordinary father would not feed his children such as is indicated here -- if a son ask for bread and the father give him a stone, or a fish, and instead give him a serpent, or if he shall ask an egg, shall give him a scorpion. It is to bring out that fatherhood considers for the children -- to bring out what God is. He has the things that we ask for; all the wealth of heaven is at the disposal of the Father and it is given to those who ask Him. The Spirit is viewed as proceeding from the Father -- knowing perfectly all that is in the divine counsels and what God is.
{66}
He carries all that infinite wealth and it is available to prayer.
The Lord was casting out a demon and it was dumb (verse 14), as if He is making way for brothers who do not speak in the assembly. They are hindering the Spirit. The Lord has to act in another way, not praying, so that the dumb spirit is cast out. The devil would keep us silent because prayer is so effectual. This section is intended to help us locally to bring everything into the meeting for prayer. Heaven is so ready to answer and makes so much of it that the prayer meeting would settle the matter.
Then the next thing is to be a vessel ready to be used in answer to the prayers. So, if a person is going on wrongly in a meeting I am ready to go to see him to rebuke him, Praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God. Chapter 15 is to bring out this matter in relation to the gospel, heaven's joy over the repentance of sinners. We have been talking of prayer meetings, now it is gospel meetings. The result in our times in gospel meetings is very small in the sense of actual converts, but they are very important in regard to improvement of the saints, the gospel being effective in saints; it should be kept going. What goes on in our meetings Sunday nights is important in the sense that if only saints are listening they get help in their souls. You get some light and you say, I have never repented of something I did many years ago, and you get help to repent of that thing.
It is the time of faith; faith cometh by hearing, hearing by the word of God. The word of God is going on and faith acts of itself. Take the meeting in Mary's house in @Acts 12, they needed it because they had lost the way of faith. They had been praying for Peter's release, but when he did come to the door they did not believe it. The habit of having prayer in the house before the gospel is blessed of God.
{67}
It is ruinous to ask a brother to preach as a matter of turn; the preaching must always be based on gift, on ability and on being sent; and so selection of preachers is important because God connects the gospel service with gift. The anointing is like a uniform in the army or navy, a man is appointed to do a certain thing because he is supposed to be qualified. The meeting room should not be a training place. It should be a place of skilled workmen. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach" (@Luke 4:18) -- that is not a matter of history, but as a model for preachers. The gospel is to be fully made known by Paul. Who is to be the judge in this matter of preaching? The brother who invites him should be the judge.
(Quote verses 4 to 10.) In both cases the sinner is brought in, but the piece of silver is lost in the house, the sheep is in the wilderness. This is clearly an evangelical picture, the other one is something that has happened in the profession, in the house. Sweeping is not evangelising, it is removing dust, making the house as it should be. Her point is to get this lost piece, and the result is that heaven is brought into it. The house is the dwelling place, involving the sphere of the profession and that a person should be lost there is remarkable. Why is he hiding himself in the house? To go out on the mountains you get away from peoples¬ view, but here in the house you are in view. Here we have a repenting sinner, he continues repenting. Heaven is a wonderful place and is a sympathetic place, and in the presence of God there is rejoicing. It is the personnel there, notice is taken of repentance. All this is to bring heaven near us, all to bring us near so that we can focus our eyes upon heaven. These chapters in Luke are intended to qualify us as having to do with heaven. Heaven is brought to us, but we are also brought to heaven. These meetings ought to bring
{68}
us nearer to heaven so that we can visualise it. The woman alludes to the subjective side of things; that would draw all into the matter. The saints as a whole are concerned; the sweeping is a feminine thought.
THE INFLUENCE OF HEAVEN -- READING 4
@Luke 19:37 - 46; @Luke 24:1 - 9, 44 - 52
Heaven enters into these scriptures in relation to dispensational truth which always occasions questioning and requires instruction in us; and the word as to the heavens, the sun in the heavens and the heavenly bodies are to be for times and seasons and days and years to connect up with this. Heaven determines the changes of dispensation. So in the passage in chapter 19 we have peace in the heaven instead of peace on earth, as in the case of the multitude of the heavenly host in chapter 2. Clearly the teaching of the gospel is in mind, that there are those who observed the pleasure of heaven, it must have first place; it must take precedence over earth -- in result heaven comes first. Therefore, we have to look to heaven for guidance as to change of this dispensation as it was when the Jewish dispensation discontinued and the Christian one began. In either case heaven has to say to it, and this intensifies the importance of what we have been saying, that we should have our eye on heaven.
Ques. The prodigal had sinned against heaven; we must not do that?
In the prodigal's case heaven is owned as having rights. No doubt in that case it would be the heavens as affecting the earth unofficially, heaven in a material sense. We are now confronted with shortage of foods and all kinds of materials and we are reminded that we are dependent upon heaven for these. If we are
{69}
in need of substance we have to look to heaven. It has to do with times and seasons. The earth yields because of heaven's influence, rain and fruitful seasons. So that the heavens in Genesis come in on the second day and the waters are separated and the material heavens are between the waters and are there in relation to the earth physically. So that I suppose the idea was the prodigal had sinned against that, against heaven. Heaven was very bountiful to him and his father, and he had squandered it. The prodigal would mean that the Gentile had benefited by material things from heaven but failed to recognise it in any sense in giving of thanks.
We are told that every creature of God is good and to be received with thanksgiving and sanctified by the word of God and prayer. The benefits of heaven promote thanksgiving to God, whether they be food or clothing or medicine -- all of God's creatures -- and the return from us is acceptable to God.
We are reminded of addition in chapter 19:37,38, "All the multitude of the disciples began, rejoicing, to praise God with a loud voice for all the works of power which they had seen, saying, Blessed the king that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". As if the teaching had been resultful and the time of the Lord's entrance as Messiah was now there and this is the volume of praise. It is not from angels come down, but from men profiting by what they saw in Christ. The heavens have precedence now in the matter of peace in a general way, not simply individuals in heaven or earth, but in heaven as a place. It reflects what is heavenly. This is the dispensational side of the position; it is a critical time because we are passing out of one condition of things into another and heaven must be our guide. These disciples are taught by observation and by direct instruction or by example, taught to see this. They are on the side of
{70}
God as the angels were in chapter 2. The sequence is to bring out their greatness. If these be silent, not heavenly angels, but stones would cry out in His testimony. Here the announcement is the positive side, peace in heaven and glory in the highest. This is the key to the dispensation. Heaven is being announced by some persons on earth, not by angels. God is producing a witness on earth. The devil is doing his worst against the Jews, but God is going to take them up and the devil knows that, and we know that a change is coming and we will celebrate it. That is the great point, the changeover is to be celebrated and in doing it to enhance Christ and the greatness of His Person. God will not send angels down to do it, but He will send stones to do it.
This is an allusion to @Psalm 118:26, "Blessed be he that cometh in the name of Jehovah. We have blessed you out of the house of Jehovah". We have an allusion elsewhere to Zacharias; the point is that we have someone on earth besides angels that know the mind of heaven and are giving it precedence in the matter of peace. @Psalm 118 will take place later; the Jews will welcome Him later, but there is a remnant the Lord has secured to bear witness. Reconciliation in Christianity precedes the idea of our exalted place. Peter introduces @Psalm 118:22, "The stone which the builders rejected", and what follows later in @Psalm 118 is connected with the next dispensation. Paul spoke of himself as an abortion, born out of due time. This is a testimony out of due time, it belongs to Christianity and makes everything of heaven. Still it was out of his time, meaning that he represented the Jewish remnant in the future.
In @Matthew 21:9 the heavenly side is connected with the present dispensation. "The crowds who went before him and who followed cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David". That chapter is preceded by
{71}
the blind men in chapter 20. They begin a note about Jesus which indicates that He was entering into His territory, "Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David". Jesus was about to cross over and they celebrated Him as the Son of David because that was the time for it, and then the riding into the city. The quotation is from Zechariah. Zion's king was there and they take up the same note as they go on to the city that the blind man started with. The children take up the same note, causing opposition to Christ by the leaders, and the Lord says to them, which is a quotation from @Psalm 8:2, "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou established praise". It is the babes there, they are singing in the temple.
So that there is no doubt that the Jewish side is announced but it really has Christianity in mind. There was a tribute to the great king by the little ones. The stones are not alluded to there, but God effected power in the little ones to praise Him. This is grace, but still the word about Jerusalem is very solemn. It is a beautiful thought that runs through Luke that grace is to be with us. "And he answering said to them, I say unto you, If these shall be silent, the stones will cry out. And as he drew near, seeing the city, he wept over it, saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, even at least in this thy day, the things that are for thy peace: but now they are hid from thine eyes; for days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall make a palisaded mound about thee, and shall close thee around, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children in thee; and shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone: because thou knewest not the season of thy visitation".
So that it is for us now to see a little of this subject in Luke, how the heart of Christ is brought into it in sympathy. He says to His disciples, You must begin there to preach the gospel. It is the government of
{72}
God in the closing and winding up of the dispensation, but nevertheless it is the patience and longsuffering of God as well; whilst awful penalties are going to be poured out on Christendom we are not going to give up the idea of the dispensation, it is one of grace.
There are two references to stones in this chapter. The idea of stones crying out would mean that it is a testimony, God making the hardest thing to do His will. A stone not left on a stone would mean a building thrown down. The testimony here below to the changing over, that the earth is to be denied peace, yet it is persons on earth who are testifying to this.
This chapter would introduce feelings with us. The Lord weeps. The weeping prophet wrote Lamentations. It is what the government of God requires that draws out these feelings in the Lord. Noah had to wait 120 years; the longsuffering of God waited while the ark was preparing. We are looking now for the Jews to come in. It is no loss to us in this, but the bearing would be on the mere professors as the dispensation changes over. All the book of Revelation discloses the awful sufferings that they will have to endure. John is also a weeping prophet in Revelation. He weeps because there was no one to open the book, as he thought, and then as eating the little book it was in his mouth sweet but in the belly bitter. He is a feeling man. Awful things are going to happen and we are not unfeeling. We rejoice in hope, as the Lord said, "Rejoice that your names are written in the heavens" (@Luke 10:20), but that does not incapacitate us as to feeling.
Ques. Is the severity of judgment in this chapter seen in that the children are included in it, whereas with the unbelievers in the wilderness they escaped it?
The little children were to go into Canaan. The destruction of Jerusalem is one of the most awful things that ever happened and the Lord is feeling it anticipatively.
{73}
We have the first fruits of the Spirit. The second fruits will be among the nations and the Jews presently. God would make men out of us and draw us to His side of things, so that we are not indifferent to things that happen in the government of God. These chapters are full of all this -- the changeover of the dispensation and how God has a witness on earth as to what is going to happen in heaven. The finishing touches on the assembly will be to revive these feelings. God produces feelings. In @2 Samuel 21 David was a very feeling, sympathetic man, but he was called upon to meet a very great emergency, a famine of three years, and he had made no inquiry about it. Then David did inquire, and God says, it is because of Saul and his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites. David makes no further inquiry, it is a question of the government of God. It is not what they gain, but what God would convey of His mind about the matter. Seven men were hung up on the hill -- David apparently did not feel it -- but one woman, Rizpah, did. She prepared a place, a shelter for those bodies from the storms and rains and kept the birds away. What an awful thing it was to be there! She suffered, she had right feelings; she would say, why are they not buried? But they were not buried; to leave them hanging for all that time -- she felt it and stayed there. Someone told David and he began to repent, and afterwards God was propitious to the land because of the feelings in the matter. So, there is need of feeling about a matter. God is looking for right feelings.
The Lord Jesus is the feeling One here. Think of His glorious dignity when He said, "If these shall be silent, the stones will cry out". The Spirit of God is stressing the Person of Christ, the glory of Christ in all this. The Spirit of God comes down from heaven carrying all that God is down here. He hovers over the face of the deep, as He does now. These feelings
{74}
shown here in the Lord should characterise the saints as taking up discipline matters, because the discipline goes on and has to be carried out. Those in Corinth failed to feel with the man that had been put out of fellowship. The seven yearling lambs in @Numbers 28 speak of the suffering Christ. That would greatly modify our spirits and soften them in connection with divine feelings and emotions in any kind of discipline. God is looking for promotion of that in us now.
"And entering into the temple, he began to cast out those that sold and bought in it, saying to them, It is written, My house is a house of prayer, but *ye* have made it a den of robbers". Attention is called to the dispensation, what it is publicly. The destruction of Jerusalem is on account of it, and this is a manifest evidence of making it a place of merchandise instead of a house of prayer. In regard to robbery, we get in @Malachi 3:8, "Will a man rob God?" It is a solemn indictment.
A reference was made as to what the authorities say about this -- that the Lord Jesus used physical violence, and our young brothers here should do the same. It is said that the Lord cast them out. In @John 2:14 - 16 it says, "He found in the temple the sellers of oxen and sheep and doves, and the money-changers sitting; and, having made a scourge of cords, he cast them all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and he poured out the change of the money-changers, and overturned the tables, and said to the sellers of doves, Take these things hence; make not my Father's house a house of merchandise". I suppose John would bear more on the point that the Lord would use violence, but still the physical side was greater in connection with the sheep and oxen. But even if He did use violence on them it was in keeping with the dispensation. He had not yet announced the kingdom of heaven and that Peter should put the sword in the sheath, it is the old
{75}
dispensation still. Goodness and severity run through until the changeover. The wickedness that is in the Christian profession is under God's eye to be dealt with in time.
Rem. The temple built by Herod was too big, it allowed too much room for that kind of business. It was to call attention to the degeneration of the dispensation. The book of Revelation is to show what God is going to do with it, as to His feelings and how long He is to go on with it. It is the long-suffering of God to keep on with it.
In chapter 24 the point in mind is to show how heaven interfered at the tomb of Jesus to change our minds about anything that might be involved in unbelief or superstition. It says, two men stood by them in shining garments. They came from heaven suddenly to remedy the situation, to check some evil -- unbelief. Then in the second section read, verses 44 - 52, the Lord stresses the Spirit coming in from above, involving clothing and the witness to the gospel, that the gospel should begin at Jerusalem; and that He was going up as quickly as possible to set up that order of things, the gospel order of things, and it should begin at Jerusalem.
The sweetness of honeycomb is in the mouth of Christ, the principle of mutuality is there; the Lord effects it in the disciples and as completing the work in this chapter. Why the combination broiled fish and honeycomb? It is sovereignty. How would they get the fish? The fish of the sea belongs to God. The Lord indicates to Peter how it could happen; they had to go and get what the sea produces; the Son of man has rights in the sea. It is the product of the sovereignty of God. Bees go to the flowers and get the honey, but the fish of the sea are a sovereign product of God that the believer has to go and get by line or net -- it belongs to God. The thought of mutuality would come in with the
{76}
piece of fish and honeycomb. It is what you share with others.
The opening up of our understanding to understand the Scriptures is a provision of Christ. In verse 42 we have the broiled fish and honeycomb, and "These are the words" -- showing that they had profited by them -- then, "that all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled". We have the mutual side, Moses and the Psalms, but it is not only an exposition; this is giving understanding. That is additional to an exposition, but if we have not got understanding we do not get anything out of it. "The Lord will give thee understanding in all things" (@2 Timothy 2:7). The Lord expanded what they had -- a full understanding of all that the Scriptures spoke of Christ -- a marvellous provision of food.
We have the Lord's own word here and it is well to note it. If you want to go by it, it is very profitable. When He spoke to those going to Emmaus He interpreted to them all the things concerning Himself. There is much that is prophetic in the Psalms. It is very remarkable the number of Psalms touched on in @Hebrews 1. God honours the saints¬ experience. He brings out the testimony of the glories of Christ in the first of Hebrews.
In these last chapters in Luke a crisis has come. John the baptist, according to John, makes a great deal of heaven. Here we have the changeover in mind and the importance of our being in it and coming out in testimony at the end. "Ye are witnesses", and the clothing from above has its own word, that we are not to begin to preach until we are clothed with power from on high; and then returning to Jerusalem. Balance is one of the greatest things in the universe, right balance about everything. The universe could not exist without it. "Thou art weighed in the balances" (@Daniel 5:27). The greatness of Christ is
{77}
to be kept in view -- and the disciples were praising and saying glory in the highest, peace in heaven, but the Lord alludes to His own Person when He said the stones would cry out if they did not.
THE INFLUENCE OF HEAVEN -- READING 5
@Acts 1:6 - 11; @Acts 10:9 - 17; @2 Corinthians 12:1 - 10
What is in mind particularly in this last reading on our subject is that we may get some insight into heaven as a place, a place to which man has access. The Acts has the assembly in view, and in the main that it might be qualified as a vessel of witness or testimony here. But there is also the thought of looking into heaven, and in Peter's case something that comes down and goes up and stays and that what comes out of it goes back into it; and then Paul's experience in being caught up to the third heaven, calling attention to degrees in the subject of heaven. We have also Stephen, a well known passage as to heaven, the heaven opened to him and what he saw there. We have concrete actual witnesses in Peter and Paul, Stephen, and we may add John according to Revelation who was invited up to heaven. In the assembly we have the effect of all these witnesses carried down; the thing is in the assembly, it is a treasure in the way of light and knowledge.
Ques. Is heaven available now to us, that we reach it?
That is in mind in Paul. John was invited into it, although he was invited up to see things that referred to the judgment of God mainly, yet he saw great and blessed positive things, especially the assembly itself coming down from God, from heaven.
What is in mind is the 'up' line. In the main the twelve point to the 'down' line, that is, what comes
{78}
down in testimony here. From the time that the Jews rejected the testimony of the gospel the idea of what is in heaven came into view in Stephen, and then Peter seeing the vessel coming down; and then Paul himself being caught up. He was caught up to the third heaven and into Paradise and he heard wonderful things there. This is to enrich the assembly in the sense of testimony and the knowledge of it, what is in heaven.
I suggested verses 6 - 9 so that we might see how we are shut up to what the Spirit would bring in. There are restrictions placed on the apostles as to their knowledge; the Lord said, It is not yours to know. There is a suggestion of a principle that you are not to know the times and seasons; they are to be known, but it is not particularly Christianity; He is confining them to what would be properly Christianity. The two witnesses in white addressed them as "men of Galilee", not as apostles or disciples -- that is your position; you have everything to learn. And they just inquire, "Why do ye stand looking into heaven?" You might say that is contradictory, because we are to look into it, whether we see it with a natural eye or if it is of faith.
Ques. "In like manner" -- would that refer to the appearing? It would not be the rapture. That is the thought -- as ye have seen Him go -- He is to return. "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven". That was the word left to them, that they were to expect Him; it is an added thought to verses 6 - 9, where they are shut up to the Spirit. Give attention to the Spirit and everything will be clear, nothing will be omitted that you should know. "The Holy Spirit having come upon you, and ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth". They are
{79}
bound up with the Spirit. He did not go up secretly as far as they were concerned, He went up in their sight, as Elijah's going up. The disciples are very special in His mind, and things happen before their eyes. In anything that the Spirit is doing, make abundant room for it. What is in our minds must be clarified. The fact that those who saw Him went to the upper room shows that they were adjusted. They went to the upper room and then to the temple, and then the Spirit would use them subsequently. The handiwork of Christ is of great interest to heaven -- the ten days and what they were doing in them.
The second chapter tells us that "When the day of Pentecost was now accomplishing, they were all together in one place". There was not an absentee, they were together in affection. The Spirit descended in a bodily form and abode on Jesus, and here it is to a large number of persons, and it sat on each of them.
Ques. In @John 14 it is the Spirit in you, and here it is upon you; is that the idea of the anointing? I think it is the public position. Luke has in mind almost entirely the public position because it is a question of testimony.
The moral position of chapter 1 corresponds to the moral position of @Psalm 1. It is the godly man, how worthy he is. What Christ is effecting is proving itself in how the disciples behaved morally. The white involves purity -- that touch entered into the upper room, because the persons there were not only brothers or sisters. It says, "they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called the mount of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath-day's journey off. And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber, where were staying both Peter, and John, and James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus and Simon the zealot, and Jude the brother of James.
{80}
These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren" (verses 12 - 14). That is the composition of the upper room -- brothers and sisters. The adjustment had that in mind; the composition would be in purity. Then it says, "in those days" -- that is ten days; there were never ten days like them; "Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren, said, (the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty) ..." The word 'crowd' is used, but each one has his distinction; what follows in the selection of the twelfth apostle is to bring out all the moral qualities. In the second chapter each one is noticed by the Spirit as are they all together. This is a company of brothers and sisters; that is carried through into 1 Corinthians, and what is proper in such a circle. We must have both brothers and sisters.
The Lord did more than affect the twelve; He affected others. It is remarkable how His own brothers and His own mother come into it. The spiritual affections attaching to sisters are of God and they are to be kept in that way. I believe the two men in white are to point out what is necessary.
Ques. Would this connect with the previous scripture read, "Lord, teach us to pray" (@Luke 11:1) -- would this complete their education?
Yes, He would open their understanding. Peter quickly uses the Lord's instruction. One of the greatest things in the young is to have obedience. The Holy Spirit is given to those who obey.
These are fundamental thoughts leading up to the assembly. The assembly is formed in chapter 2, and we have arrived at the dispensation. Now we should consider how certain ones are brought into heavenly things. Stephen as a martyr -- the heavens are opened to him. It is a wider thought, it is introductory to Paul's ministry. Peter being administrator, having
{81}
the keys, he is caused to be in a trance to see this wonderful vision, this vessel like a great sheet knit at the four corners and let down to earth, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air; all in it, so as to make him a real administrator of heavenly things, so that he might use these keys in heavenly dignity in letting in the Gentiles. There came suddenly a sound from heaven. It would almost seem as though heaven was just waiting for them to be gathered.
What we do down here is no accident, it is in the heavenly design. The thing happened suddenly, just as the two men appeared suddenly in @Luke 24 and the heavenly visitants in @Luke 2. God has His mind and it depends upon certain things in us -- how serious if we fail in it! God reckons on certainty in His work. What is down here corresponds fully to what is up there. It is a divine Person down here and a divine Person up there. We are essential to the divine pattern, the divine mind.
As to Peter's vision, the word 'vessel' is significant and really points to the assembly and each one of us is a vessel. Paul was a vessel. "And he became hungry and desired to eat. But as they were making ready an ecstasy came upon him: and he beholds the heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending, as a great sheet, bound by the four corners and let down to the earth; in which were all the quadrupeds and creeping things of the earth, and the fowls of the heaven. And there was a voice to him, Rise, Peter, slay and eat. And Peter said, In no wise, Lord; for I have never eaten anything common or unclean. And there was a voice again the second time to him, What God has cleansed, do not thou make common. And this took place thrice, and the vessel was straightway taken up into heaven".
Peter is fully affected by what he saw; he is ready
{82}
now for the heavenly matter. The sheet, although of woven material, is bound, it is going to hold, it is going back into heaven, to stay there. What the Lord says to Peter is very striking. Peter was very definite as to how religious he was, but he was really condemning himself in his remarks. He says, In no wise, Lord. He is a very bold man, he is very abrupt in his answer; he is combating heaven. The thing happening three times succeeds in changing his mind.
In these last days when religious denominations are multiplying the work is harder because every time you have to deal with a soul he has some predilections of earlier experience. They have in their minds earlier things and they are usually prejudices and they have to overcome them. We have to be patient in dealing with souls, but we must overcome the prejudices, so that every man must be made perfect in Christ.
As to Paul's experience of being caught up to the third heaven and into Paradise, he had kept this matter in his mind for fourteen years, and now he speaks of it. "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;) such a one caught up to the third heaven. And I know such a man, (whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows;) that he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter. Of such a one I will boast, but of myself I will not boast, unless in my weaknesses".
Then he goes on to tell us how the Lord attended him so that this precious light and experience which he had in Paradise should be preserved and effective in the assembly treasury, for it comes down to us preserved by the Spirit. The 'making' matter, of course, is still going on, because it is said, "And that
{83}
I might not be exalted by the exceeding greatness of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn for the flesh, a messenger of Satan that he might buffet me, that I might not be exalted. For this I thrice besought the Lord that it might depart from me. And he said to me, My grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me. Wherefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in necessities, in persecutions, in straits, for Christ: for when I am weak, then I am powerful".
It would seem that all this is required during the fourteen years since he had been up into Paradise, the making process went on. It opens up a wide subject as to the treasuries that David speaks of that we have by the Spirit of God, by the temple, in such a person as Mary the Lord's mother who was in the upper room, and in such a person as Paul himself; how things are to be kept in our souls as treasure. It is said by Luke that Mary the Lord's mother "kept all these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart" (@Luke 2:19). Later we are told that she kept things relative to the Boy Jesus. As a figure it is said of Jacob that he kept the things that Joseph said as a young man; so that the treasury is to be filled with these things relative to Christ.
But Paul has something relative to Paradise that he has been keeping fourteen years, it is in the treasury. And so it is, as we are enriched in these matters and carrying them in our hearts we are qualified for our heavenly portion. When we get there, 'There no stranger-God shall meet thee'. (`76:10) Every servant has his own distinctiveness -- the secret, the name that no one knows but himself.
In David's regime we have doorkeepers and storekeepers; we should recognise the importance of doorkeepers and what comes in, and storekeepers,
{84}
what has come in as watched over and cared for as the dedicated things. We do not cast our pearls before swine.
Ques. What is the difference between Paradise and the third heaven?
Paradise means 'garden of delights, place of pleasure', whereas the third heaven indicates altitude clearly. Measurement denotes creature limitations. Paul must have seen things in Paradise that he never spoke of, they were too wonderful to speak of.
{85}
DEDICATION OF THE ALTAR AND OF THE WALL
@Numbers 7:10 - 17; @Nehemiah 12:27 - 43
J.T. I was thinking of the dedication of the wall in Nehemiah, and the dedication of the altar in Numbers. It will be observed that these scriptures include the important thought of princes in relation to the great things in mind. The first scripture is a type of the inauguration of the dispensation, and the second is a remnant period, but the princely thought is quite prominent in both. It is said, "princes shalt thou make them in all the earth" (@Psalm 45:16), and I thought it would be appropriate to be drawn into the current of this thought, and the main subject, namely the dedication of the altar and the dedication of the wall. @Numbers 7 contemplates the heavenly system set up, as it is said, "And it came to pass on the day that Moses had completed the setting up of the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and hallowed it, and all the furniture thereof and the altar and all its utensils, and had anointed them, and hallowed them, that the princes of Israel, the heads of their fathers¬ houses, the princes of the tribes, they that were over them that had been numbered, offered" (@Numbers 7:1,2). Who they are is very plainly stated. They are active in relation to a heavenly system in the antitype; that is, among ourselves, and one thing to be noted is that each one had his day, according to verse 10: "And the princes presented the dedication-gift of the altar on the day that it was anointed; and the princes presented their offering before the altar". And in verse 11 it says, "each prince on his day". So that whilst there are twelve of them, and they act together, for there is one gift and one offering, we may say, yet each one is seen offering, seen acting.
{86}
A.N.W. Would you suggest for us the difference between anointing and hallowing and dedicating?
J.T. The anointing, of course, we all know alludes to the use of the oil as in @Exodus 40. All the parts were anointed with oil, the altar and its utensils; then the hallowing accompanies the anointing, I would think, as a mental thought. The whole scene was mentally accepted; I mean, it is so regarded by those who have to do with it, involving the idea of holiness and separation. You had something to add to that?
A.N.W. "Father, thy name be hallowed" (@Luke 11:2). It is held sacred in the mind. Then would the dedication be the feeling of the princes in regard to it?
J.T. Yes; it is devoted formally to certain purposes. The altar is devoted. That is the idea of dedication, use in the service of God. We might go into a building set up for religious purposes here on earth now, and think it was hallowed, but it can only be so by the state of the persons who were regarding it. That implies the Spirit; what Christians are. That power does not belong to unconverted people however religious they may be.
W.W.M. You spoke of the dedication of the altar in the beginning of this dispensation. Does that suggest the beginning of Acts?
J.T. Yes; things were taking form then, the Holy Spirit having come, confirming what we are saying, that you cannot have Christianity by mere natural, mental attitude or ceremony. It must involve the Spirit.
A.N.W. Verse 88 says, "This was the dedication-gift of the altar, after it had been anointed".
J.T. That confirms it. It was a very big affair, too. The dedication-gift is depicted in these verses beginning with verse 84, "Twelve silver dishes, twelve silver bowls, twelve cups of gold: each silver dish of a hundred and thirty shekels, and each bowl
{87}
seventy: all the silver of the vessels was two thousand four hundred shekels according to the shekel of the sanctuary; twelve golden cups full of incense, each cup of ten shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary: all the gold of the cups, a hundred and twenty shekels. All the cattle for the burnt-offering was: twelve bullocks, twelve rams, twelve yearling lambs and their oblation; and twelve bucks of the goats for a sin-offering. And all the cattle for the sacrifice of the peace-offering was: twenty-four bullocks, sixty rams, sixty he-goats, sixty yearling lambs". I think, viewing that antitypically, we can see what the force of these terms is, and that all imitations are just spurious or worse. The assumption of buildings and the like being hallowed is just false. There is no virtue in it at all.
C.A.M. Referring to early Acts, would you say this wealth was acquired by the twelve during the life of the Lord? Where would all this wealth have been accumulated?
J.T. That is a good inquiry. We are told in @Genesis 15 that Israel would come out of Egypt with great wealth, which would allude to just what you say: what we get in our exercises in an early sense in company with the Lord. That is what the disciples acquired, but that period could not be what is described here typically. It was before the Spirit came. This passage contemplates the Spirit having come.
C.A.M. Yes; I noticed you said that. I thought when you said that it would be the Spirit making the wealth good. The altar was not very intelligently known by them until the end of the Lord's life.
J.T. The Lord stressed it as He drew near to the close. He stressed the idea of suffering. He made His soul an offering for sin.
W.F.K. What constitutes a prince? Is it one who has something to give to God?
{88}
J.T. It is just what our brother suggested. What the disciples were as in company with the Lord, and what Israel was in the type as it came out of Egypt. It came out with great property, great wealth.
W.F.K. Would Barnabas be one, a prince?
J.T. Just so; the twelve all had that character. The wealth had to be put together. It is viewed as one in this chapter.
W.F.K. Have you any thought as to why there are twelve?
J.T. The princes stand in relation to the system as representing intelligence and wealth. It is the heavenly system that we are in connection with. These men are called princes right through. They adorn and support the thing in this sense in a princely way, so that the whole divine system takes character in this sense by what they do. We are not impoverished persons. Christianity is set up in wealth.
G.V.D. Would the crowd of names in @Acts 1 suggest something of princely wealth?
J.T. I think that is good. Names would indicate that. We are all living, all distinguishable. You will notice here that paragraphs are carefully pointed out, beginning with verse 10, referring to the first prince. He is spoken of at the beginning of this paragraph and at the end of it. "And he that presented his offering the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah". And then we are told in verse 17, "This was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab". And so with every paragraph. Each prince is designated by his name, and his father's name and what he offered, so that he, on his day, is on everybody's mind. Each of them has a great place, and then they are all seen together and the volume of their offerings is all viewed as one.
F.S.C. Have you any thought as to why the order of the names is changed from chapter 1? They are all named one by one there, but the order is changed here.
{89}
J.T. It says, "The princes of Israel, the heads of their fathers¬ houses, the princes of the tribes, they that were over them that had been numbered, offered". What is the allusion you make to chapter 1? What is the first name mentioned in chapter 1?
F.S.C. Reuben.
J.T. That is because Reuben is the first-born. We begin here with Judah.
F.N.W. The order here corresponds with the order of the encampments in chapter 2.
J.T. That is right. It is a sovereign matter, whereas the other is evidently by birth just as the names on the shoulder-pieces and on the breastplate. So that we are in the presence of divine ordering and selection. The princes are all viewed in that light, which will be the eternal position.
C.A.M. In some sense these princes all seem to be equally wealthy, at least in the gift.
J.T. That is the wonderful thing, that it is so. I suppose it would be by arrangement, but it is to bring out in the antitype that each prince has his gift. There is no distinction except sovereignly, that they are sovereignly situated, hence Judah has the first place; but all the others are just as well to do as far as their gifts are concerned.
C.A.M. Would that have to do with what the prince is Godward, because when it comes to what a prince does in conflict there might be quite a distinction?
J.T. If he is left to himself, if it is an optional matter, which, of course, God recognises, too -- what you bring. God will recognise you in what you bring, as in 1 Corinthians, the gifts or collection; Paul made provision for what they would give and brought the first day of the week into it, and then in 2 Corinthians there is much enlargement on what was done, but here it is not that, as if God were to say, You are all to look alike and give alike. You have plenty to
{90}
do it with. Therefore, every prince -- take Nahshon -- he not only comes under the eye of heaven in what he is doing, but of all the congregation. It is a wonderful day, and this prince has every heart and mind for that day, so that he will be known for ever.
C.A.M. Sonship underlies it. In that sense we are all equal.
J.T. Quite so; sonship does underlie it. The principle was there before they left Egypt -- Israel is My son.
Ques. May I ask if this offering is tribal or household-wise -- the offering as offered by the princes?
J.T. It is the tribe. You will notice what is said. "The princes of Israel, the heads of their fathers¬ houses, the princes of the tribes". Of course, the household necessarily enters into the tribe, but the tribes are outstanding, so that it says, "And he that presented his offering the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah". It is a tribal thing, but the household necessarily enters into the tribe.
Ques. How does that stand in relation to the various cities or assemblies or localities?
J.T. I think that is what is in mind -- the idea of leadership prevailing everywhere in the assembly, so that Nahshon is a sort of leading man and he is before us a whole day, and we are reminded he belongs to the tribe of Judah, and it is on account of the sovereignty of God. It is not Reuben, but Judah. That is what we learn on that day. It is a twelve-day matter. They are all in it, I suppose. How long it took, I do not know, but it was a daily matter for each prince.
W.F.K. And then at the end the aggregate is taken up. Would that be assembly service?
J.T. It is to show how real the unity was; that their offerings were alike.
A.N.W. Does the precise similarity in what they
{91}
offered denote that in the princehood there is no rivalry?
J.T. That is what is meant. We are in the presence of the divine system which is an eternal thing, a heavenly thing, and God is parading His princes, the production of His own work. Each one is seen by himself and then their offerings are all seen as united as one.
J.T.Jr. Does the measure of the sanctuary coming in here show that the thing is all according to the divine requirement?
J.T. I think that is what is meant. What preceded it necessarily enters into this. Numbers is the tabernacle in the wilderness, but it is, nevertheless, a heavenly system. It is as real as if it were in heaven; but it is in the wilderness. It has the innate power of holding itself free from defilement. It is as heavenly in the wilderness as it is in heaven, but it requires more power down here to keep out the evil. That is why the princes are so prominent, because they have wealth enough to do that spiritually.
A.B.P. Would you suggest what is typified in the basons and the bowls and the offerings themselves? There is no moral issue to be settled here. It seems a sort of abstract setting.
J.T. Apparently they are all ready. It must have been either by corporate agreement or by great spiritual unity that they are all alike. I would think that in eternity it would appear that we are all alike, because we are constituted alike, not by formal agreement. It is because of what we are. It would bring out the uniformity of God's work, without any formal agreement on the part of those who are the subjects of it.
C.A.M. I was struck by the reference you made to @Psalm 45:16 "Princes shalt thou make them in all the earth". The next verse says, "Therefore shall
{92}
the peoples praise thee for ever and ever". That is as near eternity as can be.
J.T. Just so; the time of merging comes in; the flesh and blood period comes in, and then what it is as merged in its final relation. It is the outcome of the perfect work of God, all done on the principle of pattern.
F.N.W. Does the special vow of the Nazarite come into this?
J.T. Very likely. The teaching is certainly cumulative, and this chapter must be the outcome of the previous one, even as to the numbering and as to the position of the princes. It must work out from the facts presented in the earlier part of the book, so that the work of God is magnified. "What hath God wrought?" (@Numbers 23:23). God is parading this matter of His princes; they are all brought forward and it is made sure that the one mentioned in each is named at the end of it, and it is really his work; it is his product. Why is it that he had the same as the others? That is left open. That has to work out in the work of God. We do not agree with one another as to how we are to appear eternally. It is God's doing. But we agree with one another on general principles; we love one another.
J.T.Jr. Would this be what Balaam saw? There was no iniquity in Jacob or Israel.
J.T. Just so. He saw them dwelling in tents. It was what he saw, the individual dwellings -- that it was a question of the work of God in each, but they were all in one set of tents.
A.B.P. If I understood what you had in mind, what is given represents the greatness of the work of God in the person, but the offerings represent a personal appreciation of the work of Christ, not as related to any particular moral issue but what it was in its own greatness.
J.T. I would say that, so that each prince would
{93}
have the same apprehension of any given phase of Christ. They all had the same opportunity. They met with Him. "The men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us" (@Acts 1:21). So that they all had the same opportunities, and I believe God is saying they did not have a special personal understanding with each other that they were to have the same mind about the Lord, but in result it was so. It was not their design, but it was God's design, so that the product is here.
A.P.T. Regimentation seems to be the order of the day now. I was wondering if this chapter indicates the divine way. Would that be right?
J.T. Tell us more, please.
A.P.T. I was only struck with the suggestion that we will all be like Christ. It will be as a result of God's work in us, not in a regimental way that men have in their minds, but it will be all God's sovereignty. I do not know how to express it, but these twelve men here were alike in everything they did, but it evidently had divine approval.
J.T. That is what is meant in the antitype. However much or little you have taken in of Christ, you have exactly the same opportunities as others, and God is the Potter, so to speak. He is the great Former of all, and He has a scheme in His mind. He is going to make that scheme work out through your exercises, so that His pattern is perfect at the end, because it is said of Christ that we are to be conformed to His image. There is a real change to His image, and He is to be the Firstborn among many brethren. They are all made according to pattern. The greatness of God is seen in the fact that He works out His pattern through your exercises and mine. He reaches His end. I believe that is the parade here. It is a field day. "What hath God
{94}
wrought!" We get that later, but these princes excel as examples of His workmanship.
A.C. This chapter speaks largely of the dignity of the princes. Levites are often mentioned, but is there any distinction between what is levitical and princely?
J.T. The levitical part is in the first paragraph. You will notice that, the giving of the princes -- of waggons and bullocks. They did not specify what they were to be used for, but it says "they presented them before the tabernacle. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, Take it of them, and they shall be for the performance of the service of the tent of meeting, and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to each according to his service. And Moses took the waggons and the oxen, and gave them to the Levites. Two waggons and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon, according to their service; and four waggons and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari, according to their service, -- under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none, for the service of the sanctuary was upon them: they bore what they carried upon the shoulder" (verses 3 - 9). That is all a settled matter by itself before we come to verse 10. It is a question of levitical service and how God is providing for them according to the work. The princes¬ offerings fitted exactly with that. God is taking on the princes¬ gift of oxen and waggons for His priests to use.
A.C. There is a merging, and the thing in itself is of such unique dignity that when it comes to the place the princes have in the chapter there is a climax reached.
J.T. The waggons and the oxen did not have to be held in reserve until some need arose. Heaven immediately specifies their use, showing the gift of the princes was in accord with the mind of heaven, meaning it was all in love. Everything we have is
{95}
useful and useable and should not be held in reserve.
J.A.P. Are all saints looked at as princes? @Psalm 113:7,8 says, "He raiseth up the poor out of the dust; from the dunghill he lifteth up the needy, to set him among nobles, among the nobles of his people". We have been raised from the dunghill.
J.T. That is the thought. They are looked at here as in the heavenly system to bring out what God has wrought. The dunghill will all have gone out of sight when we enter into heavenly places. Like Peter, a fisherman, see what God has made out of him.
R.W.S. "Being seen by them during forty days" (@Acts 1:3). Would the impressions gathered up then, seeing Him, be co-ordinated by the Holy Spirit coming down?
J.T. I think so. It was to confirm the pattern. The Lord coming in in the forty days would be a highly finishing process. That is, it was Himself in a spiritual sense, so that if He took five hundred brethren, He would make them what they had never been before in that appearing. They would be impressed all at the same time by what Christ is, as you might say -- glorious. So that it is into "the same image from glory to glory" (@2 Corinthians 3:18).
R.W.S. I was interested in your stressing the point of the Holy Spirit. Sometimes we speak about the way the disciples are spoken of in the Scriptures toward the end, not very favourably, as in Luke, and I wondered if after the impression of the forty days, the Spirit would take that on and make them princes.
J.T. I think He would. The matter is all one. We might say the Lord made the twelve apostles while He was down here, but they really are included in the gifts He received above. "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things; and *he* has given
{96}
some apostles, and some prophets" (@Ephesians 4:10,11). He received as Man gifts for men, all in relation to men. Now you cannot say the twelve were not included, and, of course, historically, they would gather what the heavenly part is by the Spirit having come, and even by the appearances of the Lord during the forty days, but it is all one thing. Therefore, the twelve would be included in the list alluded to in @Ephesians 4:11, "And he has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ; until we all arrive ..." It is all one thing. It took years to do it, but it is all one thing. It is all a heavenly matter. They have all come out of heaven. Christianity has come out of heaven and is going back into heaven. I believe that enters into this chapter.
J.T.Jr. In regard to our unity which you were speaking about, we have that thought in @Ephesians 4:3: "using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace". It is a secret matter, the working out of unity in the princes. There is no jealousy or ill feeling, but love is behind the whole matter.
J.T. That is the way to get at it, and the divine pattern is there, and it will be worked out. There will be no discrepancy whatever.
A.P.T. In the selection of one to take Judas¬ place, evidently there was no discrepancy with him.
J.T. Apparently not. He fitted in, but they were all immersed in the heavenly pattern. It is not simply what they learned here below, but the effect of the heavenly hue being put on them. So that they are all from the same source.
A.N.W. While Matthew and John accompanied
{97}
the Lord in His life of flesh and blood, they evidently received their ministry at Pentecost.
J.T. Really they all did. Their real ministry was after the Spirit came down. Peter was a leader. "First Peter". He shows how perfect He was in His work. The Lord went up, we are told, far above all the heavens. We are not told that in Acts. It is Paul who tells us that to bring out what this matter is; this matter of gift and princes, that it is not simply what they acquired in the company of Christ here below. They come out of heaven. The Holy Spirit brings the whole matter down, and they are immersed in it.
C.A.M. That heavenly light in Paul's soul lights up that quotation from the Psalms about His having gone up there as Man, there for men, and when that heavenly light leaves its height all the whole scheme opens up with glory.
J.T. Just so, so that the allusion to heaven in Acts enters into all this. First, the sound from heaven, and the Spirit coming out in power, breathing, and then the light from heaven, and then the voice from heaven. All that is in keeping with what we are saying. The heavenly thing embraced all that was at Pentecost. Paul came in later, but it is the same matter. He mentioned them all together in @1 Corinthians 15. He came in last himself, he says, but it is all the same thing. The idea of rivalry and ambition being shut out -- even although it may be there, God will wear it down so that it will never come into the pattern. It would mar the pattern. Someone was writing the other day that the Lord is taking on fresh workmen, as if the work was enlarging. But He is going to unify all that He is doing, so that the model is right.
A.B.P. The large place that is given to the peace-offering has some relation to that.
J.T. I would think that. The first thing mentioned
{98}
after the full vessels is, "one young bullock, one ram, one yearling lamb, for a burnt-offering"; the second is, "one buck of the goats for a sin-offering"; and the third is, "and for a sacrifice of peace-offering, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs". That, I think, would bring out the fellowship side. Now, John says, "that which we have seen and heard we report to you, that *ye* also may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ" (@1 John 1:3). Well, now, I think these peace-offerings mean -- there was a lot of that at the beginning, not only the idea of the burnt-offering, and the sin-offering, but this peace-offering. The brethren were all together, we are told; first in one place, and then they were all together, in principle. The end of @Acts 2 shows they were all together, which would mean these peace-offerings, and God having part in it. So that we are all getting together, and getting to be like one another. You do not want to have anything very different from others if you love them. You want to be like them and they like you, and all like Christ and all like God. It is a unifying idea all the way through.
J.T.Jr. I suppose when Paul went up to Jerusalem and spent fifteen days with Peter that was what was in mind.
J.T. He would see what Peter thought and would take it on. It is that sort of thing all the time, and these meetings are intended for that in our case, that we should be like each other.
C.A.M. Before we go to heaven there will be that kind of union among the saints all over the world.
J.T. That is what the Lord is aiming at, and the pressure abroad and the discipline we are going through, specific things, are all to that end. There is a lot of elimination needed and it is going on. It is a making process.
{99}
J.A.P. It is a remarkable thing that the first division was over an altar. The tribes of Reuben and Gad built an altar of grand appearance which was over against the other altar. It really divided the brethren.
J.T. Do you mean it was a partisan thing?
J.A.P. If we are all looking at one altar, we will be right.
J.T. Therefore the dimensions are specifically given. There is so much made here of the dedication of the altar. It is the place we gather and where we sacrifice.
A.B.P. There was no re-dedication of the altar. In the book of Ezra when it was set on its base it functioned immediately without any re-dedication. That would be in line with the unity of the matter, the same thing going through. It is not re-established.
J.T. Yes, indeed.
J.H. In @John 17:23 the Lord says, "That they may be perfected into one", would that be the thought of unity? "That the world may know that thou hast sent me".
J.T. Just so. @John 17 enters into all this most beautifully, and especially the glories there. The glories that the Lord manifests, the one that He is going to enter into, that He had been in before, and the one that is being given Him, and the one that He is giving others Himself. Glories are like degrees, but affecting us, unifying us, similarising us, that we rejoice in others¬ glory.
F.N.W. The testimony went out by the kings of Midian, "As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king" (@Judges 8:18). There was similarity on princely lines.
J.T. That is good.
F.S.C. Do you think the vessels refer to Christ down here?
J.T. They are different sizes, one of different
{100}
metal even, so that they deserve very special consideration as to what they allude to. It is not that silver is of any less value than gold here. They are metals of precious importance, silver alluding to a certain feature such as redemption, and gold to what is of God, but they are both really alike. Silver and gold are of the same value. They must allude to what there was in relation to these princes -- what an apprehension each had of each vessel; so that the likeness of each, the correspondence between them would be derived from all they had inwardly as vessels. Vessels must denote what was in the offerers¬ mind. The mind has a great deal to do with all this in the antitype. It is what is working in our minds; the ideas we have.
W.W.M. Would you say we have Mary of Bethany brought in at the end of the Lord's pathway in John, to show what this offering really was? She had it in her heart. She would carry the feelings of what would correspond with the princes.
J.T. There is no box mentioned. She was the box. I believe that is the idea. There is a box mentioned in the other gospels, but not in John, and yet she kept it, so that she must have had power to keep out corruption; "love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption" (@Ephesians 6:24). Judas was there. He is over against her, very opposed to a vessel containing anything that referred to Christ.
T.E.H. Would you help me in relation to Peter and John? Peter said, "Look on us" (@Acts 3:4). Is that the ornamental side of the truth in the person?
J.T. I would think that. There is something there to be looked at. It fits into what we are saying. They were in the hands, of course, of Christ, but they were heavenly. The heavenly side is not so much stressed until Paul comes, but it was there, and it was there in Peter and John.
A.B.P. We are told in @Acts 2:47 that the Lord
{101}
added "those that were to be saved". But when we come to Paul he was an elect vessel (@Acts 9:15). It is a vessel and in view of apostleship.
J.T. Just so. One would find that in Paul. For instance he says, "Known and read of all men" (@2 Corinthians 3:2). What was that? It was what was in him. It was readable in him. It was in him, the place the Corinthians had in his heart. That is the sort of thing, what a vessel has, whether there is love for God or for Christ, or the Spirit, or for the brethren.
F.S.C. It says they were both "full of fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation".
J.T. That would be Christ as He was anointed here, but, I would say, inclusive of what He is above, because He received from the Father above, and shed forth the Holy Spirit. It is Christ's humanity and the power of His Spirit. Whether we apprehend that, is a question, because His life was taken from the earth. That is a thought that has to be understood, and whether you can carry that sort of thing in your vessel -- a life that was unique. There never was any like it and there never will be any like it. It is the uniqueness of Christ as a Man down here. It is the meat-offering, but it is more than that. It is unique in that there was none like it before and there never will be any like it. Whereas what He is now in heaven, we will all be like Him. We are made like Him. He is the Model for us all. It is not after the pattern of what He was here below in the mere personal sense; it is what He is up there. "We know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is" (@1 John 3:2).
R.D.G. "Even as *he* is, *we* also are in this world" (@1 John 4:17).
J.T. It is not what He was down here. It is what He is, so that He is coming to change our bodies of humiliation and make them like His body of glory. That is the thing to have before us. That is not what
{102}
He was down here. It is what He is up there.
A.P.T. "He receives of mine and shall announce it to you" (@John 16:15). Is that what He is now?
J.T. It is what He is now up there. There was a perfect knowledge when the Spirit came down of what the Lord was there and the position He held up there. It is a heavenly Christ we are dealing with. It is not what He was, but what He is.
J.H. The eunuch is linked up with a heavenly man. Philip "announced the glad tidings of Jesus to him" (@Acts 8:35).
J.T. He could not have told you, perhaps, as you could tell us now, but that was the truth.
F.N.W. How far does the thought of redemption enter into our services in heaven eternally?
J.T. That is a matter to be considered, too. People often think, Well, we will always be telling what He has done for us, and how different we are to what we used to be, but there will be nothing of that. What we may say in regard to remembrance will come out in the judgment-seat of Christ, but after that it is what we are according to divine counsel. It is new creation. That is the eternal state of things.
A.N.W. "In whom we have redemption". It is there; (@Ephesians 1:7).
J.T. How far that will be carried is a question, but I am certain that most Christians think that will be our theme. Whereas, the eternal position goes beyond that, what God had in His mind before the world was.
A.P.T. The apostle puts it in @Ephesians 1, just to make the picture complete, "in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of offences". It is not so much to dwell on that side.
J.T. That comes in after verse 5 of @Ephesians 1. If you look at it you will see he is dealing with counsel first, and then redemption is brought in.
{103}
A.N.W. Would you say that redemption enters into the foundation of the eternal realm?
J.T. It does while we are in time; while there is opposition. They overcame by the blood of the Lamb. All that is most essential, but whether there is not something beyond that when all that is settled is a question.
A.P.T. @Ephesians 1:3 - 6 says, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ; according as he has chosen us in him before the world's foundation, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love; having marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has taken us into favour in the Beloved".
J.T. That is the fixed state of things. Redemption comes in after that. In verse 7 it says, "in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of offences, according to the riches of his grace; which he has caused to abound towards us in all wisdom and intelligence". That is the thought; that redemption will be always in evidence while it is needed, but there is such a thing as new creation, and that is what we are looking on to -- a new heavens and a new earth in which righteousness dwells.
C.A.M. The expression you have used as to a dip into time helps. It is not many of us that know much about the idea of One that was before the dip into time, in connection with the saints.
J.T. We must not assume for a moment that God started in new plans after sin came in and was settled. He is carrying out His first plans all the time. They were interfered with.
A.N.W. Being here in the place of favour you can dismiss it?
J.T. That requires great attention and care lest
{104}
you might belittle the foundational side of the position, the work of Christ, but we must make room for new creation.
Now, as regards Nehemiah we have no time now. It was only just to link up the idea of fellowship in the walls, and how the princes were there again in remnant times. The idea continues in the two choirs, that they are jubilant in spite of the depression there must have been. They are jubilant. Those choirs are all singing and the singing was heard afar off, we are told in verse 43, "And that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced for God had made them rejoice with great joy; and also the women and the children rejoiced. And the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off". It is to show what remnant times can be.
W.F.K. What have you to say about the dedication of the wall?
J.T. That is fellowship. We are in it, but we rejoice in it, and it is so strong you can walk on it and sing on it -- two choirs.
C.A.M. What the assembly has today shows that it is not worn out. Time has not had a wearing effect on it.
J.T. Some of us were saying the other day that every church had its day as well as every prince. Each has its day. The book of Revelation gives us seven assemblies and I believe Philadelphia would indicate there was nothing worn out at all. The same ideas are there. The Lord contemplates something He has pleasure in and that He loves. It is having its day now.
R.W.S. Does that link on with the musical instruments in verse 36? "With the musical instruments of David the man of God; and Ezra the scribe before them".
J.T. These men were equal. Ezra was equal to any priest. The quality was there. He was leader
{105}
of the first choir. Nehemiah was hardly officially a priest, but he was a great spiritual man, a great prince, and he had to do with the second choir, but, he says, "after them". Ezra was before but he was after, showing he was a humble sort of man, but he was filling the thing out.
J.T.Jr. You need both of these servants: those who go on before, the scribe in the word of God, and those who are behind and look after the saints.
J.T. Just so; a man that is content to be that, to come in behind.
A.B.P. That helps us to understand that if a man says things about himself it is not because of his ego.
J.T. Quite so. He was a great man not in the world or government, but a great man spiritually. See what he is doing; he is in the whole matter, and Ezra has the official place as a priest, a thoroughly pedigreed priest and leader. He is ornamenting the whole position. It is not so great as it was in Aaron s day in the quality and character of it, but in Nehemiah you have a great man. He is not exactly an official, but he is coming in and filling the thing out. So that it is a wonderfully good time, and you may say he is in it.
Ques. The princes give colour to the occasion?
J.T. That is the idea. It is the same idea in @Numbers 7.
Rem. In @John 11:1 it says "the village of Mary and Martha her sister". They gave colour to the place.
J.T. Just so; they gave character to the place and all that happened. Well, you see here the musical instruments of David, the man of God, and there are people who can use these instruments, which means they are people like David or Asaph, and so it is now. It is our day. It is Philadelphia's day. Every church has its day in Revelation. Well, how
{106}
is our day shining? What is there in it? Does it answer to the mind of God?
J.A.P. Is there a difference in the result of the two dedications? When the princes offered in @Numbers 7, God spoke to Moses from off the mercy-seat, but here the joy is partly as the result of the dedication.
J.T. That comes in after the offering of the twelve princes. Well, what is the difference? Each is a man like Ezra, who is in this singing matter. He is an instructed man. He is like a scribe, instructed in the kingdom of the heavens. He brings out of his treasures things new and old. Ezra is able to do that and to join in the song and lead in it. Why should we not have a good time like that in these times? God made them rejoice. God can do that if we let Him. He will make the thing full. The noise was heard afar off. It does not say it was heard in heaven, but no doubt it was. It was heard by others.
J.T.Jr. They had to stand still in the prison gate. Every local meeting has its prison gate. You stand still there and think of them.
J.T. Quite so.
{107}
READINGS ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER (1)
@Esther 1:1 - 22; @Esther 2:15 - 23
J.T. There are certain relations between this book and the book of Job which may appear as we proceed. Now it may be stated that the principle of the taking away of the first and the establishing of the second runs through the book. It is in mind that we shall get instruction bearing on present conditions from this book, how God acts for His people without showing Himself, even acting for them when there are circumstances which He cannot approve. Indeed the book throughout contemplates such circumstances. Thus it has a bearing in relation to God's people whoever they are and wherever they are, not in relations suitable to the law, or His principles, or His system, so that His name is not mentioned in the book, nor is there prayer mentioned. Yet God is seen in it and promoting His people, protecting them, honouring them, not reaching His end as yet but obviously this is in mind. His people are being prepared now for His end in which they would be identified with Him and seen openly as such, honoured as such. In the meanwhile we have to move on in a world that knows us not and with little or no recognition such as Pentecost introduces, but yet God is working and in connection with His own principles -- that is to say, setting aside the first and establishing the second. Only now it is not in connection with one man as in Job, but it is in connection with humanity. In Job it is with one family but here it is a great monarch, a great king and in it shines through certain features which are basic and which really have part in God's own system which will appear in the millennium. So that in order to come into this it is clear that we have to learn to take on
{108}
the principles that are set out in the setting aside of the first, that we may learn to set aside the first in ourselves and in connection with the divine system see that we gradually come into what is second. Not simply now in one family as in Job, but in one person who is a type of the assembly or of Israel. It is thought that the most of this session could be devoted to the consideration of what is symbolic in the king Ahasuerus -- his kingdom is a great and glorious affair, very extensive and resourceful and all under *one* head.
C.H.H. Is the thought of the book of Esther -- suggesting the thought of a star -- indicating what is heavenly supplanting what is earthly?
J.T. Well that is good. The meaning of the word 'Esther' signifies star. The stars have a great place throughout Scripture. In the beginning the morning stars sang together -- they were there. "Where wast thou when I founded the earth? ... When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (@Job 38:4 - 7). So that there is no doubt something in that. Then in @Genesis 1:16, "And God made the two great lights ... and the stars". That is He made them as we see them -- the sun, the moon and the stars, conveying as Joseph's dream indicates, the family thought -- the sun, moon and eleven stars.
L.E.S. Would Hosea fit in with what you have suggested? "I will go away, I will return to my place, till they acknowledge their trespass, and seek my face; in their affliction they will seek me early" (@Hosea 5:15). And then, "We shall know, -- we shall follow on to know Jehovah: his going forth is assured as the morning dawn; and he will come unto us as the rain, as the latter rain which watereth the earth" (@Hosea 6:3).
J.T. "I will go away" -- would certainly be suggested. God is not in evidence. But certain other
{109}
things, personages, are in evidence. God sets up the Gentile monarchies when He hides His face from the house of Jacob. He is not ashamed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, not ashamed to be called their God, but here God is hiding His face -- He is not in evidence at all save in the sense that we can see, by the Spirit of God in our dispensation, He is in the position, but acting in a hidden way.
J.D. Is it your thought that the principles that obtain in Job in regard of Job and his family are also seen in connection with the monarchies?
J.T. That is the thought. The monarchies have a time to show themselves. We get the principle in @Numbers 7, every man in his day. I believe every monarchy has had its day. God allowed them to parade this glory and power to see what they would do. And nothing more has been accomplished through the four monarchies than through Israel. It has come out. The monarchies have not accomplished divine thoughts any more than Israel. Government in the hands of the Gentile monarchies has done no better than Israel and is not to be compared with government as under David and Solomon. So there is the necessity for the setting aside of the first whether in our own souls or in the monarchies.
J.D. Would Daniel's prophecy regarding the monarchies show it?
J.T. Nebuchadnezzar had a great opportunity -- "Thou art this head of gold" (@Daniel 2:38). That is what he was as head of the system. It had great advantages, but it goes right on to disaster. The first comes out as God hides His face from the house of Jacob and takes nations up. Hundreds of our brethren are directly under their power, in fact this more or less applies to all of us. Governments have more authority in war than in peace. We are made to feel the pressure. And I think all this appears in this book as over against humanity in the book of
{110}
Job. Great splendour, glory and power and then this woman is in it. That is where we are to learn to take account of the first as its place is taken by the second. There must be something in these monarchies and kingdoms in a feminine sense. The assembly is the divine idea. God intends the assembly to bring out the feminine thought and she is coming out in this way in the millennium. But what is there now in this relation with the monarchies today? The Church of England is the spouse of the State. It would come out in the Roman Empire, too -- the church's place in relation to the empire. And what is coming out here -- we have to see and understand what this feminine idea in relation to the four monarchies means, and see how the assembly in measure is seen in connection with God in Esther. Take Vashti; she made her feast in the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus. She made her feast in his territory.
J.D. But then she refuses to consider the king at all, would that be the point brought out here?
J.T. The whole system has broken down. There has been plenty of opportunity for the Gentile monarchies to show what rule according to God ought to be. The principle of the rule of man over woman begins in the first of Genesis. It failed in Job and his wife and failed in Ahasuerus and his wife.
C.H.H. The act of the church becoming the spouse of the kingdoms would correspond with Babylon. It is displaced from its heavenly setting -- cast down to earth.
J.T. She says, "I sit a queen, and I am not a widow" (@Revelation 18:7). There is the complete breakdown in this passage in relation to the monarchies.
F.R. Would Vashti represent the accredited religion of the world?
J.T. Yes. The feminine thought alluding to the sympathies, feelings, kindnesses of humanity on the
{111}
earth. Where can we find it today? Take this country, especially in the East where the Roman Catholic church has the greatest power. What an influence, is it not sinister?
L.E.S. Ezra comes up from Babylon four years after this. Is there a link between Ezra and Esther?
J.T. It is the priestly side in Ezra and Nehemiah. Nehemiah did great things. You may say, How can we do in these circumstances? Nehemiah is what one man can do. Ezra brings the priest into view. It is instructive. We have priesthood in our little meetings; then we have care meetings, too, which would be representative of the authority of the monarchies. Matthew contemplates the authority of God in the assembly. Nehemiah is in relation to the king -- it is a responsible matter whereas Ezra is the spiritual side. I think both these things combine in relation to the influence of the brethren throughout the world -- the idea of the government of the assembly and priestly service Godward and manward. This book, however, is not Ezra or Nehemiah but contemplates a wide circle of things -- takes in Christians wherever they may be found, those not openly identified with the church but taking account of God's people in the Church of England or wherever they are.
P.B. We get in this book then what stands in the public eye.
J.T. You see that. But you see qualities that show that God is in this. God is not identifying Himself with them in their circumstances. No more is He identifying Himself with Esther, yet qualities were there. In the second chapter you find beautiful qualities there and that in the king's house, not in the temple of God.
R.H. Would the thought in Revelation of the mystery of God correspond with Esther?
J.T. Yes. That comes out in @Revelation 10
{112}
where the Lord is seen with His right foot on the sea and His left on the land. Mystery is mystery and so Rome is mystery -- mystery written upon her. And this book is to show how God carries on mysteriously and yet effectually. Not one Christian in Christendom is forgotten of God.
J.D. God is set aside and refused by the ecclesiastical world, and although Christians walk in that, the door is kept open to them to walk in the truth.
L.E.S. And so the service would be filled out in the spirit of suffering in Esther and Mordecai.
J.T. Yes, we see that in chapters 3 and 4 -- the details of the evil scheme which involved even Ahasuerus, the king against Mordecai the Jew.
C.C.H. Although God has for the moment set Israel aside yet He is considering Esther -- giving her favour in the eyes of the king.
J.T. No doubt we shall get much out of this book on those lines. It shows what God can be to us, yet hiding His face from us, not identifying Himself with us openly. The counterpart of this book is certainly Ezra and Nehemiah.
J.D. How far does what is seen in Esther fit in with the suffering people at the present moment?
J.T. Well, His people are still under His care. The Lord speaks of a very humbling thing in @Luke 21:20,21, "But when ye see Jerusalem encompassed with armies ... flee to the mountains". There was never anything like that earlier. In the times of Stephen the apostles had not left Jerusalem, but the Lord says, "when ye see Jerusalem encompassed with armies ... flee to the mountains". You cannot conceive of Christianity as it was at Pentecost and the saints fleeing -- but the Lord tells them to do that. We have to be prepared to go that way, when we see Jerusalem encompassed with armies. But some may say, But vengeance does not enter into this dispensation. But then in regard of Jerusalem God has
{113}
given the kingdom to another -- Jerusalem is destroyed and the Jews have escaped into the nations.
J.D. Does the book of Esther teach us that God is overruling for every Christian today? Dispensationally Esther comes after the church is raptured.
J.T. There is something in those systems which God is working in relation to -- God is hiding His face from the systems. We cannot be identified with the Romish or Anglican system or others. We cannot identify ourselves with such but we do know that He is looking after His people in them. So we have Esther and Mordecai. Why are not Esther and Mordecai going to Jerusalem? They did not go. God has them there where they are bringing out a great principle for us as well as for those of a later date. This book is a great parable!
D.R. Is the removal of the first then seen in Vashti and Haman and the establishing of the second in Esther and Mordecai?
J.T. It is worked out in that way and yet God is not owning them. There must be something in this!
J.F. "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing" (@Proverbs 25:2).
J.T. "But the glory of kings is to search out a thing". God is concealing certain things.
J.D. The working of things out in various conditions make for what He is after. He would have us work the principle out.
J.T. It is a kingly thing and goes on with God concealing things. What an atmosphere for searching things out we are in. Take the book of Esther, why not search it out? It is kings who search things out.
R.H. Is the thought of vengeance today in relation to Christendom not in relation to Israel?
J.T. The mystery of iniquity already works and the spiritual form judgments about it, it is only awaiting final execution. And so in the epistle to the Thessalonian assembly, a precious assembly to
{114}
heaven, "The assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father" -- precious to the Father, they are told, "To you that are troubled repose with us" They were troubled. They thought the day of the Lord had come. "At the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with the angels of his power, in flaming fire taking vengeance on those who know not God, and those who do not obey the glad tidings of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@2 Thessalonians 1:7,8). The reference is to the present time -- the thing is awaiting fulness -- but then this thought of rest in the judgment arrived at. The idea of vengeance enters into this dispensation.
L.E.S. "For the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come" (@1 Peter 4:17).
J.T. Peter has it in mind in his second epistle, too, and so has Jude. The idea of vengeance is in the hearts of the brethren -- they are not executors of the judgment but in @Revelation 18:20 we are told -- "God has judged your judgment upon her".
C.C.H. We have the idea in the beginning of the dispensation in Ananias and Sapphira who were inside, so to speak, and then on the outside in regard of Herod.
J.T. He was eaten of worms.
J.D. As things proceed in the ways of God they are all part of a plan.
J.T. Well, take the Romish system now, it is very anxious to side with what is right publicly, so is Russia. How long for we cannot say. But then their history is not cancelled. It is just that God is pleased to use them for the time being. God prospers Babylon and returns to destroy her. Still we know it is there. And we are reading everything that transpires in the light of the end. The book of Revelation gives us the detail of how everything is completed in connection with the end. We have part in it. We come out of heaven with the Lord Jesus.
{115}
P.B. God's people are being taken care of by Him whether in the Romish system or in the Church of England. The government of Great Britain preserves the truth of Christianity and outwardly honours the name of God and of the Lord and are thus preserved in relation to His people. Would @Esther 1:6, "White, green, and blue hangings, etc". be God preserving His name in relation to monarchies?
J.T. Well, that is worth looking into. These things are important and show what an immense empire it was. God gives the second monarchy its place as is seen here. This is all God's property but He is allowing the Gentile monarchies to use it. You are struck with the grandeur. First the extent of the kingdom. "That is, the Ahasuerus that reigned from India even to Ethiopia, over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces". And then it goes on, "In those days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the fortress, in the third year of his reign, he made a feast to all his princes and his servants; the power of Persia and Media, the nobles and the princes of the provinces being before him; when he showed the glorious wealth of his kingdom and the splendid magnificence of his grandeur many days, a hundred and eighty days". The Spirit of God writes this matter in detail. It is a question of the resources of this world, what God has given to the Gentile monarchies and God did not give it to them without giving them the power to make use of it. This book shows the co-ordination in grandeur and how there is such a heart in the monarch to make a good time for his servants for a hundred and eighty days. Is there not something in this hidden from view? How much is made possible to the four monarchies. This is the great system of government that God has ordained -- the extent of it and all divinely ordained! "And when these days were expired, the king made a feast to all the people that
{116}
were present in Shushan the fortress, both to great and small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's palace". It is a capital matter now, those present in Shushan the fortress. What grandeur, power and refinement! What will the heavenly city be if such is the earthly? But still God has a great day in these monarchies. He has given them these resources and they are making the most of them. So we have here, "White, green, and blue hangings were fastened with cords of byssus and purple to silver rings and pillars of white marble; couches of gold and silver lay upon a pavement of red and white marble, and alabaster, and black marble. And they gave drink in vessels of gold (the vessels being diverse one from another), and royal wine in abundance, according to the king's bounty. And the drinking was, according to commandment, without constraint; for so the king had appointed to all the magnates of his house, that they should do according to every man's pleasure". What a scene that is! And this all from God. God has given the Gentile monarchies such resources and such skill as to co-ordinate all this. What a king is Ahasuerus! He is not condemned but is here as king to bring out feminine conditions. That is the point. How do the feminine conditions here correspond to @Genesis 1? God has never lost sight of that. He has in mind humanity in relation to the bearing of the male and female. Vashti is the female side of all this. "Also the queen Vashti made a feast for the women of the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus". That is, she has no rights of her own. It is the male side. Not democracy -- it is the grandeur of the monarchies under God in their place on earth.
L.E.S. Is the thought carried through of the head of fine gold in Daniel?
J.T. There is something of a deterioration but the principle remains more or less. This begins with
{117}
Adam and Eve, "Male and female created he them" (@Genesis 1:27). The point is to expose what is there. The king was one of the worst men alive we learn from history, and you may say that Vashti did nothing much out of the way in refusing to obey his command but the point is to bring out the female side, what it is in relation to the masculine, to bring out the feminine side not only in relation to the assembly but in humanity. It must show itself -- in Rome or in Greece or here in the Medo-Persian empire.
A.P. Man living to himself in revelry only brings out rebellion in the feminine.
J.T. In Belshazzar's time the queen mother comes into evidence. It was a scene of debauchery -- drinking with a thousand of his lords. The exposure of Belshazzar thus is allowed to bring out the feminine side -- what it was. The queen-mother is there. She was not in the time of debauchery, she came in when the fingers were seen on the wall. She was in her right place. She says to her grandson, or whatever relation he was, There is a man in your kingdom. It is the idea of the feminine, coming in to the man and revealing the mind of God.
C.C.H. Christ is head of every man -- that is basic. God has given resources to the assembly as she recognises headship. It is a principle not generally recognised.
J.T. The assembly is the setting forth of the final thought of God. But then God has not lost sight of man and woman in humanity -- what part each plays in his place, thus bringing out what is seen in the monarchies, what part the woman has in it.
L.E.S. Even Haman's wife speaks what is right.
J.T. She tells Haman, If the Jew is making headway, you are going to fall before him. What is seen here is the whole idea of womanhood in the Gentile monarchies. Then Memucan makes his little speech: "The queen Vashti has not done wrong to the king
{118}
only, but also to all the princes, and to all the peoples that are in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus. For the act of the queen will come abroad to all women, so as to render their husbands contemptible in their eyes, when they shall say, The king Ahasuerus commanded the queen Vashti to be brought in before him, and she came not". The whole feminine side is in mind. God has never let it out of His mind. It applies not simply to every sister but to every woman.
J.D. That is interesting, as speaking of the service of the woman. Pilate's wife says, Have thou nothing to do with that righteous man. God uses the feminine side there.
J.T. She is fully in accord with the book -- Have nothing to do with that *righteous* man -- the subject of Matthew -- she has some idea of it.
J.D. God gives women a marvellous part in the working out of His thoughts as they maintain their place.
J.T. In @Acts 1:14 we have the women mentioned. "These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren". Mary -- blessed among women -- a great place. These are wonderful features coming down from @Genesis 1.
R.H. The place woman has taken, particularly in Christendom, is wrong.
J.T. The thing is turned upside down. Women becoming members of parliament, etc. -- what are they not doing that man should do? We have to have a judgment of this.
Rem. Femininity before God is the thought and women have lost it today.
J.T. The position is terrible and many of our young brothers and sisters are being called into it -- trained for government services -- but we are with them in sympathies, sentiments and feelings -- Rachel
{119}
weeping for her children. We should have right feelings about everything. The feminine side is thus seen in Genesis. We cannot say much of Eve or any woman of the antediluvian world, nor of Noah's wife or his daughters but when we come to Abraham and the span of human life reduced to 180 years we have much more of the sisters. He says of Sarah, She is my sister. And Sarah *was* his sister. With Rebecca, too -- she was Isaac's cousin. The thought is also with Jacob and then we have it carried through -- Rachel weeping for her children because they were not. It is not simply sister but the feminine idea which God keeps before us.
D.R. In the mind of Ahasuerus the whole scene of glory would be completed in the bringing in of the queen.
J.T. Well, it is unanswered. Vashti was marked as deficient in answering to the mind of God.
D.R. This would carry out the thought that woman was created for the man -- his glory.
J.T. Everything is working to the prophetic plan, given to His servants the prophets, the ministry of God being definite. Certain things come out to expose as we see with Vashti here, and the real principle of God will be shown. It is to this end that we need Esther. It is a question of quality with her -- what she is as chapter 2 brings out, the kind of person she was. We are to learn these qualities. We are not told here but the priests of God like Ezra were contemporary with Esther. Only we see here in Esther, the Jewess, the heavenly qualities.
P.B. Why is the idea of seven brought in here?
J.T. Well, there are two sevens. The seven chamberlains. "On the seventh day, when the king's heart was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of king Ahasuerus, to bring
{120}
Vashti the queen before the king with the royal crown to show the peoples and the princes her beauty; for she was of beautiful countenance. But the queen Vashti refused". Well, here it is just seven chamberlains, not princes. Is it pride here? Were they not dignified enough? Why not send his princes? But it is all designed to bring out this great test for womankind. It is not a matter here of what the king is morally. But here he is a king, the great divine thought of God given for the moment to the Gentiles and the book shows how Vashti disregarded it. Well, you say, She had good reason to, if I had been in her place I would have done the same thing. But then God says that is not right. The king is the king and in his word is power. The book of Proverbs tells us what the king is, what power God gives him. This queen while she is having a great time with the women is leaving out the man. But it is all in the house of the king -- "Also the queen Vashti made a feast for the women of the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus". Although humbled by the message from the chamberlains her wisdom would have been to bow. Obedience is the word for the feminine side, so the assembly is subjected to Christ.
C.H.H. She was deficient in having this feast?
J.T. We would not have sisters have meetings by themselves. They will never get on. I have known of such. The idea is a system of things where the women are to be silent in the assemblies and are not permitted to speak. It is not your own will, it is God's. Paul says, I suffer not. It is the Spirit of God stressing that they should keep their place in the divine thought.
C.H.H. Would that be the moral reason why she is found deficient in obedience? There must be a moral reason for it.
J.T. She was a very fine looking person and would make much of that no doubt but the statement of the
{121}
the Spirit of God in verse 9 is "Also the queen Vashti made a feast for the women of the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus". It was his property. They were going on on their own.
J.C. The word of the king here as being merry with wine is not to be disregarded?
J.T. It is right that he was a man personally without one moral quality at all. But this book is not that. You may say that Vashti was goaded into it, but then she belied the divine position.
C.B. Vashti really makes a direct challenge to what God says in @Genesis 3:16, "And to thy husband shall be thy desire, and he shall rule over thee". And it is what many women are doing today.
J.T. That is not said before sin came in. "Male and female created he them" (@Genesis 1:27). But after sin came in, "he shall rule over thee". And thus God is not forgetting His words and His thoughts and that is what we have here.
Rem. The wife of Manoah brings the man into it.
J.T. Quite so. The angel made more of her than he did of him but she kept her place.
A.P. The end of verse 20 would bring in the thought of obedience.
J.T. Just a word on the princes before we come to that. We have had the seven chamberlains and now in verse 13, "And the king said to the wise men who knew the times (for so was the king's business conducted before all that knew law and judgment; and the next to him were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, who saw the king's face, and who sat first in the kingdom)". I think these seven princes bring out the position, not only the king but what there was, in the way of government and counsel and wisdom. Well, so far so good. We are thankful for that. We are thankful for the parliament at Ottawa, and the Governor-General and
{122}
the king of England -- the matter is worked out here. So the Spirit of God goes on, "Then said Memucan before the king and the princes, The queen Vashti has not done wrong to the king only, but also to all the princes, and to all the peoples that are in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus. For the act of the queen will come abroad to all women, so as to render their husbands contemptible in their eyes, when they shall say, The king Ahasuerus commanded the queen Vashti to be brought in before him, and she came not! And the princesses of Persia and Media who have heard of the queen's act, will say it this day to all the king's princes, and there will be contempt and anger enough. If it please the king, let a royal order go forth from him, and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, that it may not pass, That Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal estate to another that is better than she; and when the king's edict which he shall make shall be heard throughout his realm -- for it is great -- all the wives shall give to their husbands honour, from the greatest to the least". So that the book is showing that the Gentile monarchy is still holding government and recognising counsel. The circumstances force the bringing of woman into her place and the maintaining of man in his place. So that necessitates the change in the female side. I think we shall see that the assembly as under the rule of Christ will maintain the position. The assembly is subjected, it is the divine vessel. So we have to learn that now -- it is the learning time for us. In circumstances, in such conditions, with the Gentile monarchies at war we are learning what the mind of God is in being under rule -- subjection to Christ. That is the present position -- to maintain subjection to Christ in all these terrible conditions.
J.D. It is moral qualifications in the princes that is needed. And would you say that those qualifications
{123}
are seen in the assembly at the present time in connection with rule and government?
J.T. I would. It is a matter of princes. Take the Pope in the Vatican. It is the claim of the Vatican -- equality with all princes -- and yet a false position. She sits a queen.
Rem. Have you in mind that this equality with princes was in Vashti's mind and that is necessitating the setting aside of the first?
J.T. It shows what is hidden in the book by the Spirit of God is that Esther is in mind. Take the words of this wise man -- he speaks wisely. So his speech necessitates Esther. It is instructive for us as we look at Esther -- what she had on. Are we accepting the clothing that Hegai gives -- content with that?
P.B. God works bringing in the true feminine side -- our young men have a conscience regarding the truth of the mind of God.
J.T. I think that is right -- the feminine idea. Our young men are subject. Obedience is their way. The only safe way is to be subject, not rebellious.
C.H.H. I would like more help as to the qualifications. In Titus with the elders great moral qualifications are necessary.
J.T. The epistles to Timothy and Titus help as to the feminine side. How much is brought in in relation to government in the assembly. The sisters have part in the administration, the qualities are to be in them, too.
J.G. The willingness to suffer is seen in Esther.
J.T. She certainly represents the second. This man Memucan exposes the first and shows the way of preservation.
P.B. Why is he mentioned the last of the seven princes?
J.T. He is one of them and is the man with the word of wisdom. It would be spoken in parliament -- the way of truth is given out most intelligently -- God
{124}
is over it, and it comes out. It is there. That is the idea here.
P.B. Would it mean that God has the last word?
J.D. These princes considered according to law. "What shall be done to the queen Vashti according to law". The princes sit down together to consider the evidence governmentally in connection with law.
J.T. You cannot help but observe that in this country the law does not seem to have full force in regard to the recognition of conscience. The law of the land has not full play as in Great Britain. Why is it? Is not God going to raise this issue if we keep on praying? These seven princes are concerned about the law. This man makes a good speech. And there are such speeches nowadays. What is right is being furnished by persons who hardly know what they are saying.
Rem. "And the saying pleased the king".
J.T. So we hear of young men being hailed to the tribunals -- judgment is passed and his conscience rebels and he suffers. He is penalised, but is it the law? That is the question. And will not God give someone to say something? These seven men are concerned about the law. Who made the law? It is a matter of the principle of law.
R.H. Later on Mordecai refuses to bow to what assumes to be law and is not.
J.T. That the Spirit of God could write a book -- write ten chapters without mentioning God, or the house of God, or the assembly, or the priest or prayer, or prophecy -- that God can write a book like this is remarkable. And we by the Spirit of God as kings can look into what is hidden in it.
L.E.S. Would you say that if the priestly side is maintained today God will maintain what refers to His own rights?
J.T. In spite of man God's mind comes out. He
{125}
will see to it that there will be someone who will say the truth.
J.D. Would not something of this be seen in the corps being formed of three hundred young men who do not have to take military training? An answer to the prayers of the saints perhaps.
J.T. Is there not some power at work in exercising some sinister influence against the law, but the princes keep on bringing forward the law. And so, "The saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did according to the word of Memucan. And he sent letters into all the king's provinces, into every province according to the writing thereof and to every people according to their language, That every man should bear rule in his own house, and should speak according to the language of his people".
{126}
READINGS ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER (2)
@Esther 3:1 - 15
J.T. It seems as if we should return a little to the first chapter and also enlarge on the second chapter so as to have clearly in our minds what the book is opening up; that is, the first in Vashti and what she represents actively in our times and then the second as to the qualities that show themselves in Esther to bring in the subjective side of the truth which is to be worked out in the truth of the assembly. We looked a little this morning at the State churches and all that resulted in the history of the four monarchies so the feminine side is seen fully developed in the book of Revelation -- how it comes in for divine judgment. Its description as given in that book shows how it merits unmitigated divine judgment. The idea of the feminine in relation to the ruler is seen illustratively, at least, in Nehemiah, who tells us that when he was making supplication to the king to send him to Judaea to build Jerusalem, the queen was sitting by, evidently in sympathy. The writer of the Psalms (which always open up what is worked out in the Pentateuch) tells of the queen in gold of Ophir sitting on the right of the king (@Psalm 45), showing the divine thought for Israel. This was reflected in the Babylonish feature of the four monarchies and then in the Persian. Thus there is the queen mother in relation to Belshazzar -- not the queen sitting by now as with Nehemiah -- but the queen in sympathy with what God is doing at that time, and then in our own times in the Romish empire as linked with Christianity. It assumes great importance in the four monarchies in that it comes into Christianity and has had to do with Christ as putting Him to death and putting His servants to
{127}
death in the ten persecutions. Pilate's wife enters into that side -- have thou nothing to do with that righteous man. That is the feminine side as we had this morning. And what deterioration set in in the history of the empire as Christianity followed Judaism. As it lost its place the assembly came into view and how quickly it deteriorated into that which is called Babylon in a feminine way. As the empire took over Christianity in the history of the assembly from the second century it shows how the feminine side influenced the ruling side. The ruling side is subservient to the female, to the subjective side and all that is seen in relation to the Reformation -- where Rome claiming to be in sympathy with Christ, sat a queen and was no widow and so to her own sorrow becomes drunk with the blood of the saints. Terrible deterioration and wickedness! And so it stands out as before God as one of the most remarkable influences that ever existed below and shown so by God in the book of Revelation. I think what is before us is as to whether we understand the feminine side in relation to the ruling powers now, and what gives it existence and whether it is not shown in its public character at the present time as influencing the ruling powers. And whether as we see this influence we see our judgment judged upon it; whether it is not worked out in ourselves in true feminine qualities answering to Christ.
L.E.S. Would there be a correspondence in Thyatira, Sardis and Laodicea in relation to Vashti and true feminine features in Philadelphia?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord says, "I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee" (@Revelation 3:9). He loves to show that she is worthy of His affection.
J.D. What would be involved in verses 19 and 20 of @Esther 2? Would it suggest a certain relationship kept until the time comes to make it known?
{128}
J.T. Quite so. There is a group of circumstances that should be observed. What has been said about Vashti is to make clear in our minds the necessity for the judgment of God and thus the making way for the qualities of Esther. Then this matter of the second gathering of the virgins in verse 19 seems to allude to some change in the king's attitude. A second gathering of the virgins -- why should there be that if he had already settled on a queen? And then is brought in the circumstance of the attempted assassination of the king bringing Mordecai in due time into immense position of advantage. It would seem as if the matter was settled in regard of Esther as stated in verse 18. "And the king made a great feast to all his princes and his servants, Esther's feast; and he made a release to the provinces, and gave presents according to the king's bounty". The matter seemed to be settled and Esther's position fixed. Well then, why another gathering of the virgins and why should the attempted assassination of the king be mentioned? Is it not for further consideration? Why are other virgins gathered if there is no weakening in the king's affections? But it is all checked by God by the introduction of the attempted assassination bringing Mordecai under the attention of the king. God brings this in here to be used later. In the meantime with this other set of virgins nothing happens and Esther comes through and Mordecai comes through and the mind of God comes through and the fickleness of the king is just left.
J.D. It is the point that God takes to bring Mordecai into evidence.
J.T. God had that in mind. He is laying the basis for further developments in view of the devil. We are not ignorant of what the devil is going to do.
F.R. What is the present bearing of the selection of Esther?
{129}
J.T. It is just a great fact in the plan of the book. Such a thing happened. The feminine thought is going over into the Gentile monarchies. Vashti is to be replaced. She has proved herself disqualified because of disobedience. That is the first thought with humanity. Eve listened to the devil without enquiring of her husband -- she was in the transgression -- God never forgot that. And He states at that point that Adam should rule over her. She is not safe without rule -- the ruling side in Adam. She is not safe, she proves herself as exposed to the devil. And this runs down. She has had her place with the Jew -- God's spouse and with the Gentile monarchies she has also had her place. She has her place in the queen mother in Babylon -- the queen in the Medo-Persian kingdom when Nehemiah wanted to build Jerusalem. She played her part there as sitting by the monarch and assisting him rightly. But Vashti is not doing that. You say, She is not so bad. But the point is she rebelled and refused to hear what the king said in his own territory.
C.H.H. Is the second gathering of the virgins like the proving of the matter, as it was at Corinth?
J.T. Why the second gathering? The assassination is brought in to becloud it. You never hear of it again. If it had gone through what would have become of Esther and Mordecai? But it did not go though. Incidents happened to check it as at Corinth.
J.D. The position of the man and the woman comes out here in Esther and Mordecai. She is already showing feminine qualities -- Mordecai tells her of the incident and she relates it to the king *in Mordecai's name*. She gives the man his place.
J.T. So we should look carefully into chapter 2 to see the qualities of the accepted one -- of the second Job's wife is just left -- we cannot say what her history was eventually. The daughters of the first family are destroyed and there is not evidence of
{130}
a second wife in the book of Job. But here no children are mentioned -- it is the wife in this book. I think we have seen how Vashti, in type, has worked out in the book of Revelation -- supreme wickedness -- Rome, Babylon -- the smoke of her burning ascends for ever and ever. So that now the second chapter assumes great importance as bringing in the second. There are such qualities there. She was an orphan and Mordecai had brought her up, and thus she gradually comes into her place and shows subjection immediately -- she is content with what is provided for her by Hegai.
L.E.S. The present activities of the Spirit in prophetic ministry all enter into it. All that comes into Esther's position corresponding to Hegai's kindness to her.
J.T. So there is much said in this chapter that needs attention. It opens up remarkably that in Esther qualities are developed in the presence of Vashti's qualities seen fully blown in Revelation and in power today. In the time of Constantine already the mystery of iniquity had begun to work and thus in the time of the Reformation we have a number of persons instituting a state church. And that idea has held in Europe -- it is this great thing called Babylon and stands as representing the feminine side regarding the four monarchies -- especially the fourth monarchy which comes through to the end. There are other women linked with it; they are called harlots. Babylon is the mother of harlots -- there are others. The Anglican system is an apt illustration of a State church. Even in Scotland and Russia and Greece, all through Europe -- the idea of the State church is held and in the Americas, too, the outgoings of Europe. It is not so prominent perhaps in the Americas but it exists, the politicians allude to the church -- make room for the church. It is the woman -- that is the idea.
{131}
C.B. As applying this to us Vashti's features are to give place to the second -- the heavenly features as acceptable to Christ.
J.T. That is what we are saying. Esther features are developed in the presence of all that has been described. It is the working out of the truth of the assembly. We have both features in Revelation -- the heavenly city and Babylon.
C.H.H. As Esther keeps her proper place, is that the power for dealing with evil regardless of how evil it is?
J.T. We shall see in that way how Esther comes though. In the meantime there are qualities with her that are known. Hegai, keeper of the women, knows them -- he discerns them. And so it says, "There was in Shushan the fortress a certain Jew, whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjaminite, who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captives who had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away. And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther". It is like, "Who also is Paul", a change of name -- no doubt having the meaning of the word 'Esther' in mind. "And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter; for she had neither father nor mother -- and the maiden was fair and beautiful -- and when her father and mother were dead, Mordecai took her for his own daughter". These are beautiful thoughts -- you would like to qualify them in the presence of all we have been speaking of. "And it came to pass when the king's commandment and his decree was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto Shushan the fortress, unto the custody of Hegai, that Esther also was brought into the king's house, unto the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women. And the maiden pleased him, and obtained favour before him". She had qualities.
{132}
J.D. It is like Joseph in the Egyptian prison -- what moral qualities were there. So Esther's qualities shine in the position in which she is set.
J.T. And the persons who have charge of her promote her. They discern those qualities. Something or someone somewhere will be in sympathy with those qualities, and have sympathetic feeling which God has put there.
C.B. It says of the Lord that He "advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men" (@Luke 2:52).
J.T. Those are feminine qualities -- the principle of subjection, no evidence of self-will. Hegai discerns that at once. And it says, "And the maiden pleased him, and obtained favour before him; and he speedily gave her her things for purification". It is the increase of femininity, as with Rebekah and Abigail. "And when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, came to go in to the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain, keeper of the women, appointed". That is she was subject.
L.E.S. The loss of her father and mother would be to her advantage.
J.T. That is worked out. To be orphans is one thing. Not to be left orphans is another.
Ques. What would Mordecai represent in this?
J.T. Just an element -- he works out as a type of Christ later on. In the meantime he is just a person who has great care for another person. He was devoted to Esther. "And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her". It is the principle of care.
L.E.S. Would this enter somewhat into the care of the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. It is like the care meeting. The
{133}
word 'care' is a good word. It shows unselfishness on the part of the brethren that they will sit up for hours to look after the affairs of the assembly in the town.
R.H. Would these features work out in the exercises of the local assembly and come to the attention of the authorities later?
J.T. That is what happened with Mordecai. He is found in the king's gate. It is the idea of administration. The qualities of the people of God are in view that they are qualities to be brought to the attention of the rulers. In our day the qualities are coming before the authorities. They may hate us but someone among them will not.
L.E.S. In @Acts 25 and 26 you get the apostle as setting forth these qualities before the authorities.
J.T. What beautiful qualities before Agrippa and before all of them. Exemplary indeed! Take Barnabas and Paul as they go to Cyprus and one Bar-jesus would have turned the ruler away from the faith but what came out was that Bar-jesus was dealt with, struck with blindness for a season -- the Jews¬ position today. "But Saul, who also is Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, fixing his eyes upon him, said, O full of all deceit and all craft: son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness". And so the governor himself becomes amazed at the teaching of the Lord. So that the male side came into evidence there and it is there that his name is changed. "Who also is Paul". Here "that is Esther". And so that is how the matter stands -- Paul comes into contact with the leading man and there is a chance to bring out his qualities. There is a witness to the qualities of the assembly today. It is a very great matter that the governors should see our qualities.
J.C. Is the book of Esther the determined effort of the devil to influence government to destroy all that is of God and for God on the earth?
{134}
J.T. Not simply the brethren or those in fellowship, but all that is of God. The devil has no small thought against us. Every product of God in Christendom is in mind in this book, even those not in fellowship get the work of God -- the devil is against them.
C.B. All this indicates their worth as seen in God's house.
J.T. Why not? Destroy not him for whom Christ died. It shows how valuable the brother is even though a Presbyterian. And so with the ruler there will always be such like Pilate's wife and like Pharaoh's daughter who did not turn against the children of Israel for she took up one of them that was weeping.
J.D. In the governmental ways of God Mordecai is in the gate when the king's chamberlains, those that kept the threshold, those who looked after the interests of the king supposedly, were planning to kill him. All this is to bring forward Mordecai and Esther.
J.T. So someone will say, Well, I know these men, why imprison them? Someone will be there -- many will not say it, but someone will say it -- Why imprison them? Mordecai is put down in the Chronicles and one night the king cannot sleep so he has that book read to him and it saves Esther and Mordecai, and the Jews.
J.D. Verse 23 says, "And it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king". It was there waiting God's time.
J.T. God saw the devil working in Haman and also in the gathering of the virgins a second time -- whether for another queen we do not know. But Haman is there and God is preparing to defeat him. And someone is going to be used to defeat the devil and save the brethren.
R.H. Would we not be justified then in using the
{135}
government's records of a certain period showing those known as brethren?
J.T. Why should we not tell people who we are? And these young men who have a conscience are in fellowship with people like that.
L.E.S. Does Esther show the children of God over against the children of the devil -- the generative idea? Here it is Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite -- a descendant of Esau.
P.B. Would Sardis represent Vashti and the overcomer in Sardis who is promised white garments -- would that represent Esther here, as being prepared by the oil of myrrh and spices?
J.T. It is a question of quality in those assemblies. Every assembly has had its day, beginning with Ephesus, Sardis has had its day, Pergamos, too, "I know where thou dwellest, where the throne of Satan is; and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith" (@Revelation 2:10). And then there is something of Thyatira and then certainly Philadelphia had its day. The whole idea of the assembly is to be seen there. "I have loved thee". "That they ... shall know". (@Revelation 3:9). You say, What does it matter whether they know or not? But it does matter. The Lord says, That they shall know.
C.H.H. Would the oil of myrrh and spices as being prepared for service link with @John 2 -- the full water pots -- as necessary for the kind of service we are going on to now?
J.T. It shows the need for filling us -- preparation for the heart of Christ -- that we might be to Another.
J.F. What would be seen in Esther finding favour and then requiring nothing but what she is appointed?
J.T. If you are subject to the Spirit of God you do not want anything more than the Spirit provides. You may use gifts -- but gifts are by the Spirit.
L.E.S. You see here that God not only overrules but orders certain circumstances in the history of
{136}
the testimony in order to bring out the characteristic features of His own work, as the third chapter would show.
J.T. God takes the feminine to meet current evil -- the kind of evil that we have to do with now. So that chapter 3 brings out Haman, we are not told anything about him before. But we have his generations here. "After these things king Ahasuerus promoted Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all the princes that were with him". The ruling power is now not against the devil. But God is taking charge of His interests, although not in evidence. The incident of the attempted assassination is one incident that God is using for the preservation of His interests at a later date.
J.D. Just before going on to that I would like a word on the end of the second chapter. "And the matter was investigated and found out". It is an excellent thing to find things out.
J.T. That is what the care meeting is for.
J.D. I think sometimes in a matter of evil we do not trouble to find out because it means a little exercise to go into the matter. But here it is a divine principle in these matters to find it out. I just wanted you to mention that as a principle of care.
J.T. And when the time came for it to be brought out this investigation showed the thing as it stood. The king enquired as to what had been done for Mordecai. "And the king said, What honour and dignity has been done to Mordecai for this? And the king's servants that attended upon him said, Nothing has been done for him". How did they know? They were on the right side. These are things we can look for -- *they knew*. "Nothing has been done for him". I thought well to bring that in here to show how God brings such to light, and how the servants knew and are ready with the answer to
{137}
the king's question. Why had not the thing passed out of their minds? Pharaoh's butler did not remember Joseph. He forgot Joseph. But these men do not forget. We can count on God looking after the matter in this way.
A.P. What is the point in Mordecai's refusal to bow to Haman?
J.T. That brings up the whole point of what the devil is doing in the position. Vashti has been supplanted by Esther. That is an attested matter. "And the king made a great feast to all his princes and his servants, Esther's feast" (@Esther 2:18). So there is full recognition in the realm that she is queen. Now what will the devil do? This second gathering of the virgins was another move -- but there is not much in that now. Just an item for us to notice. Then Esther had not made herself known or her birth known. She is still under the orders of Mordecai, maintaining her place in subjection to him. That was her salvation. "Esther, as Mordecai had charged her, had not yet made known her birth nor her people; for Esther did what Mordecai told her, like as when she was brought up with him". A very good principle. She retained her simplicity. So the devil is going to be checked and nullified. Further we have Haman's genealogy given in the beginning of chapter 3 and it says "And all the king's servants that were in the king's gate bowed and did Haman reverence, for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence. Then the king's servants who were in the king's gate, said to Mordecai, Why trangressest thou the king's commandment? And it came to pass as they spoke daily to him, and he hearkened not to them, that they informed Haman, to see whether Mordecai's matters would stand; for he had told them that he was a Jew". Well, there it is, the lines are drawn now. Is Mordecai equal to this matter? So the succeeding
{138}
chapters show how evil is broken down and right triumphs through Esther and Mordecai. But we should further notice the character of the evil and what it is in such circumstances. "And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, Haman was full of fury. But he *scorned* to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had made known to him the people of Mordecai; therefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were in all the kingdom of Ahasuerus -- the people of Mordecai". So that we now have the people of Mordecai, the real seed, the wholly right seed. Because a converted man is a converted man -- the work of God is there -- the seed is there. For the seed is the work of God.
C.H.H. Do we get the full thought of it in the last chapter of Esther -- "Speaking peace to all his seed"?
J.T. Quite so -- Mordecai comes out as the full type later. But here it is the seed -- Mordecai's people. "But he scorned to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had made known to him the people of Mordecai; therefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were in all the kingdom of Ahasuerus -- the people of Mordecai".
P.B. Would the full climax of this be in @Revelation 13 and 14 where the two beasts come up and the second beast exercises authority over all and then there are the hundred and forty-four thousand on mount Zion standing with the Lamb as having overcome the devil?
J.T. He is the wicked one. He represents this Haman character only that this is the Amalekite -- God had declared war with Amalek from generation to generation. It is a question of applying this to ourselves and that we see that those coming into fellowship come in according to God -- obeying the word of the Lord.
C.B. Why are these generations stressed so in this book?
{139}
J.T. Paul calls Bar-jesus -- a child of the devil, enemy of all righteousness.
L.E.S. Is it over against the true seed -- the Jews?
J.T. The devil's agent is against that here. Mordecai and the devil's agent -- the battle is drawn. So that we watch and see how it works out. And thus look around and see what is going on and call things by their proper names and take sides with what is right in whomsoever it is found.
F.R. All this requires discernment for what is with the testimony today may not be tomorrow.
J.T. The king is very fickle but God can turn around whom He pleases. He may not be openly identified with His people but He is with them in Spirit.
J.D. What is the meaning of @Esther 3:7?
J.T. "In the first month, that is, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman for each day and for each month, to the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar". This is going to come up again. It is history, spiritual history. This is going to be fixed by and by. These things are methodically written. The lot was cast in the month Nisan and every day until the month Adar. Well, it is covering a good bit of time this matter. Haman is looking into the matter systematically. The devil has shone in the past few years in methodical calculation of matters -- he is extremely skilful -- but God turns the tables against him. You wonder at how successful they were. It was successful. "And Haman said to king Ahasuerus, There is a people scattered abroad and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from those of every people, and they keep not the king's laws; and it is not for the king's profit to suffer them". Well, that is just the way it is, if fully known. If the world only knew what we have in
{140}
our minds! They do not know. God keeps it. But presently it will come to light. So Haman here is telling the king about these people and we have to watch for men doing that. Whether with parliaments and their cabinets we have to maintain an attitude of subjection and faith in God -- that will be our salvation. But their minds may be affected. Ahasuerus was affected here and came over to the side of the devil. Haman says to him, "There is a people scattered abroad and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from those of every people, and they keep not the king's laws". Well, there the evil is seen and how successful it is. The king is listening to it. "If it please the king, let it be written that they may be destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver into the hands of those that have charge of the affairs, to bring it into the king's treasuries. And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the Jews¬ enemy. And the king said to Haman, The silver is given to thee, the people also, to do with them as seems good to thee". The king takes his advice. He is on the side of the devil now. He has turned about face. It is a dark hour!
L.E.S. But did not Haman say what was not right? "They keep not the king's laws". That is not true.
J.T. You can well understand that when people are against God's people they tell lies. There is nothing for them but to tell lies. What did he know about their laws? Had he read Moses?
A.H. How would this affect us in the prayer meeting?
J.T. I suppose the brethren here pray for the authorities. They give thanks for the benign attitude of the government so that as far as I know this matter comes into the prayer meetings of the brethren
{141}
everywhere. It is the secret of the change that has come about. Because the uprising we are dealing with is in principle the man of sin -- the time is ripening for it. But God is pleased to intervene and prolong the position as we have it, I believe chiefly in answer to the prayers of the saints.
C.H.H. This is an excellent principle seen with Mordecai. He says that he is a Jew. Like Joseph's brethren they said they were shepherds regardless of being despised by the Egyptians.
J.T. It is noticeable there, too, that Pharaoh does not despise them, so that sometimes you see a move in favour of what is right and this is our salvation. We are to count on that. God answers our prayers in establishing such men. It is for us to look for that. Just as later another king's daughter saved the one of Jehovah's choice.
F.R. God raised up another king that knew not Joseph.
J.T. But his daughter saved Moses -- that was of God.
T.D. Mordecai is not affected by Haman's attitude. He had light as to the end of the Amalekite.
J.T. Before the truth of fellowship came up, at the time of the reformation -- four hundred years ago -- the martyrs suffered. The Mordecais stood for the truth and died for the truth. That is the kind of thing.
R.H. Mordecai was not only a Jew but he maintained a good conscience individually.
J.T. Haman is not satisfied with the individual thought. Moses killed one Egyptian. It took a long time, but all the others were killed in the Red Sea. Haman was not concerned with one man but wanted his people destroyed. And he must have been a very wealthy man. He would give ten thousand talents of silver.
{142}
L.E.S. That would be equivalent to twenty million dollars.
J.T. That is quite interesting.
A.H. What these matters bring to light is that we know the assembly is precious to the heart of Christ. Mordecai speaks to Esther the queen in regard of the decree.
J.T. That will come out in the next chapter. It is well now to see the character of evil, how Satan uses this man. At the time of the reformation there was a very wealthy man, Thomas Cromwell. At a time like this Satan brings out his man. Well, God meets that -- he takes such as Mordecai out of the hands of the devil and sets him up in His own kingdom.
J.D. It is marvellous the methodical way the devil goes into these matters as already pointed out from verse 7. God uses accuracy and method and so does Satan. In verse 13 there is accuracy again -- you wonder at the way the Spirit of God gives us this, as if it is the thought of God governmentally.
J.T. So it goes on as you say, "That the decree might be given in every province, a copy of the writing was published to all peoples, that they should be ready against that day. The couriers went out, being hastened by the king's commandment, and the decree was given in Shushan the fortress. And the king and Haman sat down to drink; but the city of Shushan was in consternation". The devil's position is being shaken. It is akin to @Acts 4 but there it is God's support by the shaking. But now the devil's machinery is being upset, in the spirit of consternation. This recent uprising has brought into view the spirit of consternation. It can be seen. God has seen to it that it is going to be seen.
C.B. Is the secret of the undoing of this power seen in Esther coming through the six months of purification?
{143}
J.T. Quite so. The experience of the terrible thing here that has to be overcome. The Lord will help us to see how she shows forth the spirit of Christ -- she puts her life in her hands as we shall see in chapter 4.
C.B. If one is not prepared to go that far they are not worth saving.
J.T. Any compromise is not worth saving. The lines are drawn and those remarkably show the position of Satan and of what is of Christ. Matthew shows the generations.
P.B. "To destroy, to kill and to cause to perish".
J.T. It is like our own Acts -- there is no mistaking what is meant. And they are to be fully carried out. You are impressed with the character of this -- the devil can win and has won and will win again. You are impressed by the ingenuity of the devil. But God is against that. However, we are solemnised at what will happen and be successful. In the meantime God is thwarting it.
G.R. Would that be seen in Esther as prepared to suffer?
J.T. You see what God is taking is worth taking on. He is not taking on something not worth it. We shall see the qualities of suffering in Mordecai and Esther in the next chapter -- the character of Christ in suffering -- going the whole way, refusing to compromise.
J.D. Is the consternation in the city in contrast to Haman and the king?
J.T. The devil would link Haman and the king, but God is working with the populace. God has rights in the city. There is this clique there, but then God has rights that He is not going to let go. God has rights in this country that He is not going to let go. He has His people and He is not going to let them go, either. We shall see that He answers our
{144}
prayers and at the same time we become priests to God -- the real thing.
L.E.S. So Paul says, We are not ignorant of his devices. We are fully aware of the subtle workings of the devil.
F.R. Would you say that these sympathies and feelings of the saints are in the circle of the fellowship, as we speak, now?
J.T. It is what God has in the systems now. Mordecai and Esther were not in Jerusalem or in the temple -- but there are certain qualities of God there and He is using them.
C.H.H. In @Acts 16 when the devil had done his worst Paul and Silas sing praises -- the testimony is unaffected.
J.T. Going on into Europe and thus we have it now on the Pacific Coast. Thank God for it! The whole truth is opened up and God has His people now even in the Roman Catholic system. The Lord knows them that are His. And at the same time the books of Ezra and Nehemiah bring to light the divine system. But there are others belonging to the Lord as in Mordecai.
L.E.S. We have the prophetic word as to this in Haggai and Zechariah.
J.T. Dealing with the Jews in this book is dealing with the immense territory called a hundred and twenty-seven provinces -- the whole world. Our prayers would be for our brethren of any denomination in those countries in Europe under a power as represented in Haman. Think of our prayers -- the priesthood -- our prayer meetings -- there is no circle like the people of God. We belong to a heavenly system. We have a great Priest over the house of God. I am sure God is carrying through and helping us in the current matter.
C.B. Why is it previously mentioned as Shushan the fortress and here as the city?
{145}
J.T. It is a capital matter. The city is the idea of administration, the centre of the system, of the fellowship. And the brethren in camps who are suffering are away from the fellowship. It is a great advantage of the devil. These young men are in great danger as separated from the brethren and the fellowship -- the thing might go on to their damage. The idea of damage comes into this book. We have to keep our eye on the property of God exposed to the devil.
C.H.H. Is it not interesting to see that while Haman is working against the Jews, Ezra and Nehemiah have their part in the testimony?
J.T. One loves to think of the service of the brethren in relation to what is current, but at the same time there is a great deal of exposure of the most valuable property in our young men being deprived of fellowship.
{146}
READINGS ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER (3)
@Esther 4:1 - 17; @Esther 5:1 - 14
L.E.S. Would you say a word as to what we have had already to link up the subject?
J.T. Well, we spoke on the first chapter at some length to show the principle of the displacement of the first by the second. The principle is seen in the book of Job but in relation to a family whereas here it is in relation to a king. Vashti proves herself unfit for the great place of queen and Esther proves herself fit to have it and obtains it. "And when the turn of Esther the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, came to go in to the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain, keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained grace in the sight of all them that saw her" (@Esther 2:15). And so she was taken in to the king. "And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained grace and favour in his sight more than all the virgins, and he set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of Vashti. And the king made a great feast to all his princes and his servants, Esther's feast; and he made a release to the provinces, and gave presents according to the king's bounty". Well, we enlarged on chapter 2 in that respect to show how Esther commended herself in a womanly fashion. It was pointed out the idea of woman's place in relation to man begins in @Genesis 1 and comes down -- it is seen in Abraham's house and Isaac's house and Jacob's house and then Israel had its day -- had its place as the spouse of Jehovah. And now it is seen in the four monarchies -- the Gentile monarchies which God appointed while hiding His face from the house of Jacob. And it comes out in a marked way in the
{147}
second monarchy, which is before us, the Persian monarchy. It comes out in a very evident way so that we cannot but see the inspiration of God in the book -- the setting of the acts as including and involving the principles governing man and woman -- first in relation to Israel and then in relation to the Gentile monarchies and finally in relation to Christ and the assembly. Now in these two chapters before us, especially the fourth, we see there is correspondence to Christ in suffering. Esther is called to the position and to the requirements of the position in the sense of suffering. The enemy coming in as in Haman in chapter 3 forces the crisis and no doubt corresponds to conditions now. It is a question of whether the brethren are meeting the crisis in the spirit of suffering.
R.H. It begins with sackcloth and ashes.
J.T. Quite so. Suitable attire -- the man leads the way in that. No doubt the principle runs down from the start of the suffering into the feminine side but it begins with Christ. Mordecai is taking the lead in the suffering but Esther is brought into it. It is a great matter that there should be leadership -- a lead given for all. It is a pretty critical time just now and suffering seems to be the appointed way and may it be according to God.
R.H. Would Peter's epistles help in that relation -- suffering because of conscience in relation to the authorities?
J.T. I think that is good. Perhaps we should read it. "Beloved, take not as strange the fire of persecution which has taken place amongst you for your trial, as if a strange thing was happening to you; but as ye have share in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice, that in the revelation of his glory also ye may rejoice with exultation. If ye are reproached in the name of Christ, blessed are ye; for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you"
{148}
(@1 Peter 4:12 - 14). There are other epistles, no doubt, having in mind the same line, but this is a striking one. The suggestion is that we are not to think it strange. We are to expect it.
R.H. The thought of suffering is suggested thirteen times in Peter's epistles and the thought of glory is mentioned thirteen times, I think.
J.G. Paul was shown what great things he *must* suffer.
J.T. Yes, what great things in suffering for the Lord -- "for my name".
L.E.S. Have you in mind that as Esther was called into the matter she was rather beneath the position of Mordecai?
J.T. Well, that is the matter before us now. It is clearly stated in the chapter -- the position of suffering -- and we are called to it. It comes right down to ourselves. It should not be thought a strange matter. Christians normally should see that suffering is attached to our position. It is given us by God not only to believe on Him but to suffer for Him.
J.D. What would be the application of Mordecai going out into the city? Is it the character of suffering publicly? "And when Mordecai knew all that was done, Mordecai rent his garments, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and bitter cry, and came even before the king's gate". Is the idea that suffering is not only enduring the guilt but known as such?
J.T. It is an open matter. Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; that is it was reproach openly, that he identified himself with his suffering brethren and that is what Mordecai is doing here. Esther was not equal to the position just as Moses had not been. Thus the later saints are referred to the Pentateuch
{149}
for example in things. Moses set the example -- he was afraid of the king -- but he won out eventually. The Spirit of God credits him with the reproach of Christ in Hebrews, perhaps he never used that term himself -- but it was really the reproach of Christ that he suffered. It was there and he took it on.
R.H. What is the significance of the link between Mordecai and the king's gate? The assassination is connected with that. And Haman could not tolerate Mordecai in the gate.
J.T. The allusion to the king's gate here is, "And came even before the king's gate; for none might enter into the king's gate clothed with sackcloth". Really it was an insult to the king to come in that attire. We should not want to be in the king's gate in that attire. The king's gate should be favourable to the people. There should not be any cause for sackcloth and a loud and bitter cry. That is the idea of the gate of the king. The gate of the king involves what he would regard as righteous administration but it was broken down. The third chapter shows that righteousness had fled. He and Haman had sat down to drink in a murderous attitude and the city had been in consternation. Where was the gate? Why was there consternation?
A.P. Is there a voice or sense of intelligence connected with the reference to the clothes?
J.T. Well, it is a comment made in the scripture and raises a query as to what brings forth this attitude. The king is not in this attitude. The gate has broken down, that is the import of the matter. And there is a reason for Mordecai's attitude. Although he had a place in the gate there is a reason for coming before it in this attitude. There is a good reason for it. And it was of the king to find it out and know that there was a good reason for it. The question is to be simple. Is the gate broken down today and are we suffering accordingly?
{150}
P.B. What would the king represent in our times?
J.T. The idea is the administration of the kingdom.
P.B. Why should Mordecai suffer and be found at the king's gate?
J.T. He is not ashamed to identify himself with the cause. David says, Is there not a cause? And is there not a cause in the recent sufferings?
C.H.H. We get the protest of the king in Nehemiah, as Nehemiah comes before him with sadness of countenance. And the king is not without sympathy.
J.T. As we have been having it -- the queen sitting by him, the queen referring to a benign influence. But where is it here? Where is it now? Where is it in Shushan the fortress -- the king's gate where righteousness was to be administered? Has righteousness broken down? In the world generally it has. The sackcloth and ashes shows there is a cause. David says, Is there not a cause? And there is cause for real suffering today. Mordecai is facing the matter single-handed -- the divine spearhead in the conflict with the devil in Haman.
L.E.S. "The kingdom of the heavens is taken by violence, and the violent seize on it" (@Matthew 11:12). I was thinking in this case that Haman should have represented the rights of the throne and the whole matter was being wrongly represented and Mordecai was using violence -- doing violence to his own feelings -- and taking the kingdom by force -- bringing in a right representation of God.
J.T. That is right. The issue now is whether righteousness will prevail. Mordecai is proceeding in suffering. It does not say he prayed to God; it does not even mention God's name, but it does say there was *fasting*. So that is the first thing to be noted in this matter.
R.H. Mordecai is giving a lead and the lead is being taken on by the Jews, "There was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping,
{151}
and wailing: many lay in sackcloth and ashes".
J.T. It was a right lead. That is a thing to notice and it is so now, where there is a right lead in these matters. Because there is so much confusion especially in Canada -- a great deal of confusion in the minds of the brethren -- there has not been a clear lead in the matter. I believe we can learn something from this passage. It is Mordecai alone -- none with him so far. "And when Mordecai knew all that was done, Mordecai rent his garments, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and bitter cry, and came even before the king's gate". And then we are told further, "for none might enter into the king's gate clothed with sackcloth". That is added by the Spirit of God to show us that Mordecai was not evading the dangers. It is with a loud and bitter cry, that is there was no uncertainty in the issue in which Mordecai gives a lead. It is a matter of great importance that we have a right lead so that people may know what to do.
J.G. "And there was found in it a poor wise man, who by his wisdom delivered the city" (@Ecclesiastes 9:15).
J.T. Quite so. Yes, by his wisdom.
R.H. Would what you are saying fit in with Peter's reference to the leaders being models for the flock?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. What would Mordecai's loud and bitter cry suggest?
J.T. Well, it is a painful experience. Loud and bitter. The Lord cried with a loud voice. The matter is heard by the universe -- it is a real issue -- it is the cross, you know. The Lord faced it. Here it is not God but man. The Psalms are filled with this -- the sufferings of Christ in adverse circumstances.
C.B. Would Mordecai's movements represent the right way of bringing things before the authorities?
{152}
J.T. Just so. The king must be brought into it because it is the king's edict. He has committed himself to murder by the dark counsel of this man, Haman, the Jews¬ enemy -- it is a real drawn conflict! This is forced by this man Haman and he is called the Jews¬ enemy. Satan is with him, as we know. The Amalekite -- sin in the flesh. This man has great power and has the support of the king now -- Satan has a real champion in the issue. But there is going to be a way made in David. There must be a David -- it is really Christ. It is Christ going forth to meet the devil.
L.E.S. "I am weary with my crying, my throat is parched; mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head; they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I took not away" (@Psalm 69:3,4).
J.T. That helps. The psalms are full of that spirit, the spirit of Christ, so that it is suffering for Christ and the glory that follows. This book as we will see is filled with the testimony of God in suffering and glory. Here Mordecai is holding the position manfully. And he has the whole Persian empire against him. That is the position.
C.B. Mordecai's answers to Esther indicate that everyone must do or die.
J.T. The first paragraph is Mordecai's lead and what is involved in that lead -- facing the matter in suffering, in an outward way. And God is not outwardly acknowledging the thing. It is remarkable! And he is not evading the dangers for the Spirit of God says, "for none might enter into the king's gate clothed with sackcloth". And then Esther re-echoes this. "And Esther spoke to Hatach, and gave him commandment unto Mordecai: All the king's servants and the people of the king's provinces do know that whoever, whether man or woman, shall
{153}
come to the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is *one* law, to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live; and I have not been called to come in unto the king these thirty days". Well, now there she is re-echoing this to Mordecai. He was taking his life in his hands -- laying down his life for his brethren. That is what is in mind. Esther makes it known it is a question of her brethren, her people, openly identifying herself with her people and Mordecai was openly identified with the people. They are taking their lives in their hands. "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us; and *we* ought for the brethren to lay down our lives" (@1 John 3:16). That is what is in mind in current circumstances that we may lay down our lives for the brethren. We must obey God rather than men.
F.R. In the first instance here Esther is not prepared to go the whole way.
J.T. She wanted to alleviate the position. It was not that she was so much against it, but it was feeling for her benefactor, she knew what he was exposed to and thought that perhaps he did not need to be so public about it. She perhaps thought it unnecessary to go to the gate of the king in that kind of attire in garments of sackcloth. While you cannot say she was against the thing she clearly wanted to alleviate the position.
D.R. Is it something like Peter when the Lord p rebuked him saying, Get thee behind me, Satan? He would seek to evade the suffering of the position.
J.T. As if he thought the Lord was going too far. Why expose yourself like that?
R.H. "Arm yourselves with the *same* mind" (@1 Peter 4:1).
J.T. Very good. Well, Mordecai was armed with the preparedness to suffer -- seen in the sackcloth and
{154}
ashes. And he gives a lead and Esther comes under that lead. She tries to alleviate the matter, as already remarked. Esther *commands* -- notice that. "And the queen was exceedingly grieved: and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth from him; but he received it not". He was thoroughly proof against that. There is to be no modification in this matter. The Lord did not receive the vinegar as He suffered on the cross. "Then Esther called for Hatach, one of the king's chamberlains, whom he had appointed to wait upon her, and gave him a commandment to Mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was". She is now queenly. But as suffering comes on we want womanhood uppermost in the test, womanly qualities to go the whole way in suffering and identification with a right cause. So it is said that she gave him a commandment. The word 'commandment' raises the exercise of queenly qualities, but are they any good? Mordecai goes on without heeding them. "And Mordecai told him of all that had happened to him, and of the sum of money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them". Mordecai is careful to say that he had *promised*. "And he gave him a copy of the writing of the decree that had been given at Shushan to destroy them, to shew it to Esther, and to declare it to her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the king, to make supplication to him, and to make request before him, for her people". That is he is teaching her the thing as it is. Her people as well as his. He is already in suffering and she is to come in. The whole idea of a true leader is that he is not only in the thing himself but others are to come forward into the same position.
J.D. He is encouraging Esther in the first features of femininity; that is subjection.
J.T. And love for the people. Why should she
{155}
not be a lover of the people? The principle of Christianity is to be a lover.
C.B. Definite committal as with Ruth -- "Thy people shall be my people" (@Ruth 1:16).
J.T. The Spirit of God is telling what happened very exactly and it is encouraging to see that Esther does not draw back. If we get right leadership God will be in the matter. The next thing is, "And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai". No misleading on their side, the matter is plainly, clearly told. It was not wilfulness. "And Esther spoke to Hatach, and gave him commandment unto Mordecai". This is the second commandment as if she is taking up that attitude purposely. That is all very well, but what is needed now is the spirit of suffering, not authority but suffering. "All the king's servants and the people of the king's provinces do know that whoever, whether man or woman, shall come to the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is *one* law, to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live". Well, did Mordecai not know the law better than she did? This is her cause, but she is certainly holding to the position of avoidance of suffering. Why should you go so far and to such an extreme? Modification is a lie of the devil. Peter would modify the Lord's position. But Mordecai is standing his ground. Not only against the possibility of being put to death, but he is standing his ground against this idea of authority in the queen so that there should be real deep feeling for her people as well as for him. So it says, "There is *one* law, to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live". She is telling Mordecai the rules of the empire -- well, I expect he knew more than she did about that. "And I have not been called to come in unto the king these thirty days". And this is what he says, "And
{156}
Mordecai bade to answer Esther: Imagine not in thy heart that thou shalt escape in the king's house, more than all the Jews. For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall there arise relief and deliverance to the Jews from another place; but thou and thy father's house shall perish. And who knows whether thou art not come to the kingdom for such a time as this?" Is not that a very fine speech? Full of wisdom and force. Who can stand against such wisdom and courage in a leader? She was protecting herself by what he knew as well as she. But he tells her that she will perish and her father's house -- and who knows but perhaps you have come to the kingdom for this very thing. What an opportunity for you. If you do not take this up your queenly position will not save you -- truly you will perish with the rest of us. And it is beautiful to see how she takes up the position and is prepared to live and die for the brethren.
L.E.S. It should be a challenge to us whether our lives are fully committed to the suffering of the testimony.
J.T. There is a lesson here. It is a real challenge!
H.L. Take thy share in suffering.
J.T. Quite so. This is her share.
J.C. Do you think that Mordecai started the leadership in a very simple way by refusing to bow to Haman and as he comes on to this there is more courage and wisdom shown?
J.T. Quite so. He had already taken his life in his hands.
J.C. He would imperil his life and the Jews would take account of that.
J.T. The enemy is to be faced. It is against the devil. He was the power and the king was with him.
D.R. Why does it say, "who knows whether thou art not come to the kingdom for such a time as
{157}
this"? Whereas actually Esther came to the kingdom to take the place of Vashti.
J.T. Well, the lawless queen will not come into suffering. There is no love with her. Will the Romish system suffer for the truth? Her very position makes the saints suffer. "I sit a queen and am no widow" (@Revelation 18:7). That is her position. No doubt the carrying forward of the idea of Vashti has that result in the natural feminine thought. The natural mind will not accept suffering. Whereas -- Mary -- the word means suffering. The Marys are representative of suffering. It is Marah. The principle belongs to those who love Christ and the brethren.
J.D. Mordecai's leadership really began in chapter 2:20. "Esther, as Mordecai had charged her, had not yet made known her birth nor her people". Under the governmental ways of God Mordecai was looking for a certain moment and training the woman for her place in it.
J.T. Well, look at her now. She is using the word 'command'. It is protection for herself. But suffering is the order of the day now. Is she going to join in it? So it is given to us not only to believe on Him but to suffer for Him. So that "the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready" (@Revelation 19:7). She was the wife of the Sufferer -- of the Lamb. That is the idea here. Mordecai is now a type of Christ. He is the sufferer, will she join him?
J.D. It is a challenge!
A.P. Is it answered in Esther's request to Mordecai to fast with all the people?
J.T. Yes. It is remarkable to see that as enlarging on this book. The people of God are disowned outwardly, but nevertheless cared for by God and gradually but surely drawn into the sufferings of Christ -- for that is the divine way. Suffering first and glory afterwards. And so she is in keeping with
{158}
that position. Who knows? "Who knows whether thou art not come to the kingdom for such a time as this?" As much as to say, God will help us either by you or someone, but this is your opportunity. It is a real positive argument -- for something will be done -- if she does not do it someone will.
J.F. Would it be the side of teaching with a leader -- the part that Mordecai takes here?
J.T. Why have we got the position we have if we are not come into it for some purpose? The Lord has something in it. It is a wonderful history of grace -- the testimony of God in Christianity. We are sure of how the matter is going to go. The question is, Are we in it?
J.G. In it to preserve life.
L.E.S. In connection with the suffering in @Revelation 11 there are two witnesses, two olive trees -- a testimony to their suffering.
J.T. Very good.
G.M. Does the crisis bring out this spirit of suffering as seen in Christ?
J.T. We know that we are in the fellowship not only for protection but the Lord has matters to attend to with us and He needs us. In the crisis are we to be counted upon to go the whole way?
L.E.S. "Which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified" (@Revelation 11:8).
J.T. That is it. We are to suffer for Christ -- to be crucified with Him.
J.D. "These are the two olive trees and the two lamps which stand before the Lord of the earth; and if any one wills to injure them, fire goes out of their mouth, and devours their enemies" (@Revelation 11:5). As if there is power in the testimony of God itself.
J.T. And then after they have lain three days and a half in the street of the great city they are taken into heaven. What a result! What a great and
{159}
glorious end to suffering! And this is given *you*. So you see from the incident in @Revelation 11 that it is worth while to stand -- not modifying the position but going the whole way with the truth.
C.H.H. So the apostle says, "So that death works in us, but life in you" (@2 Corinthians 4:12). That is the situation.
J.T. He says, "For I think that God has set us the apostles for the last, as appointed to death. For we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and men". "To the present hour" that is going on. Well, it means suffering and Paul is drawing the Corinthians into it. He was a leader. Mordecai is the leader here. Leadership will not suggest to the young men to avoid suffering to protect themselves, but will urge them to go the whole way in suffering and reproach for the name of Christ and for conscience sake.
R.H. Let them that are wise instruct the many.
A.H. Esther had not been called in to the king -- she will have to take the matter in hand to come into Mordecai's suffering.
J.T. All implying as Mordecai had said that she would not save herself. Her position would not save her.
A.H. There may be a danger with us of feeling the position all right and yet not taking our share in the suffering.
J.T. Moses *esteemed* the reproach greater riches. Well, now to proceed with Esther. She is coming to it now, thank God. Our thought is that all should come to it, to be out and out with the issue whatever it is and accept the consequences of it. "And Esther bade to answer Mordecai: Go, gather together all the Jews that are found in Shushan, and fast for me and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise, and so will I go in unto the king, which is not according to the law;
{160}
and if I perish, I perish". She is coming to the true feminine attitude. She has her maidens -- there will be reproach -- fasting in the king's palace. What is the king going to say to that? But she is showing now that she is moving with the current of God. She is not asking them to pray for her. There is no prayer -- God is not recognised in that way. Instead of prayer there is fasting. Prayer is quite acceptable. It is common, too, even with the heathen. But fasting is self-denial. Prayer does not cause that. But fasting comes in here. She would not do well for herself -- it is self-denial. She will not do well for herself but will come under reproach. And then this is what she will do. "And so will I go in unto the king, which is not according to the law; and if I perish, I perish".
R.H. She is not now evading.
J.T. Out and out for God now.
R.H. She can now command Mordecai.
J.T. Well, quite so. "And Mordecai went his way, and did according to all that Esther had commanded him". He bows to her command when she is going the right way. She now has moral power that he will recognise.
J.D. She has calculated judgment -- If I perish, I perish.
J.T. It was really a very serious matter because circumstances were ninety-nine per cent, against them. Haman in such power and the king with him. What can you expect of this? They are really taking their lives in their hands. It is a real thing. God is looking for that in His people.
R.H. Where thou diest I will die.
J.T. It is real womanhood.
J.F. The three Hebrew children went that way.
J.T. Also Daniel when he heard the decree of the king went and prayed as usual, towards Jerusalem -- but they do not pray here -- God is hiding His face
{161}
from them. He is telling us now to fast. The issue is real men and women who are able to go all the way in suffering.
L.E.S. "I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing witness with me in the Holy Spirit, that I have great grief and uninterrupted pain in my heart, for I have wished, I myself, to be a curse from the Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen, according to flesh" (@Romans 9:1 - 3).
J.T. Just so. Think of a man saying that! He does say that he *had* wished -- not necessarily now -- but he had wished himself a curse from the Christ.
F.R. What would these three days of fasting involve? Would it be a full witness to the position?
J.T. It is a period of exercise. We have the seven and three here -- full testimony to something. Really pointing to the death of Christ -- three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. The Spirit of God has written this book that the lovers of Christ might see the call for suffering for Him.
P.B. Would Esther here represent the mind and feelings of the brethren when they arrive at and accept the mind of Christ prophetically?
J.T. Esther calls others into it. She suggests that all the Jews in Shushan be brought into it. "Gather together all the Jews that are found in Shushan, and fast for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day". So now the thing is started. You can see God is working. And so it goes on, "And it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house". She is going to handle a big matter now -- the king, the king's house -- the rights of the throne. "And it was so, when the king saw the queen Esther standing in the court, that she obtained grace in his sight". It is the work of God. The third chapter is the work of the devil and also Ahasuerus is brought into it. But now the king is
{162}
favourable. God is doing it. We look for that.
C.H.H. God turns the heart of the king and we can count on Him to do it.
R.H. Why is there not sackcloth with Esther here?
J.T. She is a wise woman, too. After the suffering is gone through we must look for wisdom. Christ is the wisdom of God and the power of God. It is no place for sackcloth now. The king would be provoked if the queen came before him in sackcloth. She has suitable attire for the king's presence.
C.B. How would this work out with our young men as appearing before tribunals, etc.?
J.T. Well, it is a question of being wise in our attitude. The account of the spirit of the young in Canada is to be curt, unmannerly and disrespectful; it is a well-known thing. In the midst of evil as we stand unmovable we have to suffer and it requires that we judge ourselves and disallow our feelings and act wisely before the authorities, not antagonising them.
J.F. Would that come out in being prepared to take the words that the Government uses in relation to us?
J.T. You mean to call ourselves brethren number four in the way that they call sect. It is not a sect -- it is the assembly of God. But it is the way they call sect. Paul says, "But this I avow to thee, that in the way which they call sect, so I serve my fathers¬ God" (@Acts 24:14).
L.E.S. Do we see the right spirit as Paul stands before Felix, Festus and Agrippa?
J.T. How very courteous and subject his manner was. He knew more than they did and yet he credits the king with knowing all. He addresses Festus as most noble Festus.
R.H. The truth is to be presented attractively.
J.T. The young brothers who will be wise and
{163}
suffer for the sake of wisdom will not antagonise unnecessarily.
A.H. Having concern in the suffering that the authorities may take account of us rightly.
J.T. We do not want to go so much into details but in certain places those in high places in Great Britain have used the most encouraging terms regarding the Lord's people because of the right spirit being manifested, of their subjection and respectfulness -- that they will suffer -- they have plenty of greatness inwardly. Well, the fifth chapter is just a continuation of the fourth. "When the king saw queen Esther standing in the court, that she obtained grace in his sight". Well, the tide is turning -- the devil is defeated through her wisdom, undoubtedly through the *fasting*. God has respect to that.
Rem. A right lead is given by Mordecai and the brethren are unified in following it up.
J.T. If there is a right lead it should be followed up. It only confuses the authorities when So-and-so has a different view from you. And why have a different view from the brethren because the truth is the truth, and if a lead is given follow it.
Rem. Right conditions have been brought about and Mordecai now turns around and submits himself to Esther.
J.T. Because when the truth comes out in the commands of the queen, he loves to do them.
T.D. It is the decision that she arrived at -- If I perish, I perish, which gives her courage to move forward, to die for the brethren if necessary.
J.T. Attaching herself to the leader given of God.
J.G. And bringing all the Jews into the matter.
J.T. The voice from the altar in @Revelation 6:10 says, "How long, O sovereign Ruler, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth?". This is from the souls under the altar who had been slain for the
{164}
testimony of God. And they are told to wait for the others, their companions in suffering. And so they obtain a better resurrection.
F.R. Paul says, I die daily.
J.T. Well, you expect that. It is nothing new. Peter says, Do not regard it as new. So it goes on to say, "And the king said to Esther, What wilt thou, queen Esther?" *Queen* -- that is her position. She is queenly and womanly now -- a sufferer. God is evidently honouring her. So the king says, "And what is thy request? it shall be given thee even to the half of the kingdom". All this means a way out. God has now come in and the king is completely in favour of what is right.
Rem. Would God make a way of escape now?
J.T. Well, it may be that we have not fasted. If we fasted more, we would get more. Maybe this idea of fasting is what we need.
J.D. Would @Philippians 2:17, "But if also I am poured out as a libation on the sacrifice and ministration of your faith, I rejoice", be somewhat akin to Esther's word, "If I perish, I perish"?
J.T. "Poured out as a libation", that is a beautiful thought. That is the offering of oneself for a libation. Paul would fully complete the thought of going the whole way in suffering. The three mighty men broke through to get the water for David. David says, I will not drink but offer it as a libation to God. They risked their lives -- he could not drink that water. We shall have to take up the subject, God willing, tomorrow, from chapter 5:4.
{165}
READINGS ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER (4)
@Esther 6:1 - 14; @Esther 7:1 - 10
J.T. A question arises in this book which has not been noted so far. Why should Mordecai be so definite from the outset in refusing to bow to Haman? As Haman comes into evidence in chapter 3 it is said, "But Mordecai bowed not nor did him reverence". And Haman notices that himself and is especially filled with fury on that account, we are told. But in view of the present application we have been making of this book we should see that divine principles, however old they are, do not change, but come down. Haman was, as we are told, the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite -- Agag undoubtedly representing the Amalekite which Saul should have destroyed and which Samuel did destroy. He appears here and without any earlier intimation mentioned. Mordecai refuses to bow to him. Although he evidently knew that it involved danger, he steadily refuses to bow and thus excites the enemy. I think it gives us a lead that a divine principle in a crisis, however unapparently connected with the crisis, should be maintained, not overlooked, but maintained.
J.D. Do you think that Mordecai, under God, was honouring the law of @Exodus 17 against the Amalekite? In the governmental ways of God he comes in with that principle of God and will not bow to Amalek.
J.T. I think that thought would link it with Samuel's day. When the matter came up with Saul in the destroying of the Amalekites, we have 'words' mentioned. "And Samuel said to Saul, Jehovah sent *me* to anoint thee king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken to the voice of the words of Jehovah" (@1 Samuel 15:1). The 'words' are
{166}
details, not mere general principles, but details. And clearly Mordecai had not forgotten the details. Saul thought that he had the matter well in hand in a general way in destroying, as he thought, the Amalekites. But Samuel says to him, "What means then this bleating of sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of oxen which I hear?" Well, Samuel had in his mind that they were 'words' of Jehovah including all the details regarding this matter. Whereas Saul thought that generalities would suffice, and allowed natural feelings to enter into the matter and spared Agag. But in verse 32 we read, "And Samuel said, Bring ye near to me Agag the king of Amalek. And Agag came to him gaily". Evidently refined and wealthy. "And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past. And Samuel said, As thy sword has made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless above women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before Jehovah in Gilgal". I was thinking, too, of what has been said about @Exodus 17. The divine banner has been unfurled against Amalek and is there from generation to generation. And clearly Mordecai has this in mind. He had not forgotten. That is in these circumstances we are not befogged and confused. Our safety lies in observing divine principles in detail.
C.B. In Balaam's prophecy we have the thought of a shout of a king being in the midst of them. That is a king higher than Agag.
J.T. That is another scripture that bears on this. Mordecai comes to be higher than Haman -- it is a question of power. Balaam speaks of a shout of a king amongst the brethren, amongst the saints. Well, it is a question of power, kingly power even in reproach. Indeed, the king is in reproach and so are the brethren but the shout of a king is *there*.
C.H.H. Would the ministry of Paul in Colosse correspond with what is seen here in dealing with
{167}
Agag -- dealing with the flesh -- in order to make everything of Christ?
J.T. I am sure. That is the full thing. It is the whole matter there in Colosse. "The putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ" (@Colossians 2:11). It fits in with what has been said as to going the whole way. Our safety lies in going the whole way as to any principle governing us. So Mordecai clearly is upright here. He is able to lift up his head -- no shame. The salvation is for the head. "Lift up your heads". Instead of shame and fear stand upright in the presence of the enemy! And thus appear before the authorities, as we had yesterday, the principles governing us as we appear before them. As Esther -- she puts on proper apparel. So that we are dealing with actual circumstances and what is becoming in them. It was becoming that she should appear before the king in royal apparel. The question of royalty comes in. And this comes into our circumstances -- spiritual royalty and magnificence and they include power. "And it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house, over against the king's house. And the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, over against the entrance to the house. And it was so, when the king saw the queen Esther standing in the court, that she obtained grace in his sight". That is the position. It is royalty, and splendour in the queen, knowing how to observe her share in the royalty. She is owned as queen. So the king says, "What wilt thou, queen Esther? and what is thy request? it shall be given thee even to the half of the kingdom". We have the half of the kingdom offered to such a person as this. It is a question of the way we appear before the great ones, and whether the golden sceptre is extended in recognition. They claim royalty, of course. Here is a man in supreme rule
{168}
-- our life is in his hands, as it were. It is a question of what is there in connection with Daniel's image. The queen is equal to that. The saints are equal morally, too, as Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego were.
L.E.S. Referring again to Peter, "But *ye* are a chosen race, a kingly priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a possession, that ye might set forth the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his wonderful light" (@1 Peter 2:9).
J.T. Quite so. It is a chosen race and kingly priesthood here.
L.E.S. "That ye might set forth the excellencies of him".
J.T. That is just it -- the queenly, feminine side. That idea enters into the position -- the apparel of the queen. Which all brings about, as we might say, the favour that God gives. God can do that.
J.D. If we feel the thing that is happening, some of those features will come out as we are before the authorities.
A.P. Does not this side come out in Proverbs, as we learn to wait upon wisdom, knowledge and instruction?
J.T. Yes, it is a sign of that -- of those subjective qualities.
Rem. Paul before Agrippa displayed such qualities.
J.T. Yes. It would seem by the general position that the court was favourable in the main. Thank God for that! "This man might have been let go if he had not appealed to Caesar" (@Acts 26:32). Well, evidently there was some sympathetic atmosphere there with Paul and that was moral victory. The rigour of the voyage was greatly modified because Paul was in favour with them and he finally becomes master of the ship.
G.M. Would you pray for favour in the sight of these men?
{169}
J.T. You get it in @Nehemiah 2:4,5, "So I prayed to the God of the heavens. And I said to the king ..." And he got his request -- the queen was by the king.
R.H. Would it be right to connect the thought of piety in Timothy with these thoughts?
J.T. Very good. "That thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3:15). Well, that is in the assembly -- the greatest requirements -- we must respect them.
R.H. And so it says, "It is necessary that he should have also a good testimony from those without" (@1 Timothy 3:7).
J.T. Now to go on to the feasts of Esther. In chapter 2 we have Esther's feast given by the king. Now we have two feasts. There had been one feast made for her and now she makes two feasts. We must read this chapter in the light of the wisdom of Esther, because it is a question of the enemy. The king now is in favour. The king is in favour up to the half of his kingdom. She has gone a long way and has a great advantage. God gives us these advantages. But we want to exploit them, not allow them to fall to the ground. "And Esther answered and said, My petition and my request is, If I have found grace in the sight of the king, and if it please the king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and I will do tomorrow according to the king's word". Now we have something to look into here. Why did she not take advantage of the opportunity? Wisdom is operative. It gives her immense power and she wants to consolidate that power and not hasten unduly in the matter. Let the position be consolidated. Well, this is what Esther does. She is not in a hurry, but making the best of the position to use it. Now it is for the brethren to see the importance of waiting and using
{170}
wisdom. As God gives the opportunity, to make the most of it.
C.H.H. Does it allow the government of God on evil to fully develop?
J.T. It seems as if God is in the matter in an unseen way as the circle is gradually reducing to Esther the king and Haman. It is gradually reducing to one man -- Haman. Is he wise? The devil is not wise. He is short-sighted. Haman is very short-sighted! You marvel that he did not observe that something was against him. But he does not. He goes into his house and tells his wife and his friends of all his glory and riches. "And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and all wherein the king had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the king. And Haman said, Yea, Esther the queen let no man come in with the king to the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and tomorrow also I am invited to her with the king". Well now, see how dense he is! Think of what is against him and he did not sense it. We are to face the devil. The apostle says, Resist him. Because there are great weaknesses in the devil's activities and the spiritual observe them. Folly shows itself in them. The time of the second feast indeed brings out his folly and especially the using of the gallows he himself had made.
Ques. Is this the result of the three days fasting?
J.T. That is where wisdom comes in. There is not a word about prayer here, but it is fasting. That is the point. Perhaps if we fasted as much as we prayed there would be more accomplished.
J.D. "And Haman went forth that day joyful and glad of heart; but when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he stood not up nor moved for him, he was full of fury against Mordecai". You
{171}
wonder that Haman did not sense then that something was going on.
J.T. It is wonderful the non-discernment of the enemy. God instructs us as to the kind of enemy that we have to deal with -- he proceeds on lines and is unable to foresee how he can be overcome. And we are to be instructed in the principles of war -- to know and observe the antagonist and thus it comes out that he is being overcome and does not know it. Why did he not sense something in this woman? What is all this about? Why is she so favourable? Does he not know anything about Esther? Have his spies not found out about this woman? Apparently not.
P.B. Satan does not discern the spiritual.
J.T. "But the spiritual discerns all things, and *he* is discerned of no one" (@1 Corinthians 2:15).
R.H. The Colossian thought of Esther is, "In which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge" (@Colossians 2:3).
J.T. She is going on with great skill. And the tide is turning in her favour and the king evidently is now. He is making up his mind about Haman and it is there when the time comes, The king is something that God respects, like Pilate. The Lord replies to Pilate. "Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above" (@John 19:11). The Lord spoke to Pilate -- talked to him. Haman is unable to discern what is going on and Esther is not discerned, she has the recognition of the king. The war is against Haman, the conflict is against him and he is not sensible to it.
J.D. It was of God that Haman controlled himself. God in His government is handling the situation. "When Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he stood not up nor moved for him, he was full of fury against Mordecai. But Haman controlled himself and came home". It was all in God's governmental ways to bring him to the real issue.
{172}
J.T. It would have spoiled the position if he had been allowed to show his real feelings then.
L.E.S. The sinister movements of the enemy in Corinth were discerned by Paul and exposed by him.
J.T. He was cognisant of what was there. He knew of it. Another thing is divine agencies. God has His agents here. The king is brought in as one of them. Haman is not able to discern that the tide is turned against him. We are to exploit that -- what is successful -- keep on with it. She is now on the feast matter. And it gives her time to fully exploit the advantage. She knew exactly what was going on.
R.H. Does this waiting until tomorrow suggest the need of patience in these matters?
J.T. In @Numbers 16:16 we get, "And Moses said to Korah. Be thou and all thy band before Jehovah, thou, and they, and Aaron, tomorrow". Why not today? It is patience. We have to give time for things to work out. It is tomorrow -- not today. Tomorrow takes twenty-four hours for the earth to go around. It requires movement. Now something is going on, while the culprit does not discern anything at all. It takes time for things to work out as in the rebellion of Korah and the matter is put over until tomorrow in each case. And tomorrow brings out that the almond rod of Aaron's budded, blossomed and brought forth almonds -- it takes time. It usually takes months; that it should only take a night was a miracle, but still it took some time. And then time implies patience on our part, waiting for God to work. So these two feasts are to be observed -- to the natural mind it may be unnecessary detail -- but it shows wisdom is operative. This woman had come into these things by her fasting -- self-denial -- Haman was discerned in full and did not see that the current was against him.
C.H.H. This principle of waiting is an important principle. Our dispensation is the waiting period.
{173}
J.T. The presence of the Spirit here is just in that setting. And it is the same setting in regard of every principle. You have to realise the need of the Spirit. Many expect that it is automatic, but it is not. It never was. A divine principle enters into it. We are to fully realise the need of the Spirit.
F.R. Is this principle seen in relation to Lazarus? The Lord did not go to him immediately.
J.T. That is a good illustration. And see what effect it had on both Mary and Martha -- it was a question of divine glory. "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it" (@John 11:4). Both the Father and the Son are to be glorified. So it is well worth waiting for.
L.E.S. Does it fit in here that one great feature of John's gospel is "on the morrow"?
J.T. Yes, that is the thought. It is what the morrow signifies. Each morrow brings out something issuing in the millennium -- the third day. The Lord says, "Go, tell that fox, Behold, I cast out demons and accomplish cures today and to-morrow, and the third day I am perfected" (@Luke 13:32).
J.D. The Lord speaks of a divine principle in @John 11. "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God". The Lord had God's glory in view. And so it is here.
J.T. I think so. The two feasts are like two days -- He remained two days where He was, so that Lazarus should be buried. And Lazarus had been four days buried to bring out the corruption that had set in. Showing that He has power to raise the dead -- whether dead two thousand years or four days, it makes no difference.
A.P. Is the attitude of Esther the standing attitude of Ephesians?
J.T. "Having done all to stand" (@Ephesians 6:13). Standing in
{174}
the sense of resistance. Well now, the time is well filled up with these two feasts. Esther probably had a retinue of cooks -- but these are Esther's feasts -- what she is doing. And the king does not say, No, I have a great many military or political matters to look after. No, Esther is prevailing. What she wants is accomplished. And so it says in verse 13, "Yet all this is of no avail to me so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate. Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends to him". There is the woman again. She is there in the making of these gallows. But the end is that he himself is hanged on the tree. Not the man of God, Mordecai, but Haman. The Lord Jesus hung on a tree to accomplish redemption. He was made sin -- a curse -- for us. Most solemn consideration! Well, it goes on, "Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends to him, Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high". That is seventy-five feet which is a very imposing thing. His wife suggests this -- she brings in the feminine as in these circumstances. Democracy is very cautious to bring in the feminine side; they say the voice of the people is the voice of God. That is not true. Because you get the worst possible from the voice of the people.
J.G. Jezebel urged on Ahab.
J.T. It says that Haman's wife and friends advised this. "Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and in the morning speak to the king that Mordecai may be hanged on it". Another morning. They have the idea of the morning. But no recognition of God in it. Haman had no such idea. It does not fit with what he has in mind. "And in the morning speak to the king that Mordecai may be hanged on it; then go in merrily with the king to the banquet". He is thoroughly in this. So the scene is fixed for the final act, the second feast. And in the interim the chronicles are brought in. "On that night sleep fled from the king. And he commanded to bring the
{175}
book of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the king. And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, keepers of the threshold, who had sought to lay hand on king Ahasuerus. And the king said, What honour and dignity has been done to Mordecai for this? and the king's servants that attended upon him said, Nothing has been done for him. And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman had come into the outward court of the king's house to speak to the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him. And the king's servants said to him, Behold, Haman is standing in the court. And the king said, Let him come in. So Haman came in. And the king said to him, What is to be done with the man whom the king delights to honour?" That is refined cruelty -- righteous cruelty is being made to bear upon him. He has to adorn Mordecai and put him on the king's horse. A remarkable turn of circumstances!
T.D. The enemy is planning the destruction of Mordecai, but certain circumstances turn in his favour.
J.T. That is what comes out here. The servants have a ready answer to the king's enquiry about Mordecai. They are not against him. When the tide turns, so to speak, everything is favourable to what is right. But we have to learn all this. Chapter 4 is the secret of the whole matter. We have to learn to fast.
J.F. Is learning to fast the principle of wisdom as in Esther? God takes up the thought in that sleep goes from the king.
J.T. That is the turning point, God takes sleep from the king and causes the attempted assassination to bring Mordecai into evidence -- to bring things before the king -- for the hour of the crisis is approaching.
{176}
L.E.S. So the word is to fast in a day like this when it is so easy to do otherwise.
J.T. We have prayed much and should keep on praying, but perhaps where we fail is fasting -- that is, self-denial. Not simply ordinary worldly things, but denying ourselves of legitimate things. "But this kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting" (@Matthew 17:21). The question we are to answer is: What does fasting mean? It is self-denial of what is legitimate.
J.G. "All things are lawful to me, but all things do not profit" (@1 Corinthians 6:12).
J.T. The apostle lived in an attitude of self-denial of legitimate things.
C.B. Fasting calls for sacrifice.
J.T. Things which appeal to the appetite are denied in fasting.
D.R. "Have we not a right to take round a sister as wife?" (@1 Corinthians 9:5).
J.T. He had rights -- was it not right for him to be a married man? All the apostles were married except himself.
Ques. Is not God bringing to light in testimony what belongs to Him in the young men as they stand true, and is He not bringing to light treasure?
J.T. He is. This treasure is what is brought out of the work of God and that is what we are concerned about. It is coming out here in Esther. These are her chapters more than they are Mordecai's. Mordecai led in the matter but now she is in the front row. She is the spearhead in this conflict. And she is acting wisely. It is a question of self-denial and wisdom so that we have power. We have strength.
P.B. The king speaks to Haman first and Haman never gets an opportunity to speak about the hanging of Mordecai.
J.T. It is a matter of the want of sleep. The king
{177}
knew very little about fasting, but God comes in and makes him fast for sleep. Sometimes we fast for sleep and God makes known His mind in the sleepless hours of the night. Here the king is compelled to fast for sleep and these things come into his mind -- he wants to read the book of the chronicles -- and so he finds things out about Mordecai. God designed this. The king is denied sleep. But God intended him to use those sleepless hours to look into the book of chronicles. And what chronicles there are of the doings of the saints! What delightful manifestations of the work of God at the judgment-seat of Christ, when everything will be displayed of the things done in the body! Well, this is one of the acts of Mordecai. It is in the chronicles and the king hears it and wants to know about it. What reward had been given Mordecai? And of course this all is in view of the destruction of Haman. Mordecai is now coming into evidence.
R.H. Is all this detail intended to show the absolute accuracy of God's ways? "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways" (@Isaiah 55:8).
J.T. What happened in the interim -- in the night season! The morrow is going to bring out the decision as to Haman.
A.H. The counsel of Hushai defeated the counsel of Ahithophel. God is working to effect what is in His mind in every case.
J.T. He defeated the good counsel of Ahithophel. So that the servants here knew the answer to the enquiry -- What has been done for this man? Nothing has been done. The saints do not get much, you know, in this world, unless something happens to force recognition of their good deeds. But there is no great effort to bring them to light. It was in reading this book of chronicles that the king was made to ask about Mordecai and the servants told him
{178}
immediately that nothing had been done for him. And then the king says, Who is in the court?
D.R. Would the servants represent the men in the parliaments trying to see that justice is done?
J.T. It might be that. There is always someone that will come forward to witness to what is right especially after the king's sleepless night. So these servants knew that nothing had been done for Mordecai. How did they know? They must have had some sympathy with Mordecai.
L.E.S. "As unknown, and well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as disciplined, and not put to death; as grieved, but always rejoicing; as poor, but enriching many; as having nothing, and possessing all things" (@2 Corinthians 6:9,10).
J.T. You can see as already has been alluded to, how Paul had the sympathy of and was in favour with, the centurion. The preservation from the massacre showed that he wanted to spare Paul.
A.H. With regard to Paul appealing to Caesar -- would we see these features and qualities of suffering with Paul?
J.T. Well, that is the thing. There is work to be done in the saints, they are the theatre of God's operations. The prayer meetings are where we speak to God, but the fasting meetings are another matter. And the Lord tells us it is prayer and *fasting* that is needed.
J.F. Fasting is needed as well as prayer. You have spoken of prayer meetings and now it is fasting in a collective way, too.
J.T. We need help on the self-denial of legitimate things. Fasting makes room for the Spirit.
L.E.S. We are tested in the holiday season -- how we fill up our days in view of the gravity of matters. It is a day-by-day matter.
J.T. I am sure that is right. Holiday seasons are defiling. These resorts that men provide for humanity are surely marked by defilement. Fasting
{179}
would be denying yourself of legitimate things. Well, you have to have a holiday sometime -- but time is short. The more spiritual a person is the greater their sense of time -- there is so much to be done in the Lord's things.
R.H. It is a matter of fasting night and day.
J.T. Chapters 6 and 7 bring that out, and bring out the issue between the devil and the people of God as represented in Mordecai and Esther. So this is an immense advantage to Mordecai. It is not by any current event, but a historical event, the recognition of things in earlier days. Now these things come down in his favour. It was an earlier, historical matter. Now he is honoured. "And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king delights to honour, let the royal apparel be brought with which the king arrays himself, and the horse that the king rides upon, and on the head of which the royal crown is set; and let the apparel and horse be delivered unto the hand of one of the king's most noble princes, and let them array the man whom the king delights to honour, and cause him to ride on the horse through the street of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honour! And the king said to Haman, Make haste, take the apparel and the horse, as thou hast said, and do so to Mordecai the Jew, who sits at the king's gate; let nothing fail of all that thou hast said. And Haman took the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and caused him to ride through the street of the city, and proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honour!" So that God is giving through this incident, which is a historical one, an opportunity for Mordecai to be rightly owned. And God is doing these things now.
C.B. Mordecai stood for the rights of the throne and now he is being recognised. Would you say that
{180}
the Lord stood for the rights of the throne of God -- and representatively that is our position today?
J.T. That is just the truth. "Wherefore also God highly exalted him, and granted him a name, that which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of heavenly and earthly and infernal beings, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to God the Father's glory" (@Philippians 2:9 - 11). That is the outcome of His passion -- God has honoured Him. Then (verses 5 - 8), "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus; who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in the likeness of men; and having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross". And then we have that God has highly exalted Him. These things are foreshadowed here, in how Mordecai rises in greatness and glory as we shall see in the next meeting, but here we have the issue with Haman. This is the second feast. "And the king and Haman came to drink with Esther the queen". She is in every instance the queen now. "And the king said again to Esther on the second day, at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition, queen Esther? and it shall be granted thee; and what is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be done". So the king has not changed his mind. The matter is established. "And Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found grace in thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request; for we are sold, I and my people". Could she not have made a speech like this on the first day? But God made her greater in the interim. This matter involving Mordecai greatly strengthened Esther. The general position is better, the tide is turning and God is in it.
{181}
L.E.S. It is not now, 'If I perish', but "My people".
J.T. She is identifying herself with the people of God, great as she is.
A.P. The wisdom is manifest in connection with the fasting with the people.
J.T. Well, no doubt, fasting is the power. God is strengthening Esther's position -- not placing Mordecai at the bottom as was in the mind of Haman -- but placing him in the supreme place. It is wonderful the way God comes in for us.
J.D. Does this place of favour allude to Christ's place as glorified?
J.T. Quite so. Mordecai goes back to the gate.
R.H. Is the end of verse 4 the greatness of God's people universally?
J.T. What fine words she uses here. She is identifying herself with the people. "We are sold, I and my people". Not the Jews, but, "My people". "To be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue, although the adversary could not compensate the king's damage". The immense gift of twenty million cannot make up for the damage -- the damage to the king -- he cannot compensate it. "And king Ahasuerus spoke and said to Esther the queen, Who is he, and where is he that has filled his heart to do so?" He is thoroughly aroused now. God is working. Wrath is coming up, the wrath of the king, as Proverbs says.
J.D. If all the saints in Vancouver were to be slain, what would Vancouver do? What would be the king's damage -- the damage to the people of Vancouver if the saints were taken away?
J.T. That is looking at the thing in a concrete way -- Vancouver's damage could not be compensated.
D.R. If sold for bondmen and bondwomen in
{182}
ways in which the people can help the government, it would be all right.
J.T. "I had held my tongue" then. But it is the destruction of them that she cannot stand. And the king's wrath comes up. She profits there. "And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman". Wonderful strength and courage in her words. She is exploiting her advantage now, not modifying things, making it easier for the devil or ourselves in that sense. "Then Haman was terrified before the king and the queen". Power in a dual sense -- the people of God bring that out -- the power of the king and the queen. That will be in the millennium, there will be the Jews honoured upon earth -- the queen in gold of Ophir on His right hand. The heavenly city, of course, is the queen. We are being prepared for these things in this book.
J.D. Haman makes request for his life to the queen.
J.T. The queen has power now.
R.H. Is that the second established?
J.T. That is the idea. The care meeting is the place of terror for evildoers.
C.B. Felix trembled.
L.E.S. Esther calls him -- this wicked Haman -- the adversary, the enemy. It is like the titles of Satan in Revelation.
J.T. Just so. The courage in her words! "The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman". The book of Revelation brings out all the titles of the devil.
Well, God willing, we will have just one more season -- the final acts in this drama, of the two feasts of Esther. All leads up to the glory of Christ and the assembly or the glory of Christ and the Jews in the remaining chapters.
{183}
READINGS ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER (5)
@Esther 8:1 - 17; @Esther 10:1 - 3
J.D. I would like to ask how you regard the apparent heartlessness of this Persian monarch with this man whom he had promoted above all others and with whom he had drunk. Would it set out that the principles found in man's world, in Satan's world, do not stand, as we have come to now? And all this makes room for the governmental ways of God in the establishing of His principles.
J.T. That is true, no doubt. For while the king represents God's authority, it also shows how God uses the fickleness of the person. God can use anyone. Even Balaam, one of the worst men, is used to say the greatest things of the people. And immediately afterwards he teaches Balak to cast a stumbling-block before the children of Israel. So that while instrumentalities that God uses may represent peculiarly certain things of Christ Himself and God Himself, at the same time they are just men. This brings out what God *can* do. So that I think we see in this man's base fickleness and readiness to turn either to good or evil, what God can do in such circumstances. And, of course, what rulers were then they are now. They are fickle and exposed to political influences of every sort. So that we depend upon God every moment. There is nothing fixed in this world -- no assurance in their promises. Whereas with God He is working out His mind -- His government is stable and He would draw us into that stability. "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, ... is God" (@2 Corinthians 1:21). There is stability. He establishes us. And that is what we may see in these three chapters. The seventh is important -- dealing with how the king is brought thoroughly into
{184}
the right side of the matter. So that his wrath rose up -- he was thoroughly aroused, as if representing the wrath of God itself. Now we have the destruction of Haman. So it says, "So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai". That is the end of chapter 7. And then chapters 8 to 10 are occupied with the feminine in all this -- the establishing of it. Not exactly much added greatness to Esther but added greatness to Mordecai. For what God has in mind is Christ, the male side in all this. Mordecai represents that and there is certain authority with him. Chapter 10 has only three verses and all about Mordecai. That is where our minds are left.
G.A. Is there any parallel in this chapter with @Matthew 28 where the angel has the stone rolled away and is seen sitting on it?
J.T. Well, there is that. Satan has been overthrown. The resurrection of Christ implies that. So that in @Romans 16:20 we have, "But the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly". That means that what was reached through the death of Christ was rapid and quick -- from the divine side the matter is settled, but it takes time to reach it in us -- for it is under our feet. We have to be ready with our feet to trample on the devil when God gives us the opportunity. So we have the idea in the third of Genesis -- his head is to be bruised. We have to be in readiness with our feet for that purpose. And these chapters show that Mordecai and Esther and the Jews were to be in readiness with their feet to bruise the devil and the wicked one. Not only Haman but his progeny -- his ten sons. So in this chapter it is said, "On that day did king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the Jews¬ oppressor to Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king; for Esther had told what he was to her. And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai. And
{185}
Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman". So there is the complete displacement of Satan's emissary by Esther and Mordecai. The king now knows who the queen is. The family is now brought into evidence, pointing to the day when the Jews will be exalted, taking the place of other elements of opposition.
J.D. What would you say as to Esther and Mordecai being given this place as under Ahasuerus? Is it the feminine side recognising the male side?
J.T. It is a question of the Jews, someone representing Christ in relation to the Jews. In the millennium Christ comes out in many relations -- in relation to the assembly -- in relation to the Jews, and in other relations -- King of kings and Lord of lords. We have this typified in Mordecai.
F.R. The position is consolidated as they go. They have the house of Haman given to them. Then Esther proceeds with her concern in relation to her people.
J.T. That is just what is brought out here. The position is established and then we have a new chapter. "And Esther spoke yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device which he had devised against the Jews. And the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. And Esther arose and stood before the king, and said, If it please the king and if I have found grace before him, and the thing seem right to the king, and I be pleasing in his sight, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews that are in all the king's provinces. For how shall I endure to see the evil that shall befall my people? and how shall I endure to see the destruction of my kindred? And king Ahasuerus said to queen Esther and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I
{186}
have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon the gallows, because he stretched forth his hand against the Jews. Write ye then for the Jews as seems good to you, in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring. For a writing that is written in the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, cannot be reversed". Considerable time may have elapsed. This is a new movement. Esther and Mordecai were exploiting to the full the advantage that God had given to what is right, which is an important matter. Do not settle down half-way, but go the whole way in exploiting the advantage God gives His people.
A.H. "Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out" (@John 12:31).
J.T. "And I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (@John 12:32). Now it is a question of how Esther and especially Mordecai is coming in to secure a position of importance and influence. Verse 3 brings in a further matter and Esther resorts to falling before the king. It is a question of whether her influence is going to continue. She is dealing with a fickle man but she is continuing and becoming greater and greater in her wisdom and consolidation of what she has taken on. This chapter and the next show the position is consolidated and the advantage increases to the servants of God. For although God is not mentioned there is another feast and chapter 9 is full of joy. And the tenth chapter shows that Mordecai's position as representative of Christ is fixed. "And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai, to which the king advanced him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia? For Mordecai the Jew was second to king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the welfare of his people, and speaking peace to all
{187}
his seed". That is fixed -- written in the chronicles. Not only the acts of the king upon the throne, but Mordecai's own position as second to the king. As Joseph was second to Pharaoh and Christ is second to God. That is the position to be reached in our souls in this enquiry, the position which will be reached in the millennium.
L.E.S. Somewhat like the latter part of Ezekiel -- the prince as seen in the division of the inheritance.
J.T. Very like that. David is seen there as the prince. It is a question of personality in Ezekiel -- the full idea of King of kings and Lord of lords. A prince is surely personality -- the moral greatness of the prince. So that David is a type.
C.H.H. Before the establishing of that, is the principle with us important as in Timothy -- that of separating from iniquity -- withdrawing from it? First from Haman as a person and then his devices.
J.T. The awful effects of Haman are here so that we see how Esther is agonising that every trace of Haman and his deeds should be effaced, that there should be a reversal. So that John tells us that the Lord Jesus came to undo the works of the devil. Not only the devil himself annulled, but his works annulled in ourselves -- in persons.
L.E.S. So in the preceding chapter Esther refers to Haman as the adversary and the enemy, not Haman the Agagite, as in this chapter.
J.T. Well, that shows that she is in sympathy with Mordecai's determination, seen in refusing to bow to him. She is brought into that -- a first principle. It came down from the battle of Rephidim when the conflict began between God and His people, and Satan. She is now brought into that, Mordecai led her into it. So she is thoroughly in the thing now.
R.H. What is involved in the fact that the edicts cannot be reversed and a new edict is given which
{188}
permits the Jews to gather together and stand for their lives?
J.T. It brings out that things are not settled by announcement merely, but by their own power. The Jews are evidently brought into the thing to stand against certain enemies themselves. It is in mind here that Haman is dead but the fruit of his work remains. "And king Ahasuerus said to queen Esther and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon the gallows, because he stretched forth his hand against the Jews". The king is thoroughly with them now. "Write ye then for the Jews as seems good to you, in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring". So the matter is now in their hands. Well, can they exploit any advantage? When God gives us an advantage, we are to make the most of it.
J.D. After God gives Saul into the hand of David, in the next chapter David says, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. David did not fully exploit the position.
J.T. That is true. He brought himself into a false position -- he went to the Philistines and lost heart. He said in his heart, "I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul". That is a poor thing! God says something in His heart in @Genesis 8:21, but it is nothing like that. God said in His heart, when He smelled the sweet savour from Noah's sacrifice, "I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man, for the thought of Man's heart is evil from his youth". I just wanted to say a word on exploiting for God, because a moral advantage is given David there, he refused to put Saul to death, but then his heart fails him and he says, I will one day perish by the hand of Saul. If God gives an advantage as He does today, for all that is happening has the saints in mind, God will develop something
{189}
for them in this book. The point is, Are we ready to make the most of any advantage we get?
W.M. It is like a blank cheque given to Esther and Mordecai. "Write ye then for the Jews as seems good to you".
J.T. The Lord gave the apostles a blank cheque, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them" (@John 20:23). He gave them the opportunity to show grace and they used it, too. Peter used it to the Jews in @Acts 2. And today in the assembly any advantage that God gives should be exploited to the full. Even to the smallest particle of it. Use everything, as we have in this book. So take the Reformation, God gave a death blow to the devil in Rome. It was a terrible blow to Rome when Luther and others came in. But how was the advantage used? That is the point. They did not go the whole length at the time of the Reformation.
L.E.S. Is the recovery of the truth as we have it today, the full exploiting of the position?
J.T. Yes. Exactly. Luther did not go the whole way -- he still had the idea of a state church. And that idea is everywhere in Europe. The idea of a state church is everywhere in Christendom. So the opportunity is lost and the devil gets a footing again. The point for us is that if God gives us an advantage, can we use it? Are our feet waiting to trample on Haman? Because God will bruise Satan under *your* feet shortly. He has already been trampled under foot in the death of Christ, but we have to come into that. We have to be ready with our feet to trample on the devil.
C.H.H. In exploiting the advantages in respect of the authorities as standing for our consciences, we support the government in buying War bonds and the like.
J.T. Anything supporting the government is right abstractly, we should be able to discern what is
{190}
of the devil. In @Romans 16:20 God says, that He will bruise Satan under our feet. It reads "under *your* feet". I think we have the light to see these things and that covers what we are saying. Matters that are constantly under question, should be dealt with according to God. "Tribute to whom tribute is due" (@Romans 13:7). Romans is the great epistle for these matters.
C.H.H. The matter comes into evidence in @Matthew 17 when Peter is asked whether the Lord pays the tax?
J.T. Of course, that was the temple tax. It was not an urgent matter, but the Lord says, "But that we may not be an offence to them" (@Matthew 17:27). It shows the importance of paying whatever is due, and so having a good conscience as to it.
J.D. "Pay what is Caesar's to Caesar, and what is God's to God" (@Mark 12:17). We are obligated to know what the government require in that way.
J.T. It is not there the temple tax but what is Caesar's -- the inscription on the coin. And no doubt too the coin that came out of the fish's mouth had the inscription of Caesar to pay the temple tax. A man may have a hundred dollars -- silver coins -- Caesar's inscription on them -- they are Caesar's, but our bodies are not Caesar's. That makes the difference. Let them have your money! Let them take it, it is their due, no doubt they need it, let them have it, if you can spare it.
R.H. Is the exploiting seen in verse 11 -- the invading of the territory of the enemy, "... the king granted the Jews that were in every city to gather themselves together, and to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish, all the power of the people"?
J.T. Yes. It looks as if power is now with Mordecai and Esther. Or it should be Esther and Mordecai, for she is still queen here. The position is
{191}
dependent upon her conduct. That is another thing -- we cannot assume that things are fixed in that sense. They depend upon our own conduct and attitude. She is very particular as to that. She falls down before the king and uses similar expressions as before; "And Esther spoke yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman ... And the king held out the golden sceptre towards Esther". Then in verse 7, "And king Ahasuerus said to queen Esther and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman". She secured her position by her own attitude. She is making sure her own attitude is right. We cannot sit down and expect things to right themselves. Now is a time of fasting and carrying on matters. Let us not forget that God looks for conduct in us. The principles of the kingdom are to be seen in us. And God gives prosperity to this line of thing.
J.D. "Write ye then for the Jews as seems good to you". That is said to Esther.
J.T. It shows the confidence the king has in her and in Mordecai. She is wise.
Rem. Mordecai has been on high ground from the outset.
J.T. He has. He went back to Rephidim in his mind and Esther comes into that and this chapter is the outcome of it.
C.H.H. Present ministry would strengthen the assembly that she should be trustworthy.
J.T. That is a great matter with God, that God can have anything like that. Philadelphia is just that. "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, *I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. I come quickly: hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown" (@Revelation 3:10,11). And then, "Behold, I
{192}
make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that I have loved thee" (verse 9). The feet are brought in there again. That is the position -- the Lord can trust them.
C.H.H. Fully seen in the heavenly city. She has the glory of God.
J.T. Quite so. Our care meetings are to take that on now. Leadership will be found there in this kind of thing, and the brethren are to take it on. So that the foot is ready. God is going to bruise Satan under our feet shortly.
J.D. The conflict goes on with Amalek in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. Just so. We must have our feet ready as well as our hands and our mouths. God uses us in completeness. Where are our feet in the care meetings? Are our feet used in dealing with the enemy? Esther is thoroughly in this; she is a great woman now. And so it goes on, "And the king said to Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the fortress, and the ten sons of Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces? And what is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee; and what is thy request further? And it shall be done. And Esther said, If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews that are in Shushan to do to-morrow also according to this day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows" (@Esther 9:12 - 13). Someone may say, You are a bloodthirsty woman, Esther. But she is thoroughly in line with the position. The ten sons are not only killed, but let them be hanged, that is a curse.
J.F. The king only smote thrice and the prophet was wroth.
J.T. You are meaning in @2 Kings 13?
{193}
J.F. Yes, the king is given the opportunity to carry forward the judgment but stays his hand -- that is not wisdom.
J.T. He should have smitten five or six times, the prophet says, and that would have been the complete destruction of Syria.
J.G. David killed Goliath completely. He cut off his head.
J.F. What is the difference between slaying and hanging?
J.T. You might say the slaying may be enough. We often hear of the idea of persons being extreme. But we must be extreme -- we have read of the goodness and severity of God. That is the idea here as the king tells her what has been done. "And the king said to Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the fortress, and the ten sons of Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces?" So she proceeds in line with the occasion in every way -- proceeding in wisdom with the thing, not allowing anything of the devil to remain. Why leave one single work or evidence of the work of the devil? "And Esther said, If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews that are in Shushan to do to-morrow also according to this day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows. And the king commanded it so to be done; and the decree was given at Shushan; and they hanged Haman's ten sons. And the Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men at Shushan; but they laid not their hand on the prey". It is a question of conduct there. "And the other Jews that were in the king's provinces gathered themselves together, and stood for their life, and had rest from their enemies; and they slew of them that hated them seventy-five thousand (but
{194}
they laid not their hand on the prey), on the thirteenth day of the month Adar; and on the fourteenth of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting and joy. But the Jews that were at Shushan gathered themselves together on the thirteenth day thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the fifteenth of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting and joy. Therefore the Jews of the villages that dwell in the country towns make the fourteenth of the month Adar a day of joy and feasting, and a good day, and on which they send portions one to another". Well, now, it seems to me that Esther is maintaining her ground through right conduct. And so the idea of greed here is not seen. "They laid not their hand the prey". That is, the Jewish natural propensity is denied. I think the lesson is to go the whole way in what is right. Go all the way whatever the suffering or the extremes, if it is a right thing to do, do it.
Ques. Do we become trustworthy in that way?
J.T. It is a great thing to know that the Lord has confidence in you in what you are doing.
Rem. In dealing with matters we sometimes do not go the whole way because of sentimentality coming in.
J.T. It is said, There is no need to be so extreme. But this matter of going the whole way with what is right is urgent. We have already seen how Saul failed to destroy in not going the whole way against them.
L.E.S. When the seven sons of Saul who were hanged were buried, then God was propitious to the land (@2 Samuel 21:14).
J.T. That brings up the whole question before us. David was very dilatory in dealing with the matter. He was quite content with allowing the sons of Saul to hang there from the beginning of the harvest until the water poured on them out of the heavens. And here again a woman is mentioned. Then David sends and has them buried. That is, burying is the thought.
{195}
Deuteronomy requires that a person should not be left overnight. Burying is the thought. David sent and had them buried. He came to it in time. But he was very tardy. Then God was propitious to the land. But David kept God waiting. We should not do that. Go the whole way! Go the whole way in the smallest thing.
A.P. The way the non-combatant corps is being formed shows that the authorities have become favourable. The proving of a clear conscience before the authorities makes for the recognition of it.
J.T. Quite so. There is no doubt that the law of Great Britain is much more favourable to conscience than it was at first.
C.B. Would the hanging of the ten sons of Haman indicate a special answer in the saints to the royal edict of the king regarding Haman?
J.T. Yes, quite so. The ten sons of Haman have been slain, is that satisfactory to you? It is not satisfactory to Esther, she is going beyond that. So that the point is, Are we ready to go the whole way in exploiting the advantage that God has given us? Because every trace of Haman must be destroyed.
G.A. "But they laid not their hand on the prey". That is where Saul failed.
J.T. They showed that they were not on that line. The prey was not for them, showing this conflict was not for personal advantage but for spiritual.
Rem. That is where Achan failed, too.
J.T. He coveted the gold and raiment.
J.F. We might fail in going before the authorities if we are concerned about the monetary side of things.
J.T. That is very clear. Our young men may have to fell trees and the like. Some have to do worse things. They come into suffering. God says it is to their advantage. Well, you say, They do not get any salary. That is nothing in comparison with the
{196}
moral side. Let us make clear that we are not concerned about the prey, but the moral issue, like Haman's ten sons.
C.H.H. It proves that the second is established with these persons in a moral way, in that the Jews do not take the prey.
J.T. They are concerned with what is seemly. So is Esther and Mordecai, too.
J.D. Regarding the wholesale slaughter in Shushan and in the Provinces. There is a point I would like to draw attention to. "And in the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar, on the thirteenth day thereof, when the king's commandment and his decree drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them". Is there the Amalekite feature going through and the idea is to stress that the Amalekite is to be destroyed?
J.T. It is the undoing of the works of the devil. We are to undo them. You always find in the works of the Lord down here that everything was done completely. If there was a malignant member it was entirely made well. If persons were possessed of demons, the demons were entirely cast out. Persons that had relief were clothed and in their right minds. That is real Christianity implying a complete reversal of what has been before.
L.E.S. I was wondering if there is any connection here in the third month to the incoming of divine power at Pentecost. What is the spiritual import of the third month, the month Sivan?
J.T. The ninth chapter enlarges also on the feast in the month Adar. This feast does not seem to have anything to do with the service of God. God is not mentioned. Still there is something there. It is the outcome of having the devil denied, or robbed. It is the idea of the taking over of Pur or the lot of Haman. That is to say, the idea of the spoiling of
{197}
the Egyptians -- the robbing of the world -- the breaking up of the world. As when Israel came out of Egypt they took the silver and gold -- spoiled the Egyptians. That is to say in a spiritual manner we carry over everything, leave nothing of God behind. They took it all with them. Because if you leave it behind they will use whatever is real. If one, a Christian, comes from a human organisation, he should leave nothing of God behind. As far as in your power may lie take all of God with you. Your family and belongings -- make it clear that it belongs to God and take it with you.
C.H.H. What is implied in the scripture, "Make to yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness that when it fails ye may be received into the eternal tabernacles" (Luke 16:9)?
J.T. Well, quite so. Use what you have got in view of the future. I think that the gold, silver and clothing that the Israelites secured from the Egyptians would come into use in God's tabernacle.
J.F. What have you to say about the special days made in Shushan and in the villages in the way of joy and feasting?
J.T. Well, the capital represents the administrative position and the Jews held their feast there. God is going to bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The power of Satan is destroyed in Shushan -- the very centre of the empire. There was complete victory for the Jews. And that is what Esther has in mind -- the completing of the matter, going the whole way in what is right.
J.D. In @Numbers 31 when the children of Israel are avenging themselves on the Midianites. "And Eleazar the priest said to the men of war that had gone to the battle, This is the statute of the law which Jehovah hath commanded Moses". That is every exercise is gone over in the light of the Lordship of Christ. Then it goes on, "Only the gold, and the
{198}
silver, the copper, the iron, the tin, and the lead, everything that passeth through the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire and it shall be clean".
J.T. Well, that is just an amplification of what has already been remarked as to the spoiling of the Egyptians. It is a question of what is of God. God set up man at the beginning in certain things before the flood, and after the flood God took up a people out of the world in Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. He does not intend to leave the world with anything morally belonging to Him. They did not like to retain God in their knowledge and God is not leaving anything that belongs to Him in that condition of things. So when a Christian leaves the world he saves up everything that God can use. The world rejects God and God says, You are not having any of My things there. Ultimately the world is left a mere shell when the church is taken away, nothing left and the man of sin allowed full scope. Western Europe is going to be ultimately destroyed -- the Romish Empire -- nothing to be left at all. Whatever there will be will be in the East. When the church goes everything will be lost. So now if a Christian leaves a human organisation he brings everything with him.
J.D. The final stage of conflict is in the East.
W.M. Babylon has become the hold of every unclean thing.
D.R. Western Europe's civilisation then is to perish.
J.T. Yes, and all its outgoings. What advantages from God it has had and did not use them! Making use of the Bible and of many other things that God has allowed them to have. But when the time comes God will take everything out of it. The West has everything now -- Christianity. Since the Spirit of God came down the West has had everything. But it is going to end. The West has been built by Christianity, but God is not leaving it there always.
{199}
He has possessions in it now. But when the assembly is taken away, the Spirit of God leaves nothing but a shell to be burnt up.
J.D. "Behold then the goodness and severity of God: upon them who have fallen, severity; upon thee goodness of God, if thou shalt abide in goodness, since otherwise *thou* also wilt be cut away" (@Romans 11:22).
J.T. Just so. That is where the point comes up.
P.B. Is there any relation between the overcoming to the ten sons and the stone cut out without hands?
J.T. Well, Esther and Mordecai could hardly be said to be that. It is the idea of God's judgment going the full length here. It is remarkable how thoroughly the thing is done in these two chapters, how Esther is leading; the woman has prominence in regard to Haman and his sons.
C.H.H. Good triumphing over evil -- do you take that influence to refer to the Eastern influence?
J.T. The book of Revelation is in mind for our instruction now. The West is at its best today. For nearly two thousand years it has had the presence of the Spirit.
P.B. Will there remain no remnant of the Western world?
J.T. Of course the millennium comes in immediately. The Jews come up quickly. There will be nations but they are born again of God.
L.E.S. It makes way for @Isaiah 61:3 "... to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, that beauty should be given unto them instead of ashes, the oil of joy instead of mourning, the garment of praise instead of the spirit of heaviness: that they might be called terebinths of righteousness, the planting of Jehovah, that he may be glorified".
J.T. If we only had more knowledge of the prophets we could see how everything is taken up and
{200}
dealt with. The book of Revelation shows how things are finally taken up. The time it covers is very short -- three and a half years. Things are done very quickly. It is sub-divided into days and weeks to show how thoroughly things are taken up.
L.E.S. Unless the days were shortened the very elect would not be saved.
J.T. God wants us to get into the knowledge of what is coming in, we are on the fringe of it.
J.D. Do you see today things working up to an end especially with the British Isles on the side of the East?
J.T. I think so. The Empire will probably work out -- Britain, France and America take part in it. That is still the West and the beast will have domination of the West -- the beast and the false prophet. That is this very country and the British Isles will be in that. See how fickle the rulers are; as Ahasuerus in this book of Esther. It is a solemn consideration when you think of what is going to happen to this country, when the Holy Spirit is taken away and the Church is taken away. There is just a shell left -- the man of sin comes up and God is holding everything for vengeance.
J.D. The armies of God will centre around Palestine.
J.T. Quite. Things will happen quickly then. "And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters to all the Jews near and far that were in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, to establish this among them, that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, yearly, as the days on which the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month that was turned to them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day; that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor. And the Jews undertook to do as
{201}
they had begun, and as Mordecai had written to them. For Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the oppressor of all the Jews, had devised against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, to consume them and to destroy them; and when Esther came before the king, he commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he had devised against the Jews, should return upon his own head; and they hanged him and his sons on the gallows. Therefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur. Therefore, according to all the words of this letter, and for what they had seen concerning this matter and what had happened to them, the Jews ordained and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves to them, so that it should not fail, that they would observe these two days according to their writing and according to their fixed time, every year; and that these days should be remembered and observed throughout every generation, in every family, every province, and every city, and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them cease from among their seed. And queen Esther the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority to confirm this second letter of Purim. And he sent letters to all the Jews, to the hundred and twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, words of peace and truth, to confirm these days of Purim in their fixed times, according as Mordecai the Jew and queen Esther had enjoined them, and as they had decreed for themselves and for their seed, as to the matters of the fastings and their cry. And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it was written in the book". That is the last we hear of Esther. All is full authority and went down as written in the book. If we go back to the beginning in @Exodus 17 we find the book and things written in
{202}
the book. It is remarkable that this is the last we hear of Esther. She is seen as queen confirming these matters of Purim which are written in the book. That is to bring in all the people of all generations into this great exercise. And then the next chapter shows Mordecai's place and Esther is not mentioned. "And king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land and the isles of the sea. And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai, to which the king advanced him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia? For Mordecai the Jew was second to king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the welfare of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed". He is morally fit to rule.
F.R. Would verse 31 show that Mordecai is occupying the position morally that the king occupied officially?
J.T. The male side is clearly established especially in the last chapter. Ahasuerus the king is representing God and Mordecai is Christ, second to Him -- the millennial day.
D.R. "And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had written to them". Mordecai's leadership is not only at the beginning but it goes right through.
J.T. You could say that the real power is in Mordecai. He is the leader in the whole position. It is a great matter, this matter of leading and going through to the climax, in our own times in Christ, God's Christ -- the only One in mind all the time -- whether in us or in others.
J.D. Would the king here typify God, in the acts of his power and might and the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai?
J.T. That is the impression which this chapter leaves. It is a short chapter but gives an impression
{203}
of the results of the exercises and of the power that is there.
J.C. Mordecai was accepted by his brethren. Why does it say *multitude* of his brethren?
J.T. I would say that 'multitude' is the full thought of the Jews. "For Mordecai the Jew was second to king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren". There is nothing negative there. The whole idea is there.
L.E.S. Would it correspond with @1 Chronicles 29:20? "And David said to all the congregation, Bless now Jehovah your God. And all the congregation blessed Jehovah the God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and did homage to Jehovah and the king".
J.T. Well that is how it works out. Any spiritual person reading the book can see that Mordecai has a great place here. It is really God and the Messiah -- the counsels of God. You cannot stop at anything less than that. Mordecai has a great place. "Mordecai *the Jew*". Still the Jew. God coming to His people. God gives greatness to him. But the greatest is to be the humblest and smallest like Paul. "Seeking the welfare of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed". The word 'seed' is the last word in the book -- a wholly right seed.
A.H. Suggesting those who are to follow.
J.T. Yes. And so the book closes with Ahasuerus prominent in power and excellence and Mordecai as second. The Father and the Son, or Jehovah and the Messiah, "Speaking peace to all his seed". What a word that is during the present suffering, conflict and strife!
{204}
GOD WALKING
@Genesis 3:8; @2 Samuel 7:6; @Hosea 11:1 - 3
J.T. Our subject is God walking, which involves the tabernacle, for the Spirit of God alludes to that in saying, "but I went about in a tent and in a tabernacle;" and then His people walking with Him; and our being taught how to walk as Hosea indicates. The reading is, "And I it was that taught Ephraim to walk". The first passage clearly intimates that God intended, in walking in the garden, to draw man into a walk with Himself. His voice was heard. "And they heard the voice of Jehovah Elohim, walking in the garden in the cool of the day". He intimates He is not putting any burden on them. It is not the heat of the day, but the cool of it; as if in view of the great subject which stretches out throughout Scripture, He would be considerate of us. Jacob says to Esau that the little ones would die if they had to journey a great distance, so that there should be compassionate interest in us as to this matter, and yet it involves the greatest privileges; walking with God. He walked in a tent and in a tabernacle, He said, and it is clear that if we are to have part in this walk, the meetings are to be in mind, and we are not to be in a natural way in our houses when God is operating among His people, walking.
Ques. Would hearing the voice of Jehovah Elohim involve a spiritual alertness?
J.T. That is the suggestion, that it was to be heard, and although they were hidden in their sinfulness, they heard His voice. "And they heard the voice of Jehovah Elohim, walking in the garden in the cool of the day".
{205}
Rem. We know today we would not at all hear the voice of the Lord unless there is spiritual alertness with us.
J.T. That raises the whole question as to whether we are in movement with God, or whether we are neglecting or avoiding what involves His way of walking in a tent or in a tabernacle. Absenteeism among the people of God is very damaging. Absenteeism is a word that has become very current: people staying away from their employment; but the employment itself is apt to divert us, because of what it includes; that is, material means, and, therefore, there is absenteeism from the assembly -- the forsaking of the assembling of ourselves together.
Rem. We have later on that Enoch walked with God. I suppose he would set out a feature of what you have in mind.
J.T. That would be it. It is simple. Enoch did not ask God to walk with him; God is already walking.
H.H. That is very good. I was thinking as to what you just said as to Hebrews, and how the whole setting of Hebrews would encourage us not to forsake the assembling of ourselves together. The light is becoming more precious than ever. We are very near the end. The Lord wants us, and we might say, we want Him. I was wondering whether the cool of the day provides an opportunity for reflection on our part, thinking of what is taking place.
J.T. Genesis is a root book. The roots do not always show themselves, but nevertheless they are there, and we get in this word 'cool' a root which would suggest consideration on God's part for us. It looks for consideration on our part for Him, too. Clearly enough, Adam and Eve were not considering for Him, and yet they heard His voice walking.
A.B.P. Would the thought of the voice of Jehovah
{206}
walking in the garden suggest the title 'Word of God' as brought in in John's gospel?
J.T. You say it suggests the title 'Word of God'?
A.B.P. I wondered if it would be that kind of thing that in His walk or as He walked rather, there would be the speaking. The walk of the Lord is emphasised in the early part of John, and the title 'Word of God' -- I wondered if there might be a link.
J.T. There is the suggestion, I suppose, in Genesis of the beginning, and the word is an active word, not a static word. It is "in the beginning". "In the beginning was the Word" (@John 1:1). Genesis begins, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". There were operations at the beginning. It is an active idea, and John's gospel undoubtedly suggests the idea of movement because it says, "And, looking at Jesus as he walked" (@John 1:36). John the baptist looked at Him. It was in the beginning of things according to John. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". Then there is the idea of all things receiving being through Him -- His activities. Then the prologue runs down to the end of verse 13, and soon we have the idea of walking, Jesus walking, but clearly in view of redemption, His entering into death. That is, taking up what was essential in the beginning of things. John saw Him and says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world". That was a great matter. Then the next thing is, "Again, on the morrow there stood John and two of his disciples". John stands and sees Jesus walking and others are affected and they follow. They walk, too, but they walk on the principle of following, but clearly it was a question of a way being made in the darkness. John contemplates the darkness remaining, so that it was a question of a way being made.
W.R. @Revelation 2:1 says, "To
{207}
the angel of the assembly in Ephesus write These things says he that holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the seven golden lamps". Is that a present movement in respect of the Lord?
J.T. It was a circular movement, I would think. It does not convey the idea of going anywhere. It is in the midst of the seven lamps, but earlier He was entering into death to take away the sin of the world. He was walking in view of that, and then walking as if to establish the idea. In that idea there is the idea of leadership, making way, so that they followed Him, and the Lord inquires why they follow Him, and they call Him "Rabbi", showing how the work is taking form and that teaching was needed. Then they ask where He abode and He says, "Come and see", and they went, and filled out the day with Him. It was a teaching matter in where He abode.
F.N.W. Does the first chapter of John link with the scripture in 2 Samuel? "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us" (verse 14).
J.T. Just so; so that it says, "I went about in a tent and in a tabernacle". The original is put that way in this translation. It would mean, I think, walking continually. It conveys that idea. He went about. Of the Lord Jesus it says, "Who went through all quarters doing good" (@Acts 10:38). It was not exactly that in the wilderness; it was going about in a tent and in a tabernacle. It was the principle of walking in that sense, in those circumstances, and the tent and the tabernacle would be of great value, which John would have in mind.
H.H. "O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through the wilderness" (@Psalm 68:7). That is all connected with the ark going through.
R.M.S. Is rest in view? "They abode with him that day" (verse 39).
{208}.
J.T. I suppose it was something of that kind in the tent and the tabernacle. That is what Exodus and Numbers set out, but Jehovah makes a point here to David, "For I have not dwelt in an house", that is, a fixed abode. John contemplates a house. The Lord calls the temple "My Father's house". That is fixedness, and a place of abode in a fixed relation. God has established that now, but He is saying here that it had not arrived. He was content until then with what had been provided, what He had, a tent and a tabernacle. I mean to say, He is saying to David that He has not been considered for; there was no great provision made for Him. David had thought of having a very comfortable place for himself, a house of cedar, and he is comparing that with what God had, and God takes that up in His word to him; and the voice to us is whether we are thinking of God. He has been thinking of us.
G.V.D. What is the line suggested in Matthew's gospel in which the Lord is named "Emmanuel", which being interpreted is 'God with us'?
J.T. That is in keeping with Matthew; not *walking* with us yet but with us, although the principle comes out in the gospels, but the dwelling place was in mind. That is, the assembly. The Lord says, "The Son of man has not where to lay his head" (@Matthew 8:20). There was no provision at all under the circumstances He contemplates. At Bethany He found something, but it is remarkable that in early morning He was going back to Jerusalem and He was hungry. What kind of a breakfast was there? What consideration was there with all that was at Bethany? I mean to say, the challenge is to us as to God. What thought did Adam and Eve have of Him, surrounded by such evidences of His bounty? What thought did they have of Him?
H.H. Do you mean the supper in @John 12 when Mary anointed those feet that had been doing this
{209}
walking? I suppose it would be appropriate to connect that with our appreciation of Christ now.
J.T. Very good. That is the supper they made. The supper they made was not an everyday matter. What the saints may do on a special occasion to a servant or to the Lord, as they did, is one thing, and, of course, it is to be valued, but what they do every day is the thing to get at. It was not, clearly, an everyday case at Bethany.
H.H. I am sure you are touching a very practical point.
G.V.D. Is Rebecca marked by the consideration that should mark us, when she saw Isaac walking in the field, she said, "Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us?" (@Genesis 24:65). And then she covered herself with her veil. Was that consideration?
J.T. Just so. She was not going to show herself to others, which is implied in the marriage phraseology; avoiding all others. It is a sort of vow made by people who are getting married, which is well to notice, that you do not cast your eyes on any others. That is the idea; she was for him. She was for his eyes and he was for her. He would be for her, but she was for him. That would be the point.
A.B.P. Is the walking of @Genesis 3 by way of example? A perfect idea?
J.T. Well, I think it is God coming into an ordered domain. He had been there in His Spirit earlier, brooding over the face of the waters. There was nothing much there; no suggestion at all of any provision, of any comfort for God; because the Spirit of God is God feelingly. But now He has an ordered situation in this third chapter. The second chapter enlarges on it in the most beautiful way; how God thought for Adam and brought Eve in. He was so thoughtful of Adam in providing Eve for him, and the garden, surely he is going to think for God in the
{210}
garden. But did he? That is the idea; that we should take to heart what provision is to be made in our minds.
A.B.P. I suppose actually it was personal ambition that brought in the distance. It left a handle for Satan to suggest that they should become as gods.
J.T. Quite so. The contrast to that is brought out in Philippians, as you know. The Lord did not have any such thought as that, and therefore He brought in consideration for God in all His outlook as a Man here. He thought for God. In His prayer, and His word to the woman of Samaria of what the Father sought, He was thinking for the Father's heart, the Father's desires. Well, Adam had desires. Undoubtedly Adam was looking for a wife. He could not have put it into words, but he found none at all his like. But God thought for him. "It is not good that man should be alone" (@Genesis 2:18). And presently this wonderful creature is standing beside him and he is calling her by name, and speaking to God about her. Well now, are they together to have any thought for God? Is God going to get anything from Adam out of this thoughtfulness that He has expended on him, and is Eve going to join in? What actually happened is that they were ambitious. Young married people are very likely to be ambitious. It is a painful thing that young people are ambitious. They are markedly so, even those in fellowship; whereas the thought set out is that God is looking for results from a married couple, and in a wider sense, from Christ and the assembly; and the Lord led the way in it in that He was thinking of God. "The Father seeks such" (@John 4:23). He unfolds the thought to the woman. "God is a spirit". It is a remarkable thing that He should have told her that. "God is a spirit, and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth".
C.N. Does the teaching which follows this in
{211}
@Genesis 3 show that God in working takes on the issues Himself and is now pleased to make a way through for Himself?
J.T. Quite so. God is coming in now to an orderly situation. He Himself thought of it, and He is coming into that. He is coming into an ordered situation, and that is what the service of God implies. It is an ordered situation, and there is divine movement towards that. What does God find with us? I think that is the lesson here. What does He find?
C.N. Well, He does not find much response, if any, from these two, and I thought that what follows shows that He took the issue on and made a way out, so that there should be results. Do you agree with that?
J.T. Quite so. They had made a terrible issue themselves. He had to deal with the whole matter. He first speaks to the devil, and then He speaks to the woman and then He speaks to the man. It is by speaking, as has been remarked. John contemplates the Word. "The Word was with God, and the Word was God". He spoke to the devil and the woman and the man.
C.N. He brought in the seed of the woman.
J.T. Quite so.
F.N.W. "And Man and his wife hid themselves". Do you think it is a question in our marriages whether we are helping one another along the lines of the work of God, or whether there is a lack of transparency in me, and whether my wife helps that along? When you get this hidden state in a couple, as in Ananias and Sapphira, it has a deadly effect on local companies.
J.T. There is that; and then there is a couple like Aquila and Priscilla. They are mentioned equally by the Spirit of God, and undoubtedly their hospitality and readiness to help together in hospitality
{212}
and speaking is in mind, as excellent examples for young married people.
H.H. Your thought is that God has an ordered condition of things before Him. God walked in the garden having that in mind, and God has never given up that idea. God has a beautiful ornamented condition of things before Him. He does not surrender it, but He would bring us into it. Is that so?
J.T. Quite so. And so it is in the houses of the brethren and in the assembly; "rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ" (@Colossians 2:5). That is the word to us. It really implies ornamentation; an ordered state of things. God has that in His mind. Hebrews contemplates it in chapter 9; what the tabernacle meant. It was a type of the universe; we are all in the universe, whether physically or morally. We are now dealing with the moral side, and we are all in it, and it ought to influence us in all our relations in the sense of order.
R.W.S. In chapter 18 of this same book, Abraham does not seem to be hindered by his wife in leaving. He sees that Jehovah is moving on and he goes on with Him.
J.T. Abraham went with Him. That shows Abraham was considering for Him. He had been considering for Abraham. Abraham joined up and went with Jehovah, and Jehovah was ready to speak to him and hear his pleas. Then we are told Abraham returned to his place and Jehovah went on His way. He has something on His mind. The visit to Abraham was, as it were, on the way. It was not the prime thought. God is on His way now to the fulfilment of all His thoughts, but there is a special sort of thing that He would join in with, namely the assembly, which implies order, and Matthew, I believe, has that in mind. The Father brought it in really, but the Lord brought it in: "On this rock I will build
{213}
my assembly" (@Matthew 16:18). As if He would rely on us in this wonderful time of movement, finding accommodation.
C.A.M. In this verse you started with, the reference to the man and his wife would seem to have a special significance in that there must have been a companionship leaving God out; do you not think that there might be a tendency with any of us, that unless God makes some gracious intervention, we would be liable to leave Him out?
J.T. I think Aquila and Priscilla come in conveniently in a spiritual sense in how they link up with Paul, and how they link up with Apollos. I am already touching on this because of @Psalm 20 and @Psalm 21, which we have already dwelt on, some of us, as to the king. These two Psalms are full of the king and what people think of the king; namely, him whom God anointed; who represented God in authority here. Now, the idea there supports all gift, all anointing in the great system. There are not the clergy and the laity, but there are the anointed, the gifted persons as anointed. They are provided for especially. The people speak of the king; they had great affection for him. For instance Moses was king in Jeshurun, meaning in the affections of an upright people.
Now, it is said in @Acts 18:1, "And after these things", after the things that happened at Athens, where there was nothing at all in the way of accommodation for Paul, only criticism, "having left Athens, he came to Corinth; and finding a certain Jew by name Aquila, of Pontus by race, just come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife, (because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome), came to them, and because they were of the same trade abode with them, and wrought". Notice that. They had no holiday in their house; no special time of leisure; but he abode with them and he wrought, because he was of the
{214}
same trade as themselves. They wrought and he wrought, but they afforded him something, and then we find in the end of the chapter that "a certain Jew, Apollos by name, an Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, who was mighty in the scriptures, arrived at Ephesus" (verse 24). Notice how their race and nationality and personal identity are noted. "He was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in his spirit, he spoke and taught exactly the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John. And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue. And Aquila and Priscilla, having heard him, took him to them". Now these are important matters us, for while there is no clergy or laity at all in Scripture, yet there is the difference between gift and non-gift, although every saint has a gift in some sense. "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ" (@Ephesians 4:7). But then there are those especially favoured and anointed for the service of God and service to the saints. But Aquila and Priscilla represent what married people are to do in relation to the servants, and what the servants are to be in relation to them, but what they ought to be in extending a covering wing to those who serve. Adam and Eve did not show any of it. But we find it down through the Scriptures, and it opens up into the idea of Christ and the assembly, and what provision is made for God there.
A.R. What does he say about them in Romans? Paul speaks of Aquila and Priscilla.
J.T. Quite so. In @Romans 16 there is worthy mention of them. First we have a sister there. We do not know whether she was married, but she is a remarkable woman. She was "minister of the assembly which is in Cenchrea; that ye may receive her in the Lord worthily of saints", (that is, the assembly at Rome are enjoined to do that) "and that
{215}
ye may assist her in whatever matter she has need of you" (verses 1,2). Because she was a sister that assisted, too, in whatever was to be done. The Lord says, "But *I* am in the midst of you as the one that serves" (@Luke 22:27). But then there were those who ministered to Him of their substance and were with Him, so that the allusion to Aquila and Priscilla is striking. He says of Phoebe, "For she also has been a helper of many, and of myself". Then he says, "Salute Prisca and Aquila, my fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus, (who for my life staked their own neck; to whom not *I* only am thankful, but also all the assemblies of the nations)" (verses 3,4). So that they had a great place as a husband and wife among the saints universally; "all the assemblies of the nations". What a place God gives to young people who can minister and care for the Lord's servants!
A.R. What you said about helping one another now is very remarkable.
J.T. Quite so. I was thinking of that. God can do everything for us if necessary. He allowed these two to do things for Paul. I think we will see how God has provided us with models, and the Scripture affords abundance on that head in every respect -- models, as in the Thessalonians. But now it is God coming into an ordered state of things which is called the world. It is said, "He was in the world, and the world had its being through him, and the world knew him not" (@John 1:10). It is exactly what we get in @Genesis 3. The Creator came into the world; the world was made by Him; the beautiful ordered world of the garden, and, you might say, the world knew Him not. The same thing comes out in John's gospel. The Lord Jesus was in the world, and the world was made by Him and the world knew Him not. It goes on to say, "He came to his own, and his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God".
{216}
Those are the ones now to look to; those that have received Christ, as to how they hold themselves in their personal relations and then their married relations and then their household relations. "As many as received him". Martha received the Lord into her house. You may say, that is a worthy thing to do. We may do that, but not treat the persons right. Priscilla and Aquila are examples of married persons.
A.R. The Lord says, when you go into a city, if there is a son of peace, stay there.
J.T. That would be the idea and, of course, that brings up the question of children; how they are in this matter; whether they can add to the position. There are no children yet in the garden, but Adam and Eve were there, and the Spirit of God gives us in a few words the whole position. But Jehovah came in; "Jehovah Elohim" (it is beautiful that we have that compound title) "walking in the garden in the cool of the day". His voice was heard. There is no order in the world now, of course. There is murder; violence all around. But there is something for God in which there is order, and He comes into that.
C.A.M. I suppose that is the reason why those details about Aquila and Priscilla and Apollos are very interesting, because as we think of one another in everyday matters we might think, Well, everything is absurd and confused, but in bringing God in and not exercising our wills we will find there is a marvellous companionship ordered of God.
J.T. Quite so. God did wonderfully in what He set up in the way of companionship in the garden, and we come in and join in it. But what He found is another matter. The issue involves so much.
E.McK. I was wondering what He found in the Lord in Matthew's gospel on the mount of Transfiguration. It was really what He was looking for in the first man. Then He says, "*This* is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight: hear him" (@Matthew 17:5).
{217}
I was wondering whether the Lord then speaks about an ordered state of things in regard to the assembly in the following chapter.
J.T. That really involves all the synoptic gospels. God began there. But John was there before; it was a matter of making a way for the Lord. The old was in some sense making way for Him and He appears at the Jordan in the beginning really of a new order of things, involving order. John was in it. We know what was said about Him, that it had all this in mind; and the Father's voice -- it is not said it is the Father's voice, the point is the voice; "the voice of Jehovah Elohim". It is not what was said, but the voice. The voice was there and it was for those who heard, and for us now to know that it was the Father's. The terms used show it. And then on the mount it is the Father again, and Peter says, "this voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain" (@2 Peter 1:18). These are all most important points, as to what is before us as to this matter of walking, and whether we are taught to walk and have part in the thing that has been inaugurated.
T.W. What would you say about the Lord Jesus saying, "If I therefore, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet" (@John 13:14)?
J.T. It is the idea of walking. You get a great deal of it in the epistles, and what we are at now is manifestly applicable to present conditions. It is walking and God has inaugurated the walk; walking by Himself in relation to an ordered state of things, and walking in a tent and in a tabernacle also in view of external conditions; and then whether He has those that can walk with Him. Israel are those that were brought out with Him and at Sinai they are taught how to walk. God is going on; He is going about and He is to be in the tabernacle, but who are to walk with Him? I think the idea of teaching is
{218}
in the book of Numbers; how we are taught to walk in relation to God. In @Numbers 9 and 10 they begin to walk, to move. Two sets of the tribes move according to the trumpet blast; and then the sanctuary -- making a provision for God; that is how the movement is to be, and so the walking begins. It is for each of us to understand it; how we are to have part in that walk, because the order is very precise in Numbers. It is not only the twelve tribes, but there are four sets of them, and the sanctuary in the midst of them, and the Levites in the sanctuary. God is there, and each is to be in his place.
C.A.M. In @Luke 24, when the Lord made as if He would have gone further, was it all that they might come into that matter you were alluding to?
J.T. They began to walk themselves immediately after. He made as though He would have gone further. He would say in effect, It is a question of the provision you are making. They are challenged as to the provision. He was persuaded to go in with them, and that is the point; that God is giving us an opportunity to persuade him; He is not going to be a burden to us.
F.N.W. Is the walking of God largely in the wilderness setting until the rest is reached?
J.T. That is right; that is what it is. That is what He alludes to in 2 Samuel. The house is the settled abode.
A.B.P. You spoke of the order in @Numbers 10; the setting of the tribes. Would there be some instruction in the five abreast walking out of Egypt to Sinai? They went out in ranks of fives; but in the wilderness there were four threes of them, and an extra one; that is, the camp of the Levites, those who cared for Jehovah and loved Him, so to speak, and considered for Him all the time. That is what God is looking for; an inner circle. If the inner circle is right the outward will be right.
{219}
J.T. It is the speaking at Sinai that regulated that. "The Lord spoke unto Moses saying ...". How often that is said.
A.B.P. I thought there might be a connection with @Genesis 3. They followed Jehovah as they were under the leadership of Moses, but then the instruction would establish the order of which you are speaking.
J.T. The speaking, the idea of the word, is in Moses. The speaking is to convey what is in God's mind; that brings the four threes into position. When they are settled and encamped there is always the position of the Levites. It is the inner circle. God has those that He can rely upon. We were speaking lately of how the Lord stressed upon the apostles as He was about to die, whether they would understand and be custodians of the truth as it came out in Him; whether there was an inner circle. He had them in the garden; He put some here and some there, and three special ones were to be near Him. That is the idea in the garden. There are none of them called to be near Him at the cross. What they may have done is another matter. Some of them were there standing at the cross, but there was in His heart the idea of persons left as He died who had the truth and would be custodians of it and care for Him. So in the book of Leviticus Jehovah speaks out of the tabernacle; He is in His house, in the tent or tabernacle, as He says here, and we have the unfolding of the truth there as to the offerings in the early chapters, 1 to 7, and the priests had the custody of all that. They understand, and everyone that came up would go to the priests. God's interests are cared for and the needs of the saints, too.
S.F. Is the spirit of that in David in @Psalm 132:4,5: "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob"?
J.T. That is very good; that is a priestly way.
{220}
So that he goes on to say, "Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy saints shout for joy" (verse 9). God looks for that. He looks for it all the time. He is telling us that we are priests and ought to be able to do it.
F.N.W. He speaks of the ark in the wood and then invites Jehovah into his rest, and Jehovah answers, "This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it" (verse 14).
R.W.S. After @Numbers 21 the encampments seem to be more normal, more energetic. Would that be the working out of it?
J.T. Yes. After @Numbers 21 it requires the Spirit in an active way springing up, so that you have the prophecy of Balaam; that is, light from God to lead us to understand how great the saints are; what the whole position is; not simply the tabernacle, but the dwellings of the people, what God would see in them and that He could be there. Numbers is very particular as to anything that is in the camp, that there should be nothing unsuitable in the camp. Everything is to be ordered, and nothing impure. So that Balaam's prophecy coming in after @Numbers 21 unfolds the mind of God in the wilderness, about to enter the land. "How goodly are thy tents". How God was pleased with them. There is nothing to distress Him; all is orderly.
H.H. So the journeying after the teaching of the brazen serpent is understood in the household.
A.R. Moses says to them in @Deuteronomy 2:7, "He hath known thy walking through this great wilderness: these forty years hath Jehovah thy God been with thee; thou hast lacked nothing".
Ques. Why do you think God brought Himself forward in this way in relation to the fact that He is the One that taught Ephraim to walk?
J.T. Numbers, I think, is the answer to that. We have already touched on it; the position of the tribes
{221}
around the tabernacle, and then the mind of God in Judah. Judah is first with two other tribes, and when the movements begin he leads toward the centre. The orientation of the whole position is towards the centre, so that we are inspired by the prospect that is before us every time we move.
Ques. Do you think that in meetings like these we get divine teaching in this way to move?
J.T. That is the idea. He says, I taught Ephraim to walk. But undoubtedly it could be extended to the whole thought of Israel.
J.A.P. It is remarkable that there is vengeance on some persons who refused to walk in their assigned positions, such as Korah and Aaron and Miriam. They did not like the assigned work God gave them.
J.T. The book assigns a place to every one of us and it is for us to keep our places and move accordingly.
Ques. Would Peter be an example of one taught to walk through discipline and pressure? I was thinking of his pathway, how the Lord took him on and carried him through extraordinary circumstances until he is seen in the beginning of Acts serving.
J.T. The Lord covered his whole life really in His interview with him according to @John 21:18. He says, "When thou wast young". It is a thing that challenges every young person. "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst" (that is not a lovely walk when young people hike off as they wish to do), "but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee". He girded himself at the first. It is like a young person doing himself up for a show to make himself presentable; but, "another shall gird thee". That is resignation to the will of God. Undoubtedly the idea is in the Son of God. John shows it is in the walk of the Son of God. John the baptist says, "And I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God",
{222}
(chapter 1:34). Peter had the light of the Son of God from the Father, but he never preaches it nor teaches it. Not that he was wrong in not doing that; it was a levitical matter that he did not, but when he comes to the close of his life he speaks about the Son.
H.H. In speaking of the old persons over against the young, is there not more the referring to the Holy Spirit on the part of those who are older? It is not the energy of the flesh; it is more the relying on the Spirit. Is that not a point of importance for all of us now, in turning to the Holy Spirit for support and help?
J.T. When he was putting off his tabernacle. It is beautiful, I think, to read Peter's second epistle in that light. When we are getting older we think of the Lord coming, and we ought to all the time, but we also think of possible dissolution, having to die. Peter thought of it that way. He thought a great deal of the Lord's coming, and the glory, but he also knew he would die, before the Lord had revealed it to him. But he speaks about the Son of God and the heavenly glory and "such a voice". And the stretching forth of his hands would, I think, correspond with your suggestion that the Spirit is made much of.
F.N.W. The next remark of the Lord in @John 21:19 is, "But he said this signifying by what death he should glorify God".
J.T. Just so. The second letter is by a man that has come the whole way down. The Son of God is before him.
H.H. I thought of what our brother had in his mind about the soul history of Peter, learning lessons, not too quick at learning them, but still they were learned.
A.B.P. Does fatherhood connect with teaching how to walk?
J.T. Just so. The wording in Hosea would indicate
{223}
that. He said, "When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and out of Egypt I called my son". See how it links on with the Lord Jesus prophetically. "As they called them, so they went from them: they sacrificed unto the Baals, and burned incense to graven images. And I it was that taught Ephraim to walk". That would be a prophetic allusion to a fatherly affection like Joseph. Some of his great grandsons were born on his knees.
A.B.P. Paul in speaking to the Thessalonians says, "as ye know how, as a father his own children, we used to exhort each one of you, and comfort and testify, that ye should walk worthy of God" (@1 Thessalonians 2:11,12).
J.T. "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God" (@1 John 3:1). It culminates in that. Let us take our places in that.
{224}
THE YOUNG AFFECTED BY THE PRESENCE OF THE SPIRIT
@Acts 2:16 - 18; @Exodus 12:26 - 28; @Exodus 13:8,14
J.T. This verse in @Acts 2 is quoted from the book of Joel, and it is in mind now because it carries divine thoughts as to the Spirit from the Old Testament and because these thoughts embody young people. "This is that which was spoken through the prophet Joel, And it shall be in the last days, saith God, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your elders shall dream with dreams; yea, even upon my bondmen and upon my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy". The youth are stressed in this verse and, therefore, the verse has a peculiar application, the young amongst us being numerous and increasing; and it is thought that they should be reminded of the presence of the Spirit available to them through faith; that is, His operations are characterised by the use of young people. Old ones are just mentioned, but the reference is to young people, both men and women, or boys and girls. And then in Exodus we have this passage augmented by a reference to the questioning of the children in relation to the passover. It is said, "And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say to you, What mean ye by this service?" showing they take the initiative in questioning, and then in the next chapter in relation to the feast of unleavened bread, the Israelite was to inform his son. That is, the father takes the initiative to inform his son; not to leave it to him to gather up what he can, but to inform him as to the feast of unleavened bread. And then again in verse 14 it says, "And it
{225}
shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this?" The change of the word from 'children' to 'son' is suggestive, because it would denote that the young are taken account of in chapter 12 as not mature, and in the sense of relationship in the family. But in chapter 13:8 they are to be informed first of all, and then they are to ask (verse 14), but viewed as a son. No doubt there is much exercise about the young as developing from childhood into boyhood, or to manhood or young manhood that they should be informed, not left to learn casually, but to be informed, and then that this should work out in their inquiring so as to get information.
C.A.M. Do you take it for granted that because of the greatness of the Spirit's world of things there will be inquiry? There is so much to be known.
J.T. They are quick to learn things and to ask about current, mundane matters, but what inquiry there is about the things of God is a question, and then how much information they get from us. "And thou shalt inform thy son".
A.R. Were these features lacking at Corinth? They were not keeping the feast.
J.T. Just so. They were enjoined to keep it: "Let us keep the feast".
W.F.K. Why is it the last days? Is that the day of grace?
J.T. It is to mark off how the matter stands. John says it is the last hour in his epistle. The government of God has run its course pretty well. Christianity was in view all the time, but much had to be done in a rough way, rough work had to be done in the race so that the great thought of God should have scope; that is, in this dispensation, representing the great plan of God which He kept back, for "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing" (@Proverbs 25:2). He kept it back. There were types
{226}
which could only be understood by keen inquiry, but the history of the race had well nigh run its course before Christ came or the Spirit came. "The fulness of time was come". It is an important matter that we are not at the beginning of time. We are at the end of it, the millennium being the final feature of time, so that I suppose that is what the prophet means. "And it shall be in the last days, saith God, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh".
A.N.W. Why is it that there seems to be so much that is on the party line and questioning whether a person has the Spirit or not?
J.T. This passage would contemplate that the incoming of the Spirit would carry with it the concrete marks or fruits. "I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy". It had marked effects. They are not simply in the way of enjoyment as in Romans: the love of God shed abroad in the heart by the Spirit, but the work of God in intelligence and prophesying.
A.A.T. How does that work out? I can understand a young man getting up in the assembly and giving a word, but here the daughters are prophesying.
J.T. That is to be noted. The persons mentioned are really all young: bondmen and bondwomen would suggest rather young people. The elders are alluded to, of course, but it had a concurrent effect when they are prophesying; not simply having the joy of the love of God in their hearts, but intelligence working. Prophesying is not simply asking questions, but conveying to those who hear, conveying God; the idea of God is impressed on those who listen. It was, I suppose, that the incoming of the Spirit should be in this way marked by young people; instead of being light and frivolous and careless, they are prophesying.
{227}
A.R. Would Philip's daughters be like that? They prophesied.
J.T. Just so. I suppose they are mentioned to show what the influence of a devoted man in his house may result in. Much is made of Philip personally, not as a husband or a father, but as a preacher. He would have something to do with souls as a deacon, but he certainly became very pleasing to the Holy Spirit, because the Holy Spirit took him away, raptured him. He must have influenced his household in that spiritual, feeling way.
R.W.S. Speaking practically, you can see that some amongst us nominally have not got the Spirit -- some young people. They would be at a great disadvantage and so would the assembly. It has been pointed out in ministry in @Luke 11 the Lord, as having the locality in mind, is urgent that if they, the parents, being evil know how to give good gifts to their children, how much rather shall the Father give the Spirit to those that ask Him.
J.T. That is a remarkable passage. It has often been commented on in this connection; and the Spirit Himself coming in as at Pentecost, taking on the young people is remarkable; not that it is said to be so historically in the Acts, but it is enough to have it quoted by Peter from Joel, the Spirit of God Himself quoting it really.
A.N.W. What does Joel mean by "all flesh"?
J.T. I suppose it would point to the millennial state of things. Flesh is still to be owned of God not in the moral sense, but in the physical sense. It is so with ourselves. Our members are taken on by the Spirit.
C.A.M. That seems to be an interesting thing in connection with what you said about the young people that it is in the last days, and you were stressing that things are reaching a sort of climax. All flesh as such seems to be wearing out, but in
{228}
connection with the Spirit there is all this newness of life.
J.T. Conditions of blood and flesh are still in mind for use. In our case, of course, it is only provisional and in the millennium it will be only provisional. Flesh and blood will be used, but here it is just flesh.
C.A.M. Would you connect this with the world on the other side of the flood -- Noah's world? The judgment was really imminent for these people, was it not?
J.T. They were in the last days.
C.A.M. I thought that Peter speaking represented a hope that would awaken them to another world of things.
J.T. Did you say in Noah's day?
C.A.M. I thought Peter took the line of Noah. He refers to it in his epistle. I thought in the beginning of Acts perhaps you could regard the fact that he was speaking of the bow in the cloud and God's covenant, whether that would connect with this other world.
J.T. The Spirit coming in, as in this chapter, had in principle another world in mind, which has taken form provisionally involving the assembly. That is, God would carry on witnessing to the human race through an organisation. The Spirit comes into a recognised state of things; not to continue as it is now. It is just provisional. The organism will continue. That is, the body of Christ and the assembly viewed as the vessel of administration will continue in the assembly in the millennium from above, but during the present dispensation it is an organisation involving our condition in flesh and blood. It is God's way to witness in our condition, and to take men, humanity, up at its best. That is, as young. The children are young and energetic and they have their faculties fresh, and the Spirit is intimating that
{229}
He is ready to use them. The youth is a beautiful side of humanity.
A.R. The word is "pour out". "I will pour out of my Spirit".
J.T. It is a remarkable form of expression, involving liberal giving, free-giving.
J.T.Jr. Would there be the need of having the children tied like the ass and then the colt before the Lord could take them on?
J.T. The gospels help as to that. God has endowed parents with authority. In fact, that exists even before they are converted. He has endowed parents with authority, and He is, I think, intimating in the references to that incident that they should use it, and that they should use it early.
J.S. Is it the reign of grace?
J.T. Yes, quite so. The youth are supposed to be ready. That is, there is something of God, from the very outset among men, women, and children, even before the sovereign work of the Spirit. When the Israelites went out of Egypt they were to borrow things or ask for things inclusive of clothing and utensils and gold. Well, these were there. And so at Jericho the silver and gold and vessels of copper and iron were to be taken by the Israelites, which would mean that whatever there is of God set here governmentally in the race is to be used. Therefore, Christianity did not come into a chaotic condition of things. If there were not government here, there would be chaos. But God has put government here in view of coming in directly in the reign of Christ. All the previous exercises and experiences of men pointed to that period -- the fulness of time -- and reckoned that whatever was of God would have been employed. God would honour any restraint by parents even although they are not converted; any respect at all for Him and His ordering He would stress, I think, in unconverted families. Sometimes
{230}
you see restraint of children and the like, and God will show that He respects that even although they may be unconverted yet.
F.N.W. Does it work out in a normal Christian family that if God-given discipline is established from the beginning apologies do not need to be made later?
J.T. It is what is of God. If the government in a country in any way employs these principles good and well, in the schools and the like. God will honour that insofar as it is effective.
A.N.W. That word 'restraint' is the word God uses in the matter of Eli's difficulties with his sons. He did not restrain them, God said.
J.T. These things were taken from the Egyptians, which must have been used; and they were enjoined to be taken at Jericho which is suggestive -- that whatever there was of the race augmented as it was by the special laws and principles and ordinances given by the Jews, God respects it whatever it is, the outcome of it, and He takes it on when He begins the reign of grace.
W.R-n. What would you say about the young man that came to the Lord in the gospels and said he desired to follow Him, and that he had kept all the commandments except this matter of selling all that he had?
J.T. That is it. There was one thing he lacked, and unfortunately he did not go in for that, but then some did go in for that. Why not? God would honour whatever it was.
W.R-n. How would you view him? As a result of wrong teaching?
J.T. Quite so. He was well instructed in the law, but there was one thing he lacked. That makes it easy. The Lord is surely implying He is respecting what he had. There is one thing lacking. "Sell all that thou hast and distribute to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in the heavens, and come, follow
{231}
me" (@Luke 18:22). The Lord is not discrediting what he had.
R.W.S. How would you name that one lack?
J.T. It is Christianity. I would say it is Christianity in the principle of it -- the giving away; selling and then giving and the compensation above, and the following of Jesus in the meanwhile. It is really the *way* that is spoken of, the way of God. All the education under the government of God is good from the very start.
A.A.T. I notice in @Galatians 5 there are nine fruits of the Spirit mentioned, but prophecy and visions are not mentioned.
J.T. I think this verse implies there was a good deal preceding. They are ready for the Spirit, for prophesying. God is taking account of what there was there. They were ready for the Spirit and useable like the utensils come out of Egypt. Where did the utensils come from? Were they trained in the schools? Moses was brought up in the schools. He was educated in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. You might say, Did that qualify him to lead God's people? Certainly not. But still there was something there and it was not all for nothing.
A.A.T. When he sat by the well he learned something.
J.T. He learned very quickly. He killed a man a few days before, but now he is changed. But he had right thoughts in his heart in using violence.
A.B.P. When Abraham's servant saw Rebecca it says he marvelled at her. Would that suggest the appreciation that the Spirit has of a preparatory work?
J.T. She belonged to a family that was under culture; she belonged to Terah's family, the line of Shem. "Blessed be Shem". However far back you go, if you go back one half-dozen generations, that grandfather and grandmother were blessed of God.
{232}
There is something there. "Blessed be Jehovah the God of Shem". You must get some results from that.
C.A.M. Prior to that the statement is used that God's Spirit would not always strive with men. Since that day, Shem's time, there seems to be this result of government.
J.T. Yes; government was ordained in that way particularly at Babel. The nations were divided and surely that would imply restraint. The barrier of language, the difference of language would be restraint.
W.F.K. The Spirit warring against the flesh -- how does that fit in here?
J.T. Well, that is the state, the mixed condition in the believer. Galatians would refer to the mixed conditions in the believer, that is especially noticeable in young believers. These are contrary one to the other, so that you cannot do the things that you would. The Spirit is stronger than what is in the flesh, what is in man. It is a victorious matter. We are now dealing with what was before; what exists before the Spirit comes in, what exists in government. If God has put it here He intends it to be used, and wherever it is used He honours it.
A.B.P. Would you say that in a sense the governmental action in regard to the malefactor prepared the way for his confession? "*We* indeed justly, for we receive the just recompense of what we have done" (@Luke 23:41). Evidently the acceptance of government even in an extreme case like that seemed to pave the way for blessing.
J.T. Quite so. Where did he get the word 'justly'? A thief would eliminate that from his vocabulary, but he carried it with him; and many a young person has carried thoughts of God instilled in his mind that stand him in good stead in later years.
J.S. He vindicates the Lord. "This man has done nothing amiss".
{233}
A.C. Is it not a fact that in certain parts of the world government is more directly in the fear of God, if you could use that expression, than in other parts?
J.T. You take the Roman system when Christianity began. They had remarkable laws. Their laws have come down to us. God had honoured them; the Lord Himself preparing the way governmentally for Christianity. The Greek system prepared the language to be used by the Spirit of God. These are like the vessels that came out of Egypt and like the gold that was in Jericho.
F.N.W. Had that principle of government worked out into Cornelius so that he is a pious man and so pleasing that the Holy Spirit falls upon him and others as he listened to the word?
J.T. That is a good connection, because it is said his prayers ascended up to heaven; not simply that they were heard but they went up there and they were a memorial; a memorial from a Roman officer kept up in heaven before Peter met him at all. That shows that God is working all the time for one end. There is no lost time with Him; everything is for a purpose and works out for good.
A.N.W. That is why the word 'spoiled' is used in connection with the Egyptians; carried over as a trophy.
J.T. They spoiled the Egyptians, too. The question might arise, How would that be? The meaning would be that the world is rendered weaker and Christianity gets more power. There were houses built for the midwives, the like of which were not there before. They were to be seen there.
J.T.Jr. God took Saul of Tarsus out of the world. He took him out of the realm of the world system, did He not? That weakened the world system, taking the gold in that way.
J.T. Very good; just so; taking whatever was there. He was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel.
{234}
A.P.T. The Holy Spirit is given to all those that obey, Peter says. Does that enter into this young people matter? Then the injunction in @Ephesians 6:1 is, "Children, obey your parents in the Lord". Would that enter into the reception of the Spirit?
J.T. Most certainly. That refers back to the giving of the law in @Exodus 12; the first commandment with a promise. You say commandments are irksome, but are promises irksome? That is the way it works out. That it may be well with you. Does that mean in heaven? That means in your ordinary affairs. God will make it well with you and your days will be long on the earth. That is a good scripture to bring in here.
A.A.T. The old man seems to have some place.
J.T. Quite so. The stress is on the young, it is quite clear. "And it shall be in the last days, saith God, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your elders shall dream with dreams". That is the only reference to age. But then it goes on, "Yea, even upon my bondmen and upon my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit". That is remarkable. It is *your* sons and *your* daughters and *your* young men, but God says, *My* bondmen. Where do they come from? What brought that out?
A.B.P. The passage is transposed in quoting. The old men are mentioned first in Joel, but the young men are mentioned first in the quotation.
J.T. That shows there is improvement from the Old Testament. I mean, the New Testament puts things where they ought to be. Much was made of the old in the Old Testament. In Genesis hardly anything is made of the young except Joseph, but in the New Testament it is the young. The Lord Himself was a young Man. John the baptist was a
{235}
young man, and all the apostles as far as we can see were young men.
J.S. Bringing the gold to light?
J.T. Just so.
A.R. "We will go with our young and with our old" (@Exodus 10:9). Not the mature first, but the children first.
G.V.D. You have been speaking of what develops out of God's governmental dealings, but in @1 Corinthians 10 Paul introduces what was favourable for Israel, that they all drank the same spiritual drink; yet God was displeased with the most of them, and that is brought forward for our admonition upon whom the ends of the ages have come. The side of God's favourable dealings -- what would you say about that?
J.T. That would not include the young. They would have to be at least twenty years in the wilderness before that would come in on the young. All the young ones that came out of Egypt went into the land. The judgment fell on the older ones. That must have been on toward the end of the wilderness -- those that were numbered, six hundred and three thousand people, were all over twenty years of age at that time, at Sinai. They were the ones that fell in the wilderness, not the little ones.
A.N.W. He uses the word 'fathers', "all our fathers"; I thought that was perhaps worth noting. "All our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea" (@1 Corinthians 10:1). It rather impresses the line of the elder.
J.T. As regards the ages it says, "But your little ones, of whom ye said they should be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the land that ye have despised" (@Numbers 14:31). The little ones that they thought would be a prey are going in.
J.A.P. Do you not think a feature that those of us in this country have to guard against is independence?
{236}
The young man in Mark evidently refused to sell his possessions to retain his independence. Does that hinder the Spirit's work in our hearts?
J.T. If he has not got any, his aim is to get some so as to be independent. That is in the mind of the natural man, if he has possessions to retire and be independent. It is a common word used. Well, it belongs to the youth.
R.W.S. You spoke of the young man in Mark. There are two of them there. One is in chapter 14 who followed the Lord: "And a certain young man followed him with a linen cloth cast about his naked body; and the young men seize him; but he, leaving the linen cloth behind him, fled from them naked" (verses 51,52). The other young man would be in chapter 16.
J.T. You had something to say about that?
R.W.S. You mentioned the young man and I judged it was the young man sitting on the right in the white robe. There are two here and they seem to be in contrast.
J.T. I would not say there is so much of that, because there is something -- he had something; the linen cloth. He was badly set up, in want of raiment and seemliness, but there was something in him that found him in those circumstances. It is a very irregular and unseemly and humbling experience, but still I would not think there was not something there in a man being found in such a case at that moment. It was when the Lord was arrested, was it not?
R.W.S. Yes; He was in the garden, was He not?
J.T. The Lord was in the garden of Gethsemane; yes. He had just been arrested. Well, the young man certainly was not at a football game. He was there. There is something there. The suggestion is that it was Mark himself that is in mind; who knows?
A.B.P. Do you think there is the subtle suggestion
{237}
in it that Mark went into the service with pure motives, but he had the official title of a servant without having the sense of the seriousness of what he was going into?
J.T. I think the word 'motives' applies, as covered in the linen. It was not enough. Of course, that is quite common, that you are not just taking account of things as you should, but still there is something there; and the second young man is the full thought that he has in mind to set out in his gospel. The second young man is a man of purity in a white robe and he is at the right, at his best.
F.N.W. Is there an interesting contrast to the linen cloth being cast about his body in Samuel, a boy girded with a linen ephod?
J.T. He did not know Jehovah, but he had the right thing on. There was no discrepancy at all. When he got light from God he was ready for it.
T.E.H. The second young man was clothed in a robe. There would be a formative work in his soul. A linen cloth is not made into a robe, but there is the suggestion of it.
J.T. There is the suggestion of it. Rahab had the flax. There is the suggestion of it, but only in the making.
A.A.T. Did you want to make more of the bondmen and the bondwomen?
J.T. You connect that with young people, but they are God's. God calls them His. That is to be noted. The others are *your* sons and *your* daughters, and *your* young men and *your* elders, and then it says, "yea, even upon *my* bondmen and upon *my* bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy". The word 'even' there indicates there was a modification entering into the matter. Bondmen are not just the same as sons and daughters, but the possessive pronoun is 'My'. God has such. Well, how did they become that?
{238}
Are we not to look back in history and see how God prepared for that condition? So they are ready for the incoming of the Spirit.
A.A.T. That would be the apostles and disciples who were ready for the Lord?
J.T. Others came in. What God began with after sin came into the world is continuing and operative. It is what is of God, and it has not lost its value because Christianity has come in -- a better thing.
R.W.S. I was going to ask whether the selective way in which the Holy Spirit came upon men of old would emphasise this scripture that He is coming upon so many; upon all these His Spirit is to be poured. Would not a godly Israelite envy one upon whom the Spirit came? It was an unusual matter in the Old Testament.
J.T. Just so. Samson is a good illustration. The Spirit of God moved him in the camp of Dan; not when he went away on a holiday, but in his own home quarters.
G.V.D. Would it be right to say that the transition from what is ours to what becomes God's is the result in the first place of carrying through the truth of baptism? I was thinking of Hannah. She lent Samuel to the Lord.
J.T. She is a good illustration of what we are saying. I thought of it when it was mentioned of her bringing up the little coat. She is contemplating growth in him, but that had developed into a linen ephod. He became priestly, but not from his own inward motives, but evidently from some external influences or teaching that God honoured, because he did not yet know the Lord; yet God began to tell him the most extraordinary things to make him fit for a care meeting. Jehovah told him about Eli's house and the conduct of his sons. That should be told in whispers to old brothers, but God told it to him, a young man.
{239}
J.A.P. In verse 13 it says, "But others mocking said, They are full of new wine". Why is that?
J.T. That is a remarkable thing. I have often thought of it. Peter addressed the mockers. Why did he do that? It says, "But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and spoke forth to them (that is, the mockers) Men of Judaea, ... these are not full of wine, as ye suppose", etc. He gave a good reason for it, too; it was only the third hour of the day. Very remarkable. I think the whole position would be to teach us of levitical principles; how Levites carried on at the beginning; the way they began in speaking in taking advantage of public circumstances.
J.T.Jr. I suppose they were full of the matter, evidently, causing great feeling in them. There was something different about these men in the way they were speaking of these things. Is that not what Christianity is? The new order of things is stimulating.
J.T. They talk about it. The mockers said one thing; they said, "They are full of new wine". But others had said other things; you get a mixed multitude. If you preach on the street you will get a mixed multitude. The question is, Am I skilful enough to use that fact? If you stand up to preach now you will get a Jewish crowd probably, especially in New York. Paul on Mars Hill used the situation. Well, I thought it would be worth an hour of conversation among the brethren about this matter of the young people, and how they are treated in Scripture in this remarkable passage, in the inauguration of Christianity; that they are mentioned so prominently and brought in from the Old Testament, and then go back again to the Old Testament in these two chapters in Exodus, how the children are alluded to in chapter 12:26, "And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say to you, What mean ye by
{240}
this service? that ye shall say", etc., and then in the next chapter, which refers to the feast of unleavened bread especially it says, "And thou shalt inform thy son in that day". Inform him. See to it that he gets this light or information about something. And then the next passage is that he asks. "And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say to him", etc. He inquires about it. No wonder. Because if he did not get anything to eat it would not be very pleasing to him. Why should this be?
A.B.P. The informing by the parent seems to be historically before the inquiring by the son.
J.T. Quite so.
F.N.W. Is it important for both the father and mother that they should take the initiative in approaching the children on these great matters of God, and the questions will follow?
J.T. That is just what I thought in suggesting these scriptures. There are so many fathers here, and it is a very opportune time to bring up this matter. The Holy Spirit needs them all. That is the idea.
A.N.W. The inquiry in chapter 12 is because they keep the service. You must keep the service to have the questions raised by the children.
J.T. "What mean ye by this service?" Just so.
R.W.S. Did you suggest earlier that the change from children to son suggests spiritual growth?
J.T. Clearly. Children would include all that sit at the table down to the youngest. They are all there; they are all included in the inquiries, but the son is singular. He would be grown up in the midst of them. The oldest one, we will say, is entitled to be regarded as a son, which involves maturity, and he inquires. His father first of all tells him and then he inquires.
A.R. Is the passover kept continually? This
{241}
service would not be once a year as it was then. It would be all the time, would you say?
J.T. Just so. That is the way it is alluded to; feast of unleavened bread -- both phases of the feasts. First, "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth" (@1 Corinthians 5:7,8). That is the part of it that the young people would not care so much about keeping. Unleavened bread has not much taste; nothing to stimulate much. Why is this? Well, it is a good thing to inform them first about it and then see if they will ask.
H.MacG. This does away with young people's meetings and the like, if we have the truth of this.
J.T. Just so. It is at the table. This is contemplated at the table because the feast was held in each house.
A.B.P. When Lot spoke to his sons-in-law his words were like idle tales. Was that because he was positionally wrong? He had light but was not really living up to it.
J.T. Just so. He carried it a good way when he had unleavened bread in his house, but did he keep it for a special occasion or did he make it for the angels as they came, or what? Anyway, he is the first one that is mentioned as having it.
F.N.W. Do questions concerning the passover and the feast of unleavened bread involve the stones in the Jordan and Gilgal on the other side?
J.T. That contemplates a higher line of truth in Canaan.
W.F.K. "And they shall prophesy". Even young men shall take part in the prophetic meetings.
J.T. It is remarkable that they are supposed to be ready for this service. First it says in verse 17, "I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and
{242}
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy ..." And then the last reference is to His bondmen and bondwomen. "They shall prophesy".
A.R. What are the features to be seen where the feast of unleavened bread is being kept? It is kept all the time.
J.T. The reference in 1 Corinthians would mean that it is kept all the time. "Let us keep the feast". Being Christians and knowing what the antitype means, we know that you never can give up keeping it, because it is a question of sincerity and truth and the absence of leaven, what inflates. It is in the light of the antitypical teaching that one would say it is kept all the time, because it was not really kept all the time in Israel. It was once a year.
J.S. Is it significant that they did not maintain the feast householdly in the wilderness?
J.T. Quite so. They neglected much.
R.W.S. It assumes that the father is near enough to Jehovah to give a correct answer. It says, "And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say to him, With a powerful hand Jehovah brought us out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage. And it came to pass, when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, that Jehovah slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of men and the firstborn of cattle: therefore I sacrifice to Jehovah all that breaketh open the womb -- being males; and every firstborn of my children I ransom. And it shall be for a sign on thy hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes, for with a powerful hand Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt". So that we who are fathers must be near to God to have something to say to our sons.
J.T. A son would understand something of power. Great triumph was involved in the answer. In the previous one the answer is, "It is a sacrifice
{243}
of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses". There is not so much the suggestion of power, for a young man or a son ought to know something of it. "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you" (@1 John 2:14). The answer in the second place when he makes inquiry ought to appeal to a young man as to power, because Mark's gospel has power in mind. There is the suggestion right through Mark. I think he answers to the mighty men of David.
J.T.Jr. "This kind can go out by nothing but by prayer and fasting" (@Mark 9:29). In that connection also would the household matter connect with prophecy -- the power in prophecy?
J.T. The young boy there was a lunatic really. This kind of power was needed, and that is the reason why it seems that the idea of power is connected with the answer in chapter 13. The father says, "When Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go" (very few young persons have not got a little stubbornness) "that Jehovah slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of men and the firstborn of cattle; therefore I sacrifice to Jehovah all that breaketh open the womb -- being males; and every firstborn of my children I ransom". It is the male side that is in mind, of course, in both the passover and the feast of unleavened bread, but it is the question of power against the stubbornness that is natural with the youth.
J.A.P. Paul says, I am writing "concerning his Son (come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead)" (@Romans 1:3,4). Is that what this father is telling his children?
J.T. Christ as marked out Son of God in power. Quite so.
{244}
A.B.P. Is there an age with our children when we should expect some definite work and exercise about taking their place? Is it right to feel that there should be something more definite after the age of twelve than before?
J.T. That is what I understand. The Lord has a lead in that. "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (@Luke 2:49). He was truly a Son in intelligence there.
A.R. It is while they are keeping the feast apparently that the son wants to know about it.
J.T. The answer in chapter 13 contemplates power in taking God's people out of Egypt and Mark is that. It is the kingdom of God come in power, and Christ at the right hand of God is the evidence of that. The young man is at the right hand of the sepulchre. It is power; all of which has a voice, I am sure. The war appeals to young people. The idea of power is so stressed in aeroplanes, battleships and tanks. Everything is an expression of power, whereas God has power, and the youth are to be an evidence of that. "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong" (@1 John 2:14).
D.Macd. In relation to reaching the age of twelve, some have felt that our children should sit behind; others have felt that they should still remain with the father at the breaking of bread. What would you say about that?
J.T. I think when they come to the age of understanding they should sit behind. There is reproach attached to the position in sitting behind. Why are you sitting behind? Well, it is because you either are not fit for the front or you have no heart for it. That is what I would say. I think persons who have an understanding of the position ought to sit behind. There ought to be a confession of where they are.
A.P.T. The teaching then of these two scriptures in chapters 12 and 13 is, as you were saying, an
{245}
advance. Not only that one is conscious of God's righteousness in the blood preserving me in chapter 12, but then in the next chapter delivering me out of the whole realm in which the enemy is against me. Do you think young people need to get established more in this great feature of the truth, to get delivered out of all the pressure of sin and the world? As you were saying, and I see it in my children, they are greatly taken up with the power of the aeroplane and all that kind of thing -- all man's power. They need to be delivered out of that and see the power of God in resurrection.
J.T. That is very good. "And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say to him, With a powerful hand Jehovah brought us out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage. And it came to pass, when Pharaoh stubbornly refused ..." The father might look around to the eldest boy in the house: You know you are stubborn. So that it goes on to say, "when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, that Jehovah slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of men and the firstborn of cattle: therefore I sacrifice to Jehovah all that breaketh open the womb -- being males; and every firstborn of my children I ransom". The man is not saying 'my sons'; but "my children". Household baptism applies to all the children, but the matter of power involves the son. He knows what it means. And then it goes on to say, "And it shall be for a sign on thy hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes, for with a powerful hand Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt".
F.N.W. It might be said that if you talk too much to the children about these things they will turn away. @Deuteronomy 6 indicates there is a great deal of talking about these things.
J.T. Deuteronomy greatly enlarges on these
{246}
previous levitical books. It is what Moses says. Paul says about marriage, I am saying certain things to you of my own mind. I am saying them to you because I am an experienced man. Deuteronomy is what Moses says, so that he enlarges greatly on things that you get in Leviticus and Numbers and Exodus, and it is most interesting if you can follow him, because he is an old man, an experienced man, and a man who hears God. He goes into the sanctuary and God speaks to him. So that Paul says, and he only says it in regard to the matter of marriage, I am only saying this myself but it is my judgment and I have the Spirit. He is stressing that he is a spiritual man, so that it is important to come to men who are experienced in these matters. Sometimes a man who is just speaking from experience has more force in certain circumstances than if he has a word from God. He is speaking from experience. As the Psalmist says, "I have been young, and now am old" (@Psalm 37:25). He has authority in that way.
A.B.P. Jacob says, "I know, my son, I know" (@Genesis 48:19).
{247}
THE SPIRIT'S DISTRIBUTIONS AND INDICATIONS
@Hebrews 2:4; @1 Timothy 4:1 - 5; @Acts 16:6,7
J.T. What is in mind is to seek to bring out that the presence of the Spirit on earth implies signs of the times, indications, too, as to how long the dispensation may continue. There are two lines of things in that respect -- what is in heaven and Christ being there, the movements there -- and what is here in the Spirit. It is thought that these three scriptures put together will serve to bring out the truth in this connection. First, in Hebrews, the distributions of the Holy Spirit, and then how He speaks, as it is said, *expressly*, in relation to what we may call prophetic truth, that is, the latter times; and then how He indicates territorially where the service of testimony to God is to proceed. That is, @Acts 15 records certain things that happened, as Paul and Barnabas going up to Jerusalem; then after the council at Jerusalem the Holy Spirit in chapter 16 interrupted Paul and Silas, forbidding them to go to a certain place, and then not suffering them to go, as it is said, to other places. That brings out the territorial side of the matter -- because the history of the testimony since Pentecost shows that certain territory has been in mind. There has been discrimination as to what territory should become fields of service. Other territory, we might say, has been left out according to the principle of the scriptures read in @Acts 16.
The distributions of the Spirit are first to be considered. They are mentioned in relation to "signs and wonders, and various acts of power, and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to his will" (@Hebrews 2:4). The distributions of the Spirit are to be noticed in many countries -- the activity and sense of
{248}
gift or ability in service. These gifts or distributions are not for heaven, not merely for formation in the saints generally, but for testimony, and we are to gather, as it is said, "Assuredly gathering", that if they exist the Lord must have something in mind as to further service.
A.R. Are you thinking of how the Spirit has been operating under the British flag?
J.T. Yes, indicating territory. Interference by the Spirit in @Acts 16 shows that the servant was in mind, because accompanying these interferences by the Spirit there was a vision; a man from Macedonia appeared to Paul saying, "Pass over into Macedonia and help us" (verse 9). That is territory. The servant is invited over. That would mean the way has been made for him governmentally. It is not a direct action of the Spirit, and the indication territorially is very clear. It is toward the west. It has continued there ever since, spreading out to this part of the globe.
W.R. It is hard to understand the Lord's commission to His disciples in @Matthew 28:19: "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". That is to all the nations. Does something come in there between that and @Acts 16?
J.T. There is a scripture more comprehensive than that. In Mark 16:15 it says, "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation". That is the great general indication of the sphere of the operations of servants, but then there are levitical principles that come into those general directions from the Lord as to where each is to go; and even if he does not seek it, the Lord may interfere and indicate where he is to go. It is not left open. It is not a matter for the servant to go anywhere or everywhere as he might wish. The
{249}
levitical law provides that the servants are to be governed by levitical principles.
A.A.T. Is New Zealand east or west?
J.T. We would call it east from here, and possibly from Europe they would call it east; it might be west from here, of course, but usually it is east. That is, we begin with a certain meridian, but that is a little beyond what we intended to speak of, but it certainly enters into it, because the points of the compass have a place in the divine economy.
R.W.S. Are distributions of the Holy Spirit sovereign by Himself? In the scripture in Hebrews it says, "God bearing, besides, witness with them to it, both by signs and wonders, and various acts of power, and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to his will?" Would that be God's will? In the other scriptures it is the Holy Spirit Himself acting from Himself.
J.T. Quite so. "But the Spirit speaks expressly". That is the Spirit Himself acting of Himself, and so, too, in @Acts 16. The Spirit is sovereign, too, in His actions, but that would be, as it were, subordinate to the great general thought of divine sovereignty; but the Spirit is here in obedience, as the Son was, and the Spirit operates in obedience to the Father, but still They are both divine Persons and act sovereignly, too.
C.N. Do the distributions of the Holy Spirit come under the heading of @1 Corinthians 12, that speaks of no one saying, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Spirit; and then, there are distinctions of gifts but the same Spirit. Are these the distributions?
J.T. Just so. We have there the Father, the Son and the Spirit alluded to; God and the Lord and the Spirit in that chapter. That is, the economy has to be borne in mind in all that we say, because the economy is the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. You could not reverse that and say the Holy
{250}
Spirit and the Son and the Father. You have to use the language of the Scriptures to convey the Trinity, because the Trinity is seen in an economy now. It has to be regarded, too, abstractly; each Person being equal with the Others, which is beyond us; it is inscrutable; but the economy we can understand. The Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit is the order in which the truth of the Trinity is presented. The baptismal formula helps us as to the order of the economy. "To the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" (@Matthew 28:19). That is the public position. But the inner position is @Ephesians 4:4,5: "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism". Those are the two first concentric circles in the economy, and then finally, "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all" (verse 6). The latter circle is clearly that which has to do with the outer world. God controls everything, but it subserves the inner: "one body and one Spirit, ... one hope of your calling". That is the inner, so to say, vital circle which enters into all our assembly services.
R.W.S. Is it the third circle you had in mind? "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all".
J.T. That is the outer circle. We would not confine ourselves to that, but it is well to have it in mind, so that we may be balanced. We are now speaking of the distributions of the Holy Spirit. That is in the chapter in Hebrews, and that is God's action. The chapter begins thus: "For this reason we should give heed more abundantly to the things we have heard, lest in any way we should slip away. For if the word which was spoken by angels was firm, and every transgression and disobedience received just retribution, how shall *we* escape if we have been
{251}
negligent of so great salvation, which, having had its commencement in being spoken of by the Lord, has been confirmed to us by those who have heard; God bearing, besides, witness with them to it, both by signs and wonders, and various acts of power, and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to his will?" That is the position. These verses really allude to the danger of apostasy that beset the Hebrew Christians. There is a warning in them and the positive side includes the distributions of the Holy Spirit that God gave for their guidance and help.
Ques. Does this refer to @Acts 2, the distributions of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Quite so. There were various distributions as He came in. We have already alluded to @1 Corinthians 12:28: "And God has set certain in the assembly: first, apostles; secondly prophets; thirdly, teachers", etc.
J.H.E. The apostle puts this in the form of a question requiring us to give the answer. There is a question-mark after verse 4, as if he would ask all of us to give the answer to it. We should know the answer.
J.T. It is a question of a challenge. "For if the word which was spoken by angels was firm, ... how shall we escape ... ?" That is where the question begins. The 'how' is alluded to in the question-mark; "how shall we escape?" It is a question for everyone not to slip away.
A.B.P. Does the word 'distributions' have in mind where the helps are set?
J.T. That is what I was thinking of; where they are placed. They were placed first in Jerusalem. That is, the Lord said, "Do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high" (@Luke 24:49). That is an allusion to the Spirit Himself coming, but at the same time, the apostles came in first for the distributions. Distribution involves more
{252}
than simply the gift of the Spirit. The word 'distributions' would refer to the Spirit operating in certain ones whom God would use. These, when they begin to function, would come under other law; that is, levitical law, as to where they should go, and the spiritual would discern that the Spirit was giving guidance; not simply that the servants got guidance from heaven but the Spirit would affect them so that they got inward guidance. Hence you get the Spirit saying certain things to Philip, for instance; and you get the Spirit catching him away, so that he should not continue to accompany the eunuch south. He was found at Azotus, in another section. That was territorial.
Ques. Is the Spirit here to be viewed as a divine Person down here acting for Himself, or as delegated?
J.T. I would not say altogether delegated. He is delegated. It says, "Those who have declared to you the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven" (@1 Peter 1:12), meaning He was under orders. We have to speak reverently about a divine Person, but if They take these positions and act in them and speak in them, we are entitled to speak of Them in that way. So that He was sent down. It is never said the Son was sent down. It is the Spirit that is sent down. The Son is always said to have come down. But He is here under orders, because He speaks to His Father as sent; but it is sent on earth; it is from the time of the incarnation. The sending is from some position on the earth, because he did not begin to operate until he was thirty years of age.
Ques. Would you include @Acts 13 in the distribution?
J.T. They were already functioning. It is a question of territory, so He says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them" (@Acts 13:2). Then the assembly laid their hands on them. They did not send them out.
{253}
The Holy Spirit sent them out. All these principles are important, because they are trespassed upon by missionary practices of ordinary Christendom.
A.B.P. Did you have in mind that there are distributions of the Spirit over certain spheres in which the testimony is set? It seems to be an indication that God has something more in mind to do, to carry on. I rather gathered from your opening remarks that you had something like that in mind, that there was an indication that God had something more in mind to do through these distributions, that He might continue the present dispensation a little longer.
J.T. That is what I thought exactly.
A.B.P. Distributions would suggest that you see that working generally throughout the sphere of the testimony, is that right?
J.T. Just so. The word 'distributions' here would mean that, and then that the Spirit was received as He is by every believer, of course. To all who obey, the Spirit is given. But I think distribution goes beyond that. I think there are signs of this distribution now. Of course, there have always been, especially since the revival, but I believe there have been special evidences of it lately.
A.A.T. In what way?
J.T. Well, we have eyes to see and ears to hear; especially in this part of the world and in the British Isles and in Australia and New Zealand -- we should know that there are such distributions. That is, ability to minister. The ability to minister is not needed for heaven. If we were all going to be translated you would hardly expect it. You need it for earth.
A.A.T. There is a thought running through my mind as to the distributions of the Spirit and the anointing as the Lord was anointed. Is there a distinction?
{254}
J.T. Anointing is a different word. The Lord was anointed. "And I have anointed my king upon Zion, the hill of my holiness" (@Psalm 2:6). That alludes to the holy anointing of Christ. God is asserting His right to appoint an officer. Peter says, "God anointed him". And, "he went about doing good" (@Acts 10:38). That was evidence that He was an anointed Person. Distribution may involve that, but it does not go so far as the idea of the anointing. Anointing is divine committal to the Person.
A.B.P. The scripture goes on to say, "Because God was with him".
J.T. That would show that God had committed Himself to Him. He "went through all quarters doing good, and healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him".
G.L. There is a certain difference in the movements of the apostle Paul and Apollos. Does the thought of distributions come in there from the divine side -- how Apollos operates, evidently under God's direct guidance by the Spirit?
J.T. Well, he is an illustration of God's sovereign activity. Paul had nothing to do with his conversion or his anointing into the ministry. Paul had to do with Timothy and others, but not with Apollos. I believe he illustrates what we are saying. God acts sovereignly. He had already done it, but He acts sovereignly in others, and they are recognised immediately. Paul immediately recognised Apollos.
R.W.S. Do you think God is preparing vessels for the distribution through so many of our young men being in the military world?
J.T. I would think that. The same thing was apparent in the previous war. Many that we know of that are being used now came through that war, the experience of it. I believe that is right.
{255}
G.W. Is it right to ask for a greater distribution or portion of the Spirit?
J.T. It is right to ask for a gift. It is said, "But desire earnestly the greater gifts"(@1 Corinthians 12:31).
G.L. Have we anything to do in placing ourselves in or near the current of the activities of the Spirit as to our movements territorially, or is it all in God's sovereign action?
J.T. "Work out your own salvation" (@Philippians 2:12). That is what you do, but, "For it is God who works in you" (verse 13). That is, they run collaterally; God works and you work.
G.L. There would be a big difference in the motives of Apollos moving out of Alexandria and the two that helped him, Aquila and Priscilla, coming under God's government and moving out of Rome. There would be divine government moving some and other divine actions moving others.
J.T. Take the two cases you mention: Aquila and Priscilla were found in Corinth by Paul, and we are told why it was they were there. Caesar had commanded all Jews to leave Rome. They were regarded as Jews. There is no evidence in the actual facts given that they were Christians, nominally even, when Paul found them, but they were there, evidently under the government of God, at Corinth, under the direct action of the government. But then Paul was there. He was not there by direction from the government, but by the direction of the Lord and the Spirit; but they were linked together and evidently they came into Christianity through him, because they were ready for Apollos. Paul had left Corinth when Apollos came in. He left Aquila and Priscilla at Ephesus and Apollos came to Ephesus from Alexandria. At least, it is said he was from Alexandria, which would mean it was another direction from Athens. He undoubtedly represents that side, that territorial position. He came over to
{256}
Asia, and met those two. You see the government of God working in with the action of the Spirit, and that is the way all the time.
C.N. In our verse in Hebrews we have "signs and wonders, and various acts of power, and distributions of the Holy Spirit". Would you say a little as to the difference between these?
J.T. They may take in what is of the heavens; the heavenly elements to indicate what God is doing. We have in the book of Job the ordinances of the heavens. These are what you might call objective things that you see, but they are operative too, as we will see on the day of reckoning. These ordinances of the heavens are objective things; what a mariner would go by, by observation. Stars would help him in his navigation. These signs and wonders are objective things that you see by the Spirit coming into a brother in this sense. The distributions of the Spirit into a brother give him dead-reckoning. That is, if a mariner comes near land he goes by the depth of the water, and the like. That is called dead-reckoning. In these last days we have dead-reckoning. We can see in a general way what is happening in the government of God, and link it up with prophecy both in the New Testament and the Old; but then we can also discern if we are spiritual, what the Spirit is doing, and that would come under the idea of distributions of the Spirit. "But the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall apostatise from the faith". That is, in Paul's own soul there had been consciousness of that.
C.N. Is that truth also borne out in Paul's journey to Rome? He told the mariners not to loose from a certain place. The mariners would be directed by these objective things you were speaking of; Paul himself was moved by the Spirit in advising them not to leave.
J.T. Just so. He became the master of the ship,
{257}
really. He knew better. But it not only became a question of the depth of the water, but the place; that is, the island, and then other things came in, so that Paul reached Rome. I believe that is how the matter stands now. The ship has been wrecked, but not a total loss. It is under control. Even the sailors were to be kept. "Unless these abide in the ship *ye* cannot be saved" (@Acts 27:31). That is a remarkable thing, and bears on what we are saying. There are conditions, and we discern what is needed. The Spirit only is needed for direct divine operations, but from the governmental standpoint there are certain others that are needed; maybe men, rulers and the like; and the spiritual would discern if these are not with us we cannot be saved. We are looking to them. But then, we are not looking to them in the meeting; we are looking to the Spirit, and those that have ability through the Spirit of God.
A.R. Why do you have in the second scripture the spirit of apostasy? 1 Timothy speaks about apostasy. Is that dead reckoning?
J.T. If you begin to see apostasy you can see the enemy has got in, so that it says, "For the mystery of lawlessness already works" (@2 Thessalonians 2:7). That is a long time ago, and the spiritual man would say, that is a sign to go by. I have to look around for that iniquity. Where is it? It is not in heaven; it is down here.
A.R. The ministry would bear against that.
J.T. Just so.
R.W.S. What would be the difference between the latter times of @1 Timothy 4 and the last days of @2 Timothy 3?
J.T. Not much; in the first scripture it says, "But the Spirit speaks expressly, that in latter times some shall apostatise from the faith, giving their mind to deceiving spirits and teachings of demons speaking lies in hypocrisy, cauterised as to their own
{258}
conscience, forbidding to marry, bidding to abstain from meats" (verses 1 - 3). These are all to be looked for, and are negatively guides for us. They would extend back for many centuries as to actual fact. This sort of thing existed many centuries ago and had its centre in the Romish system. In the second epistle in chapter 3 it says, "But this know, that in the last days difficult times shall be there; for men shall be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, evil speakers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, profane, without natural affection, implacable, slanderers, of unsubdued passions, savage, having no love for what is good, traitors, headlong, of vain pretensions, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God; having a form of piety but denying the power of it: and from these turn away. For of these are they who are getting into houses, and leading captive silly women, laden with sins, led by various lusts, always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now in the same manner in which Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, thus these also withstand the truth; men corrupted in mind, found worthless as regards the faith. But they shall not advance farther" (verses 1 - 9). We have to look for these. It is quite obvious that what Paul said in his first letter is not set aside. It is an earlier development of evil. This is evidently "the last days". The other is "latter times". This is what is final.
A.R. Do we understand it is the last days of the church's history on earth?
J.T. That is what I think. But the word 'last' is different from the word 'latter'; 'latter' is comparative. It is not so far ahead. In 2 Timothy it is final, and, therefore, we are to look for these signs or conditions today, and I believe they are all around us in a peculiar way; the other is around us, too, but not in such an open, bare-faced way as these other things are.
{259}
A.R. How would ministry bear against that?
J.T. Do you mean 2 Timothy?
A.R. Yes.
J.T. Well, just look at the conditions. "Men shall be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, evil speakers". You look at the whole list and you can see them all around. So we must do something to meet this, because the brethren will be affected if we do not.
R.W.S. "Giving their mind to deceiving spirits". The great system of literature is behind that system, which might infect one if he touches it.
J.T. "Disobedient to parents". One of the most crying, baneful things in this country is disobedience to parents and lack of respect in young men and young women; resisting authority. "From these turn away". We have learned to withdraw but turning away is very definite.
F.N.W. Is what meets that among the saints what is positive? As Paul says in verse 10, "But *thou* hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, endurance, persecutions, sufferings". Is that the kind of thing that is seen among the saints today?
J.T. The second letter clearly comes in after the first. The first still stands, but the second is additional. We are in the last days in the second; not the latter days, but the last ones. These two epistles give us a basis for ministry.
J.T.Jr. Would there be some dispensational thought in the seven deacons that were selected? The idea of seven might be found continually, what would continue in the way of service in a complete way over against what we have been speaking of as arrogant and disobedient.
J.T. The seven would mean that. It was to meet a difficulty that had arisen. The deacons were set up, or were selected to meet a difficulty. It is the first
{260}
great difficulty after the sin of Ananias and Sapphira. Murmuring arose and the diaconal services were provided to meet that, and it is remarkable that the number seven is used. It would allude to the perfection of the Spirit's service. It would mean looking after the needs of the saints to prevent that sort of thing.
Ques. The Spirit speaking expressly -- did I understand you to say it refers to what is inward in the servant?
J.T. I think so. The Spirit would speak to him. He speaks in a way generally; maybe He spoke to others, but undoubtedly the servant was made conscious in himself that this thing would happen. This great apostasy would happen and it did happen, and it has come down to us.
G.W. What is involved in understanding the signs of the times? I was thinking of the passage in Chronicles where men had understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do. You mentioned earlier that distributions of the Spirit had to do with understanding the signs of the times.
J.T. You have a similar suggestion here. "God bearing, besides, witness with them to it, both by signs and wonders, and various acts of power, and distributions of the Holy Spirit". These were at the beginning of Christianity. Now your inquiry is as to the present time; as to what can be seen. It would be on subjective lines. We do not see in the way of signs and wonders, that is, miracles now, and it is very significant that John does not use the word 'miracle'. He uses the word 'sign', which would mean anything that would signify something. We have many things that would signify something, and it is for the spiritual to discern them and see them, and they afford guidance. Peculiar things have happened during the last quarter of a century. Can the spiritual man not see them and put them together and find guidance as regards the dispensation?
{261}
C.N. Such as these two references to 1 and 2 Timothy. You can see these things operating in persons.
J.T. Quite so. It would take a long time to search into all this, although great gain may accrue from it. The great revival which has begun and will continue to the end, I am sure began with looking into prophecy, and so the prophetic map was developed and it stands and helps us, but the question is whether we are able to follow up the details; that is, what the Spirit is indicating in ministry and what is happening in an evil sense; that is, developments in the world, whether you can discern anything in them.
Ques. I wanted to ask you when these conditions which we find here in 1 and 2 Timothy are prevailing, can the believer use it as dead reckoning to determine his position in relation to the Lord's coming?
J.T. Somewhat. The book of Revelation ought to help a good deal, too. It is evidently of a later date than these scriptures that we are now dealing with. I would say it comes in quite late in John's ministry, but it bears, not only on the future; it really bears on the testimony in Christianity. It is how this is going to eventuate, which we are going on with. It has not to be regarded as something by itself. It is called the apocalypse, which means an unveiling of things and it is not only future. It begins thus: "Write therefore what thou hast seen" (@Revelation 1:19). Whatever they were; that is current. "And the things that are". That also is current; "and the things that are about to be after these". There are three sets of things, and the first begins with ourselves -- goes back to apostolic times. "The things that are". There are the seven assemblies and they extend to us. "The things that are about to be after these", would mean that the assembly shall be caught up to heaven before they begin, that is, before they become critical. Their roots are away
{262}
back at the beginning, but the critical stage has not yet arrived.
T.E.H. Would you be able to discern the features of a son of disobedience? We see all around us children of disobedience, but when it has developed to a full stage, sons of disobedience, the wrath of God seems to come in in connection with it.
J.T. A son of a thing would be a fully developed person in the thing, whatever it be: socialism or whatever the thing may be. The idea of a son means he is fully developed in it, so that it says, "The spirit who now works in the sons of disobedience" (@Ephesians 2:2). That would mean men that were under the power of the devil.
A.A.T. In Revelation where it says, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies", and the Spirit speaking expressly, is that the same thought?
J.T. It is the same thought. It is a question of Paul calling attention to what the Spirit is saying. The light that I would gather from that is that I know what the Spirit says here. It is a historical matter now. At that time it was not historical, but we know it is historical now. These persons who forbid to marry and command to abstain from meats -- that is recognised by a great number of nominal Christians, but if the Spirit is speaking expressly about something else that has not yet taken place or has hardly taken place, then it is for us to hear what the Spirit says to the churches; not what He has said or will say, but what He says. Philadelphia is historical, but it is current. Thyatira is current. It is historical, too. But Ephesus and Smyrna and Pergamos are historical; they are not current.
J.A.P. Would that come out in our reading meetings and ministry meetings that we pray at the beginning that it might be the Spirit speaking expressly?
{263}
J.T. That is right. We get impressions and these impressions should guide us.
T.E.H. How do I regard the Spirit of Jesus in a territorial matter?
J.T. "The Spirit of Jesus" is a doubtful rendering. It might be that, or it might be just the Spirit. I would take it that it is that. It says, "Having come down to Mysia, they attempted to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them". Now I cannot say who is responsible for the omission of the note to this reference to the "Spirit of Jesus". It is not in the later edition of this New Translation, but I do not know why it is left out, and from the fact that it is left out we may perhaps conclude that it is the Spirit of Jesus, and if it is the Spirit of Jesus I would say it is the Spirit of Christ in the brethren. The Spirit of Jesus in taking account of certain things, like the Spirit of Christ. Instead of the Spirit of God, it is the Spirit of Jesus.
R.W.S. It was hardly the Spirit that animated Barnabas in verse 39 of the previous chapter in taking Mark and sailing away to Cyprus; whereas Paul and Silas are committed by the brethren to the grace of God.
J.T. That would help, because the high feeling, the acute feeling that arose between Paul and Barnabas at that time would hardly be the Spirit of Jesus, although the Spirit evidently confirms Paul and it seems in @Acts 16 as if he was justified from the move he makes.
T.E.H. Mark had not then been recovered. He says later, "He does all things well" (@Mark 7:37). That would indicate he was being formed in the Spirit of Jesus.
J.T. He came back to that, but it was not that when Barnabas chose him.
J.T.Jr. Did you have in mind the thought of the princes of the Levites in connection with this chapter?
{264}
J.T. Yes; I think that is the idea. Eleazar represents what is spiritual; he represents a spiritual element.
J.T.Jr. You would look for the Spirit's guidance in going to places. You might be invited to a place, but this would allude to something beyond an invitation.
J.T. Just so. It is really negative. They were forbidden by the Spirit in verse 6, and the Spirit of Jesus would not allow them in verse 7, and then you get the vision. That is another thing. The positive thing came through a vision.
F.S.C. Could we give a reason why the testimony did not go eastward?
J.T. No; I do not think we can, except that it is divine sovereignty. This forbidding here is only an indication. Bithynia only is involved in the first one. That was a province. The second is they were forbidden of the Spirit to speak the word in Asia. That is not the continent, but the province. So that they are both negative and only referring to a province, whereas we can hardly bring any scripture to show that the whole eastern world was shut out. We can only go by the facts. They are not evangelized. Asia has one-half the population of the earth; it had more than that in those days, and yet it was not evangelised except in the western part.
F.H.L. Coming to Philippi, would this not link up with the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ? The Spirit of Jesus forbade them to go in a certain direction and they came on to Philippi.
J.T. It is there that you get the supply of the Spirit.
S.F. Was the jailor affected by that Spirit?
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit of Jesus Christ was there both in Lydia and in Paul and Silas.
A.R. Has the world suffered from the far east not being evangelised?
{265}
J.T. Maybe. Very little has come out of it. China has been evangelised for three hundred years and I am told there are not more than three hundred thousand nominal Christians from all that work.
R.W.S. Would time as well as geography enter into this thing, because later on Paul does go to Asia and at Ephesus develops his ministry? "Having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia", Paul goes to Europe, but he comes back.
J.T. He does. But then you have the principle that the west was in mind. You have a vision from Europe, beckoning him to come into Macedonia, and that is what it eventually resulted in. Asia resulted in apostasy. They came under Mohammed. The whole of western Asia fell under apostasy.
T.E.H. I would like to get a little help as to Spain. The apostle had a desire to go to Spain, did he not?
J.T. It was the gateway out, and it has come westward; but the thing to notice is the westward part of Europe, how it was affected by the gospel. Mohammed overran all of North Africa and all western Asia, and attempted to come up through Spain into Europe but was overcome there. He never made any headway beyond that. You say, that is history. So it is; but it is spiritual, too. God has been looking over things and Europe has been preserved for the gospel, for the reformation, the great work of God. And then this movement we are in now began in western Europe; in Ireland, as a matter of fact, but still it is Europe. God has watched over all these movements, and His Spirit has been operating concurrently with that, and that is our subject: to notice that the subjective conditions confirm the objective conditions abroad.
C.N. Verse 10 says, "And when he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go forth to Macedonia,
{266}
concluding that the Lord had called us to announce to them the glad tidings".
J.T. "Assuredly gathering". That is, you put things together. That is the word now. You are not just a person getting the direct word, but you get things and put them together in your own mind.
W.R. How do you account for the fact that there are so few meetings in this country?
J.T. You account for it by the fact that it is so. Some cities are not touched at all and others are. The work is shallow in this country, in this part of the world; but the work is there nevertheless. There is something going on. It is current, and that is a guide. God is extending out to His territory, because we have to include the redemption of men. The territory belongs to God.
Ques. Would you link up America with Europe in getting church material?
J.T. It is an outgoing of Europe. Prophecy does not take account of these outlying territories, but the people in them are from Europe. Not really all from Europe; there is a composition of people in this nation from all over the world, but the bulk of them are from Europe. The pioneers were Europeans. Of course, there were red men here. They would have come from Asia, no doubt.
T.W. As to the matter of being under orders, does that enter into the service of those who have the obligation to invite preachers into a locality?
J.T. Oh well, you are just inviting a brother to preach instead of you. It is not an official matter. The assembly does not preach. It has a meeting room that the brethren pay for. You have the meeting room and you can use it. That is pretty well how the matter stands. I do not know what else you would put into it.
T.W. I was thinking of the work and the way in
{267}
which this vision appeared to Paul in relation to the local development of things.
J.T. It was a man of Macedonia. That was a nation. I think it was a dispensational thing, but I do not know that anyone has any special right to invite anyone to a locality. It is simply a question of confidence that Christianity implies. I should not like to take on the responsibility of inviting, say, a brother from Great Britain to come over here. I would invite him to my house, having in mind the brethren might be glad to see him. It is best to get the divine principle that governs it.
G.H. I was thinking about Asia and the East. Do you think God would take it up in a later day?
J.T. Oh, yes. It is just kept there. The larger proportion of the human race has not been evangelised. God has not forgotten that. He would keep them in mind.
S.F. Does Peter refer to Babylon in one of his epistles?
J.T. Just so. "She that is elected with you in Babylon salutes you" (@1 Peter 5:13). That might be just a person. It probably was. It is a question of love.
T.E.H. This matter of inviting a brother to a locality in view of help You said you would invite him to your own house on the principle of confidence, is that right?
J.T. You go by love. That is a subjective thing, too. There is nothing formal. No brother has any legal or formal right. It is only a love matter. There is no formal authority to invite another brother from another continent or another country. For whom is he doing it? What Scripture would govern that? This man of Macedonia is evidently a representative of a dispensational turn of events. "Pass over into Macedonia and help us". He is called a Macedonian
{268}
man. That is in the country of Alexander, a European country.
F.H.L. Do you mean the local company is responsible for the invitation?
J.T. No. I should be very much afraid to invite a brother to a company. I invite him to my house and if love is operating he will be invited to others.
Ques. Did you have in mind a brother from another country?
J.T. You cannot invite from New Jersey, or any brother. Who has a right to do these things? You might invite a brother to your house.
A.Macd. The Philippian jailor invited Paul into his house.
D.Macd. Is it not usually taken up in the care meeting?
J.T. That does not prove anything. It is a question as to whether there is anything in that. Inviting is a love matter. If it is the apostle Paul you invite him to your house. He is there and the brethren will soon find out he is there. What a thing love is!
T.E.H. I thought of the exercise that came up in regard to the New Year meetings. How would you put that on a proper basis? It is on the principal of confidence.
J.T. That is to take a particular meeting to give an address.
W.R.S. Would it be right in writing to a brother to say that if his exercises led him this way the brethren would be glad to see him?
J.T. That is your judgment. You might say, if Paul came to Corinth they would be glad to see him, but does Scripture warrant a brother extending an invitation like that? Have you ever done that?
W.R.S. I must say I have done it, and I wondered whether it would be right to say you felt sure the brethren would be glad to see him.
{269}
J.T. That is enough, otherwise we are appointing officials. Preaching the gospel is not an office at all. Eldership is an office.
A.D. Are you restricting this to preaching the gospel?
J.T. Do you mean the Macedonian man? It goes beyond that. Undoubtedly what happened at Philippi is the answer, and that is what to go by, what did happen there and the assembly is set up by the visit. But then remember the women were there before. There were women assembled by the river side. That is a subjective thing going along with the official. Maybe it was their prayers that led that man to invite Paul to Macedonia. The Lord acted on those lines.
Ques. You are not condemning the idea of our inviting a brother of another locality to be with us?
J.T. It is just what the man of Macedonia did. He opened the door to that territory, and the apostle assuredly gathered that he should go there. He was not under formal obligation. He just assuredly gathered that he should go that way and what he found was not a man but women praying. And then he found a jailor.
A.B.P. No brother has a right to assume that he can invite, or no meeting to assume they can invite a brother to serve in a district. Is that what I understand? But you have no thought in mind that the custom among the brethren to write asking a brother to come to a given locality for special meetings is out of line, have you?
J.T. Quite so. If he is free to come and the brethren are there making provision for him. It is all a matter of love.
J.A.P. Do you mean that the district meeting that we have on Lord's day afternoon is really local?
J.T. If you have one here, of course, it is here. Those that come are just here joining in with Westfield
{270}
It is not a district meeting. It is the assembly of God which is at Corinth, or the assemblies in Galatia. They would be local companies.
A.P-f. But if the brethren from nearby meetings want to come, it would be all right to come?
J.T. Quite so but it is not a district matter; it is a Westfield matter. Of course, there are other things that enter into that; the organism and the body and so on, but that is another matter.
{271}
THE PROPHETS (1)
@Acts 3:17 - 22; @Luke 9:28 - 31; @Matthew 17:10 - 13
J.T. My thoughts have been moving in relation to the prophets generally, but particularly in relation to Elijah and Elisha, having in mind the apostle Peter's word that the heavens must receive the Lord Jesus until the time of the restitution of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began. Elijah will have to do with setting things right. As these meetings progress it is hoped there will be help from the Lord, from the sanctuary. The passage in @Acts 3 is especially in mind as pointing to circumstances in which the Lord is, which are just provisional. Verse 20 says, "he may send Jesus Christ, who was foreordained for you, whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began". The Lord's present circumstances are in mind, that is, He is in a certain position indicated by these words until the things begin to happen which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began. When these things begin to take place we may look for order in the universe, especially on the earth; but in the meantime there are circumstances into which we are brought that are indefinite and have now lasted some hundreds of years. It is thought that this situation should become clarified; also that we should look for the times spoken of by the prophets with a view to the establishment of the divine purposes and principles ordained for the earth, matters in which the Lord will be operating in His own way and place according to divine appointment; for it is said that God "has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness
{272}
by the man whom he has appointed". The thought is that we might pursue a line of ministry or truth relative to Elijah and Elisha, though not overlooking the other prophets; emphasising especially what is set out in Elijah in view of the reference to the restitution of all things with which he will have to do. He is said to be impersonated in others, especially in John the baptist. In @Luke 9 he is spoken of in his present state as a man who appeared with Moses and spoke to the Lord Jesus about His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. That is to say, there is something in the way of mystery set out in the ministry of Elijah, followed by that of Elisha which perhaps we shall get into. We may say that these prophets taken together form, prophetically and typically, a view of Christianity: first in Elijah as a type of Christ, and then in Elisha as pointing to the operations of the Spirit at the present time, the spirit of Elijah being in him. A great deal is involved but I hope it will become clear as we proceed.
M.O. Do you view the Lord's present position as a provisional one?
J.T. That is the way it is presented. It is not a formal entering into a provisional place, but according to this chapter He is received above until the times of the restitution of all things. That is, He is received there *without saying* what He is going to do, but it is pending the restitution of all things; so that this is in a sense a nondescript dispensation, and yet the greatest of all the dispensations because it is really reserved in the divine way for the working of love in its own self-power of operation and elasticity. How long or how short a time it may go on is just left. We have to learn it as being in it.
Ques. Do I gather that the mysterious side of what you have in mind is seen in Elijah going up, but in view of that we have proved, great excess of
{273}
spiritual wealth in Elisha while we wait for the restoration?
J.T. That is just what is in mind, and @Acts 2 bears it out, the way in which the Spirit came in in profuseness and the spiritual power that followed. It was left for faith to lay hold of at the time and was gradually absorbed into a heavenly state of things developing in Paul's ministry.
Rem. So that Elias being seen on the mount indicates that his work is not finished. He is being kept, as it were, in view of the future.
J.T. He is just there, and the Lord in His instructions about him also leaves the matter open. Such a man as Elijah, one who never died, is up there and will come again according to the prophets; but in the meantime there is an uncertainty.
Rem. That perhaps would account for the meagreness in the circumstances of the widow who had to do with Elijah, two sticks, a little meal and a little oil; while Elisha acquires much wealth, the waters of Jericho being healed, and the debt of the widow of one of the sons of the prophets being paid. In all this there is the suggestion of spiritual expansion.
J.T. That is what may develop for us in the history of these prophets. Meantime we might accustom ourselves to distinguish things not clearly defined, the state of things that is to be entered into and understood by persons who are spiritual and made intelligent by the Spirit of God. There is no other dispensation like the present one; the very fact that the description of it is left open shows the distinction attaching to it.
A.B.P. Would the broad outlook of the position be seen typified in @1 Kings 18 where the prophets of Baal are said to have been slain and the decision to serve God was placed upon the people? Elijah says, "answer me, that this people may know that thou
{274}
Jehovah art God, and that *thou* hast turned their heart back again"(verse 37).
J.T. Yes. You are impressed with what is seen in this wonderful man and how it unfolds. You do not see it all at once. As you come to @Luke 9 and elsewhere in the New Testament more of it will unfold. What a man he is in the divine reserves! God seems obliged to give an account of his history.
C.A.M. The mysterious aspect of it admits of everything in God's holy ways coming into this dispensation. An immensity of thoughts accumulate at the present time in a spiritual way.
J.T. They are not beyond or otherwise outside of it; all comes into it: "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God" (@1 Corinthians 2:9 - 11). That shows the wealth and blessedness of our dispensation, the depths of God are known in it. You want to be in all this, at least that should be the attitude of our minds at the present time. What we are in and what is developing in it is immense.
C.A.M. There is such immensity that you feel unable to grasp it. Do you think the prophetic ministry guides our thoughts at any given moment?
J.T. Well, the wonderful resourcefulness of the present dispensation works out in solving whatever comes up. The matter is not left open, it can be solved, so that John says, "ye know all things".
R.W.S. Would you say love is the great binding power, as seen in the beginning when there was no defined order in the giving? They had all things in common and later on they laid certain things at the apostles¬ feet. Paul brings in the order, but love is the great underlying power of the dispensation.
J.T. I think that is the way we are to consider
{275}
the book of Acts. What is present there and left open is unfolding, time entering into it. Every minute brings out something. So as regards the apostles¬ question as to when the kingdom should be restored to Israel, the Lord said that was the Father's matter, not theirs. They were to receive the Spirit, which is much greater than what referred to Israel. It is an unrestricted state of things connected with the Holy Spirit and hence has immense possibilities.
C.N. "Whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things"; is it to be understood that there is this mysterious state of things which brings in the condition for Elijah to come back, or is the Lord personally to take up the position on the earth? He is up there until the restitution of all things; but there must be this mysterious service to regulate things in which Elijah is to have part.
J.T. Quite so, it is mysterious, "whom heaven indeed must receive", the Lord is in that attitude. He is in an unlimited, undefined, unrestricted state of things, but John brings out who He is. He is divine, He is God. John intimates that there was to be a great opening up of things; that indeed the world itself could not contain the books if everything were recorded.
J.W.D. Is there specific allusion to this dispensation in what is definitely arrived at by God?
J.T. Well, all is by virtue of the Spirit being here, it brings out the possibilities of the operations of the Spirit here in these circumstances. It exceeds all other dispensations; things are left open and it is a question to some extent of what the saints are ready for. The Lord in John says, what you know not now you shall know hereafter; things will come out that you will know later.
S.R.McC. Is the way Elijah does things a word to us?
J.T. Yes. There are great possibilities, so that as
{276}
the Spirit came in at Pentecost it was said by the multitude, "We hear them speaking in our own tongues the great things of God" (@Acts 2:11).
Rem. This would account for the difficulty in trying to explain the dispensation to any but a spiritual mind.
J.T. That is the difficulty we find now in relation to the matter of conscience; it can be understood only by those who know something of the truth. How can we explain that a Christian cannot take the sword now, whereas the prophets show that believers of the Old Testament times used it, and saints of the coming dispensation will use it? We are in the time in which there are complications, but nevertheless there are solutions. There is a means of solving everything to the satisfaction of the spiritual mind because the Holy Spirit is here. We are never driven to the wall for a solution to any matter.
R.W.S. In verse 19 where it says, "so that times of refreshing may come", is there a moral reason for that in the repentance and conversion mentioned in the same verse? Does it depend on the moral side in the believer?
J.T. Yes; it says, "Repent therefore and be converted, for the blotting out of your sins, so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord". It does not say they have come; the Holy Spirit had come, but now another matter is pending: "that times of refreshing *may* come from the presence of the Lord, and he *may* send Jesus Christ, who was foreordained for you, whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began". Now that is all put forward to the future. According to the prophets things are going to happen from heaven, that is, all prophetic utterances generally allude to the coming dispensation and we have to wait for that; but this
{277}
reception of Christ in heaven is in the meantime.
C.A.M. Referring to the matter of conscience again, would you say that we are really acting on the fact that Elijah is gone on high but that the world has not known it? They have done to him whatsoever they wished. Therefore, as far as this present time is concerned, it remains for spiritual persons to understand.
J.T. That is right. But God has the Spirit here, that is the outstanding fact. It is the time of perfection; there is a solution for everything. The devil is endeavouring to bring in solutions on the principle of so-called science, but the present time is the time of divine solution of everything; it is morally the greatest time.
J.T.Jr.. Is there instruction in the fact that it is heaven that must receive Him? It does not say the Father received Him, it is the *place*.
J.T. I think so; it is heaven's present function to receive the Lord Jesus. In the book of Revelation the Man Child is caught up to God and His throne, He is taken out of the way; but this is more definite, "whom heaven indeed *must* receive", that is, it is a divine necessity that the Lord be in these circumstances until certain things happen. What are these things? They are the setting forth of the gospel and the formation of the assembly. Things come out on those lines. The mystery is unfolded.
J.T.Jr. The earth would not have Him personally so the heavens must have Him.
J.T. That is so; and what happens while He is waiting? To illustrate, Isaac is seen as having returned from Beer-lahai-roi when Rebecca was on the way. Isaac is not seen as doing anything, he is a man of leisure so to speak, and yet he is occupied in meditating in the field. But as soon as Rebecca comes great things happen and I think that is the way to get at the truth. The Lord is received above
{278}
*until*; 'until' alludes to the things of which the prophets have been speaking that must come to pass; but what about the Lord Jesus personally? What is He doing?
H.B. Would @1 Peter 1:12 fit in? "To whom it was revealed, that not to themselves but to you they ministered those things, which have now been announced to you by those who have declared to you the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven".
J.T. That fits, because the Holy Spirit is sent from heaven; indeed you may say the sending alludes to the activities of Christ, the Lord taking on something in the interval until the times of prophetic announcement begin to arrive. The Lord is doing something else now, He is going to work out the greatest things.
J.W.D. Would you say that the 'something else' is connected with the gospel and the mystery? They are tangible things, are they not?
J.T. That is what I was remarking. What has been concealed is the mystery, but now it is made manifest, involving the most interesting period to heaven. Now Peter is intimating that the Lord is in heaven, received and reserved there until the period of the prophets begins, but in the meantime He is not inactive. The history of Acts shows that another line of things is going to develop, and that line is the greatest. We are in the end of it at the present time. As already quoted, Peter says, "Repent therefore and be converted, for the blotting out of your sins, so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and he may send Jesus Christ, who was foreordained for you, whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things". The times of refreshing will be then; but what is coming out in the meantime is the greatest thing.
{279}
J.T.Jr. The Lord says to the disciples, "I go to him that has sent me, and none of you demands of me, Where goest thou?" Does that allude to their lack of appreciation as to what was to happen?
J.T. Just so, they were not concerned about it. They had already asked about the kingdom, but the Lord gave them no definite answer as to that. The apostles might have said, What does He mean, what are we going to do? Well, the answer would be, you are to wait for the Spirit, and the Father has kept in His own authority these matters that you are asking about. So that Christ is in a waiting attitude and the disciples are in a waiting attitude; but then the Holy Spirit is here and what will He do? That is the way to get at the truth governing the moment.
C.A.M. It must have been mysterious to Peter himself when he said this because he could not have known all the wonderful things involved.
J.T. Nor did he know. The thing was beginning to unfold. He was a subject apostle and spoke as the Holy Spirit gave him utterance.
J.R.H. It would appear from the expression, "by the mouth of his holy prophets", that there was great spiritual unity. Peter himself had moved and with them waited for the development of the truth as given through Paul.
J.T. They would all be in a waiting attitude. But there was plenty to do, enough had come in to occupy them. The dispensation was unfolding, the assembly was being formed and the Lord was adding daily those that were to be saved. Paul would be brought in in due time. It was Paul who said, "the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God" (@1 Corinthians 2:10).
J.H-t. Would you say that the desires of Jabez coming in before the account of David setting up the kingdom have a place in the filling out of this? "O that thou wouldest richly bless me" (@1 Chronicles 4:10).
{280}
J.T. Just so. We are ready for any developments that God may bring out. Availability for divine usability must be in mind. We should be available because there are such great things with God, and He is looking for those who can be used to take them in and then to unfold them.
C.N. There is a verse in @John 16, "But when *he* is come, the Spirit of truth, he shall guide you into all the truth: for he shall not speak from himself; but whatsoever he shall hear he shall speak; and he will announce to you what is coming" (verse 13). Does that enter into this?
J.T. Very much. You can see how the Lord intended that the apostles should be prepared in their minds for the great things that were still secret, still a mystery. The apostle Paul touches on them in @Romans 16:25 - 27.
Rem. If I follow the thought in mind, these mysterious movements of God completely confound all enemies but they give liberty for the introduction of the greatest thoughts of God. But how are you bringing the prophets to bear upon us? Is it in a moral way?
J.T. Well, I would say in general that what I see is the need of love among the brethren so as to make us ready for God, for His present thoughts. It is not simply the knowledge of the Scriptures but the need for love. The Lord stressed that in @John 13 and I believe that is the point; there is so much ready to operate in heaven, ready to break forth into our hearts, and active love is the great need among the brethren. The Lord speaks to the apostles in that way, that they might have love among themselves. It is hardly to be expected that God will open heaven to us and the wonderful things that are there unless love, which alone can make way for them, exists.
J.H.E. God makes that possible by the love of God shed abroad in our hearts.
{281}
J.T. That is the idea in Romans, exactly.
A.B.P. Would you say repentance is the softening up process for the free flow of love? Repentance is referred to in this passage as though it enters into the moral basis for the Lord's return.
J.T. Just so. The woman in @Luke 7 loved much because she was forgiven much. If you have a good number of that kind together, those who are forgiven and love because they are forgiven, I think we can say there would be a state for God to operate in by the Spirit.
C.A.M. Thinking of repentance making way for love, I was wondering how this matter of the Lord alluding to Elijah as John the baptist comes into this setting. In some sense faith knows that Elijah has come. Would it be on the repentance line?
J.T. Well, quite so. He was there in John the baptist and the Lord would regard John as an immense accessory in the testimony. He is contemporary with Him; John's gospel shows that the Baptist's ministry went on at the same time as the Lord's. The synoptics do not give us that in them, the Lord did not enter on His ministry until John's was over; but in John's gospel we have the two ministries running together. I think the Lord would regard the presence of John the baptist as augmenting His own ministry, and especially in the matter of repentance. The way John the baptist is presented in John's gospel is most instructive, especially as recognising the Bridegroom's voice. What suggestions there are as to what is to follow in the opening up of the great marital subject! And John the baptist had a sense of the importance of it. I believe that is a thing to be followed out. @John 4 shows the woman of Samaria coming into it; she came into the system the Lord was working out, and she is ready for it as soon as she was touched by the prophetic word which He spoke to her (@John 4:19,28,29).
{282}
F.C. John's statement comes into that, "He who comes from above is above all. He who has his origin in the earth is of the earth, and speaks as of the earth. He who comes out of heaven is above all, and what he has seen and has heard, this he testifies". Would that link on with the present dispensation?
J.T. It would. In that passage you can hardly distinguish between John the baptist's ministry and that of John the evangelist as he joins in afterwards. So that John's gospel helps as to what we are saying. The great acquisition to the Lord's ministry there in the presence of John the baptist is, I think, what is necessary now. It is a question of love working out. What power there must have been as the Lord thought of John serving as contemporary with Himself! You get that only in John's gospel. Earlier He had said to John, "Thus it becometh *us* to fulfil all righteousness".
W.J.W. It is the Spirit's work at the present time to show the things of Christ to us.
J.T. Yes. Here in @Acts 3 it is a waiting time. It is a time in which great things are pending and yet they are not disclosed. Peter is speaking about things that will come from the presence of the Lord when the Lord Jesus is sent here; but in the meantime heaven is receiving Him and He has a place there with nothing definite said as to what He is doing. We have to wait now to see what He is going to do and that is this present dispensation. We are at the end of it and what these readings have in mind is that we might be ready and usable to God at the end of this great dispensation; for there is going to be an end to it and the end is to be in accord with the beginning.
A.T. You referred to the Spirit searching the deep things of God; during the period of the patience of Christ the Spirit gave light on the movements of
{283}
God; He gives light now in relation to the present circumstances.
J.T. Yes; it is a time of light, but light that is not always specified beforehand. At the outset it was a time of great light, and so throughout; but always developments have had to be awaited. It is not exactly the prophetic time; that alludes to the coming of the Lord and the establishment of the millennium, but this dispensation is pending that. It is most wonderful that we are in it, and we want to be *really* in it, to have our ears open and be ready for God, for anything in which He may move.
Ques. Would that imply that the full weight of prophetic ministry at the moment bears on our relations with Christ as the Bridegroom?
J.T. I think so. It is prophetic ministry, not in the sense of telling of coming events, but in the sense of bringing God in and stirring us up, stimulating us in the service of God. The woman of Samaria said to the Lord, "I see that thou art a prophet", and then she brings in the subject that, I believe, the Lord was waiting for, the subject of worship. The official prophetic services did not exactly develop that, it is because of what God *is*. That was brought out in @John 4, not simply what He is prophetically in view of the millennium but what He is *now*, what He is in Himself. "His holy since-time-began" prophets (see note) treated of coming events, involving "the restoring of all things". But Christianity involves the gospel of the glory of God; it is the gospel in its fullest sense; also the ministry of the assembly -- all that Paul was used to disclose.
J.R.H. Is it in regard to the patient waiting for Christ that He is brought forward as a prophet in this address of Peter's? "Moses indeed said, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up to you out of your brethren like me".
J.T. That is right. It is that kind of thing, what
{284}
the woman of Samaria *found*, really opening up the matter of the Spirit in His subjective operations.
J.W.D. Is this principle of the opening up of all things in our dispensation like Aaron's rod that budded and blossomed? Every feature of the dispensation opens from one thing to another. Is that your thought?
J.T. Exactly. In @Numbers 17 we have Aaron s rod that budded. Now that brings up the question of the rod. @Exodus 7 speaks of the rod that was "turned into a serpent"; this rod, or staff, is regarded as used by Moses and Aaron, and in verse 17 Jehovah uses it Himself. They are all *one* really. This points to the way the dispensation works out: it is a question of oneness. Then as said, in @Numbers 17, there is another rod, made for Levi, but it becomes Aaron's. It is a beautiful rod, representing life; it budded and blossomed and bore almonds. I only refer to all that because it brings out what marks this dispensation. Aaron's rod here is the evidence, typically, that our High Priest is established in the "power of indissoluble life" (@Hebrews 7:16).
J.W.D. What came out recently in regard to the heavenly character of eternal life shows how varied the light in this period is.
J.T. Quite so; so that while eternal life is spoken of in connection with the earth, it has in certain scriptures heavenly links and features. Believers are enjoined to lay hold of it. In the Old Testament the prophets spoke about eternal life; it is "commanded" in Zion; this is millennial. But in the New Testament it is a definite Christian blessing, having a heavenly character (see @John 3:12 - 16). The blue, the heavenly colour, marks all that belongs to Christianity; we are blessed "with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1:3) "the depths of God" (@1 Corinthians 2:10) are open to us.
J.T.Jr. You used the expression 'medium' several
{285}
times in your prayer. Is it the idea of love among us?
J.T. That is the point for the moment -- what there is among us, what there is in this city in view of these meetings, because what is in this town is a reflection of what is in other towns; it is the same thing everywhere -- not much love or unity, hence the liberty of the Spirit in opening up this dispensation is impaired. What marked the woman of Samaria was the opposite of all this; she left her waterpot and took up something else.
C.A.M. It is very helpful to connect this matter of love with the thought of prophetic ministry, whether you think of John or of the last book of the Bible. It is not the telling forth of coming events, it all culminates in bridal affections for Christ.
J.T. Yes. What would the Apocalypse be if love were not brought in?
M.O. Would the reception of Christ by heaven and the restoring of all things suggest how competent He is to take up matters in the interval?
J.T. Well, just so. The coming world is not the greatest, this is the greatest time. He is received up there, but then, what is He doing there? That is the next thing. It is the most wonderful time; heaven is free to go on with sonship. It is what heaven is saying, what heaven will bring out. This all lies in the Spirit, but the state of the saints affects what the Spirit is doing.
M.S. Is the restoring of all things a public matter?
J.T. It is. That is a comparatively simple matter. It is a question of the testimony of the prophets. As to this, however, it is important to remember that "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the glory of kings to search out a thing" (@Proverbs 25:2).
Ques. Would the order of @1 Corinthians 13 and 14 bear on this? There is a call for love indicated in the former and the latter develops prophetic ministry.
{286}
J.T. I think it would: "Yet shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence", and that way is love. The Corinthians were not characterised by love, and the question is whether we have it. In this country conditions are low. We might as well face it and challenge ourselves as to whether there is a state for these special meetings in which the Spirit of God can open things up.
Ques. Do you think the brethren feel this matter?
J.T. Well, I am very doubtful. During recent years we had remarkable times in Great Britain, brethren in certain parts giving themselves up to spiritual things, and there were *disclosures*. The present public sorrow, however, has become a test, but I believe the truth is holding and the brethren are gaining. It is to be hoped that the Lord will stir up the saints on this continent.
A.D. Would each esteeming the other better than himself enter into this matter?
J.T. It is a question of love. After the apostle left Corinth the first thing he had to challenge was the matter of disunity. They were not speaking the same thing.
J.W.D. "For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments" (@1 John 5:3). Would that meet the low conditions among us to which you referred?
J.T. Yes. The way of love is the keeping of His commandments, and every true Christian ought to see how simple the commandments of the Lord are; the chapter quoted says they "are not grievous". We cannot say the brethren have no love if they are keeping the commandments of the Lord.
J.W.D. Do you think we should see whether we have love among ourselves before having special meetings?
J.T. Yes. It is a pertinent question, before
{287}
inviting brethren from other parts, for brethren in the place of the proposed meetings to enquire as to whether there are conditions of love among themselves. The Old Testament indicates conditions of love for the holy convocations in Israel.
A.B.P. Would you say that the unhappy conditions among the saints, which are of comparative frequency, would, if gone into and thoroughly repented of, become an asset for the removal of dark spots so that love might flow freely? Love cannot rest where there are underlying unjudged conditions. These sad occurrences are an indication of a low state, but if they are acknowledged before God they will serve to bring about a basis for the free flow of love.
J.T. Quite so; the woman of @Luke 7 loved much because she was forgiven much. Peter's address in @Acts 2 brings up the matter of state: "What shall we do?" they said to Peter and the other apostles. Peter replied, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit".
A.A.T. You are emphasising the need of the atmosphere of love among the brethren. As you said, the woman in @Luke 7 had love, the atmosphere was there.
J.T. She had it in herself. The Lord said she loved much. The atmosphere was against her, but she loved much because she was forgiven much. Peter says, "Repent, and be baptised, ... for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". That is the basis for love conditions. We are to repent. Whatever there is to be repented of, do not let us fail in repenting.
Ques. What you are saying would put greater responsibility on the localities holding these special meetings. Are they not generally carried on on an annual basis, the local brethren feeling they have
{288}
done their part in inviting the brethren, providing the food, sleeping accommodation, etc.?
J.T. Yes, whereas it is not only the physical food that we need. We have to get ration coupons for that, but what about the coupons for love? The government will not supply those, but love is absolutely essential. We could go hungry for a day, but what about love? We cannot get along without that.
J.W.D. Are these scheduled monthly or quarterly meetings quite scriptural? They are put in the book regardless of whether there is a right spiritual state in relation to them. In some cities there are fellowship meetings once a month; other places have quarterly meetings, and they are in the book that is issued by the tract depot. These go through automatically regardless of whether localities are marked by the proper spiritual conditions. Is that right?
J.T. It is not. Right conditions require unity and that implies love.
J.H.E. Special occasions in Jerusalem meant that the children of Israel had to journey.
J.T. Yes, and the idea was that they could travel and live together without quarrelling.
Ques. What should be done about conditions unsuitable for such occasions?
J.T. Well, I would point to Peter s advice as good, "Repent". This matter of monthly, quarterly and annual meetings in the book has already been mentioned. One of the important things that comes up is the collection: how much is going to come in? Shall we be able to feed and house the brethren? That is foremost in mind; if we invite the brethren we must have food and sleeping accommodation for them. But there is never a question as to the *love*. What about that? Is it fair to invite brethren where there is not love? Is it just right? Well, the men at Jerusalem listened to Peter and it is said, "And having heard it they were pricked in heart, and said
{289}
to Peter and the other apostles, What shall we do, brethren? And Peter said to them, Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For to you is the promise and to your children, and to all who are afar off, as many as the Lord our God may call. And with many other words he testified and exhorted them, saying, Be saved from this perverse generation. Those then who had accepted his word were baptised; and there were added in that day about three thousand souls". Then the remaining part of the chapter is to show that love was there. Besides the general outlook, involving the apostles¬ teaching and fellowship, there was great spiritual liberty and affection among the saints evidenced in mutual care; for they sold their possessions and substance and made distribution "according as any one might have need". Thus we have indicated at the outset of the dispensation conditions for holy convocations.
Rem. That is all most important. When you go outside of what is local in view of such occasions there should be exercise among the brethren as to whether there are conditions to support them.
J.R.H. You would not give up the meetings, but are encouraging us to be exercised as to right conditions among us?
J.T. I should not like to see the meetings given up. God comes in for us in spite of ourselves, and I would not suggest for a moment that there is not love among us. There is love, but we need *more* and *more* of it.
C.A.M. "But Lydda being near to Joppa, the disciples having heard that Peter was there, sent two men to him, beseeching him, Thou must not delay coming to us" (@Acts 9:38). Apparently they faced the conditions in the place and this great servant was available. Would you say that affords a guide?
{290}
J.T. Quite so. That whole section supports what we are saying: "Now it came to pass that Peter, passing through all quarters, descended also to the saints who inhabited Lydda. And he found there a certain man, Aeneas by name, who had been lying for eight years upon a couch, who was paralysed. And Peter said to him, Aeneas, Jesus, the Christ, heals thee: rise up, and make thy couch for thyself" (@Acts 9:32 - 34). That indicates what the Lord does for us and what we should do for ourselves. Then it says, "And in Joppa there was a certain female disciple, by name Tabitha, which being interpreted means Dorcas". She was a worker, but was she supplying what was needed for the work of the Lord? She was full of good works and alms-deeds, but there was evidence of natural sentiment by the widows. Peter put them all out. How essential it was that he should be there to create conditions suitable for the work of God! All that is applicable to what we are saying about conditions being suitable for general meetings.
C.A.M. It is quite different from printing the announcements of special meetings in a book; it is a question of what is current among the saints at the *date* of the meetings.
J.H-t. Does Elisha's question to the woman in @2 Kings 4:2 bear on this? "What hast thou in the house?" She seems to minimize what is there, but he shows her how it can expand.
J.T. That is good. Referring to what we said earlier about the prophets, there is much to be done before Elijah's ministry can come into effect. That is the point now, what is to be done in a locality in which special meetings are to be held before we get to the real point in the ministry that may be given.
A.B.P. Elijah was a long time in Zarephath before the widows were brought before him.
J.T. Quite so. I do not know whether we have
{291}
arrived at what was indicated earlier in this meeting as to Elijah himself and the mystery attached to his person, such a person as to be impersonated in others. Although belonging to a former age he comes into the coming one; but what is he doing now? All that is mysterious in a certain way, but we belong to a time in which mysteries are to be understood, the Spirit of God enables us to understand them. Of course, we do not want to seem too mysterious; but as already said, there are persons existent who never died, and where are they? There are persons who were raised when the Lord died and they entered into the holy city and appeared unto many. What has become of them? We are not told, but they exist. I am making these remarks in view of what we have said of Elijah, concerning whom more will come before us.
{292}
THE PROPHETS (2)
@1 Kings 17
J.T. Some further remarks are needed to clarify the passages read this forenoon in the New Testament before we proceed to this chapter. The account in @Luke 9 stresses the humanity of Moses and Elias; they were two *men*, which would be intended to remind us, as to Elijah, that he was not a mythical personage, but a real man, in truth, a heavenly man. @Matthew 17:10 - 13 confirms that he is to come. The disciples asked, "Why then say the scribes that Elias must first have come? And he answering said to them, Elias indeed comes first and will restore all things. But I say unto you that Elias has already come, and they have not known him, but have done unto him whatever they would. Thus also the Son of man is about to suffer from them. Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the baptist". The Lord confirms the Old Testament prophecy as to Elias, who indeed comes first and will restore all things. So that much of what we may call mystical truth arises in the mind as to Elijah; first, that he is actually now a real man, What his occupation may be we have to leave, just as we have to leave the statement as to the Lord that He is received in heaven pending certain coming events. Of course it is said that the Lord is at the right hand of God, but that is general; it is not a specific statement as to His position, but a place of great honour and power. Mark says He "sat" there. He is operating in relation to the disciples and what they are doing. But as to what Elias is doing there is nothing said. He is said here to be a man, and he appeared with Moses talking with Jesus. It says in @Luke 9:30, "And lo, two men talked with him, who were Moses and
{293}
Elias". It is no question of mere apparition, but actual persons, two men talking with Jesus. It seems as if there is instruction in this as to the present state of things in heaven. We spoke this morning of certain who came out of their tombs after the Lord arose, and entered into the holy city and appeared unto many.
C.A.M. It says that Elijah restores all things. That is a remarkable statement. Matthew seems to agree with what you are calling attention to in @Acts 3, the restoring of all things, and then the Lord comes.
J.T. What he is doing now is the mysterious side for us; also where Abraham is according to the Lord's references in @Luke 16; and then what we have as to Moses here, one of the two men; one of them having gone to heaven without dying and the other being concealed by God in burial, Michael contending with the devil about His body. I am referring to Scripture, the very suggestions of which are food for holy thought. It is clear the Spirit of God intends that we should be impressed with the fact that they were two men and that they appeared: "And lo, two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elias". There is no question as to this, it is a fact -- "who were Moses and Elias, who, appearing in glory, spoke of his departure which he was about to accomplish in Jerusalem". The speaking is all on their side, they were two men talking with Jesus. It goes on to say they appeared in glory, and we are told what they were speaking about: they "spoke of his departure which he was about to accomplish in Jerusalem". That is, they are presented to us as persons fully fitted, representing a prime thought in this great scene next to the fact of Jesus being there and changed.
C.A.M. Mark's gospel, which we regard as a prophetic gospel, puts Elias first. Would you say
{294}
that shows that these personalities have some present effect on the saints?
J.T. Well, Luke's account is to stress especially the persons and their importance at the time. @Mark 9:4 says, "there appeared to them Elias *with* Moses", that is, Moses really has the first place; the preposition 'with' shows that Elias is there with the great mediator. But Luke says "Moses and Elias". That is very greatly stressed. It is not the existence of persons who were once Moses and Elias, they are really the persons themselves. The persons were there as men and they talked with Jesus and spoke of His departure which He was about to accomplish at Jerusalem. The existence of these men is seen here in heavenly glory, clearly not presented in any mythical or mere apparitional condition, but literal persons.
H.B. Is that emphasised by the note which reads, 'who were no other than'?
J.T. Yes, no other than the very persons. The Spirit of God would tell us that the very persons were there.
G.McP. Matthew and Mark leave out the word 'men'.
J.T. Luke stresses the idea of humanity. He does it again in the appearance in chapter 24, "two men suddenly stood by them in shining raiment"; the context, however, indicates that these were angels, and so also the "two men ... in white" in @Acts 1. But Moses and Elias were real men. They appeared in glory and talked with Jesus about an event that was to happen in His own history.
A.A.T. I notice it is worded that His death was to be "accomplished". That is not the way we customarily speak about death.
J.T. It is "his departure". Of course, it is death, but it is a going out of the position. It is really the word 'exodus': they "spoke of his departure
{295}
which he was about to accomplish in Jerusalem"; it was an actual exodus that was in mind. Really the whole book of Exodus is involved in the Lord's going out.
A.A.T. Is it not said rightly of His departure that He had ability to accomplish it? That could not be said of us.
J.T. Yes; the word 'accomplish' is a full word. It is not a mere effort, it is a strong word under special circumstances.
A.B.P. Would not the disciples be impressed with the way Moses and Elias could speak with the Lord about this great matter, and would they not have a sense of who the Lord was as being with Him in that way? It would always keep them humble in regard of any place they had in the testimony.
J.T. Just so. The fact is that the whole matter is for them. While He was praying the disciples were with Him (verse 18). Then again in verse 28: "And it came to pass after these words, about eight days, that taking Peter and John and James he went up into a mountain to pray. And as he prayed the fashion of his countenance became different and his raiment white and effulgent. And lo, two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elias who, appearing in glory, spoke of his departure which he was about to accomplish in Jerusalem". That is, the appearing was for them. The Lord had said that some should not taste death "until they shall have seen the kingdom of God"; what happened was for them. The great scene was brought in for them, and they surely would take account of it and speak of it afterwards, as Peter does in his second letter. He speaks of it most beautifully and touchingly, that they were "eyewitnesses of his majesty" (@2 Peter 1:16). The thing took place for them so that they might be witnesses to it for others.
C.A.M. The Lord would not have to open up
{296}
things to those two great persons. They would have a full knowledge of the death of Christ and of all that He had to do.
J.T. How well able they were to speak about it! Peter and the others could not speak about it as they did. They were speaking to Himself about it, and surely that is to remind us of the intelligence they had.
F.C. Verse 28 says, "after these words", that is, after the words that "There are some of those standing here who shall not taste death until they shall have seen the kingdom of God". Is it to fix our minds on this matter of words, referring to what the Lord had said, that it is all one matter?
J.T. Exactly. "And it came to pass after these words, about eight days, that taking Peter and John and James he went up into a mountain to pray". The thing happened in regard of the words, it is one whole. Surely the disciples, in subsequent relations and conversations with one another would dwell on these two persons and the intelligence and liberty they had in speaking with the Lord.
J.B. Moses and Elias are known by Peter, but his intelligence is not great enough to know why they are there. It does not say who told him their identity but he knows them.
J.T. Yes The Spirit of God through Luke says, "two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elias, who, appearing in glory, spoke of his departure". Then Peter says, "let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias". That is, Peter knew the persons. It was intended that they should be apprehended by Peter and the others.
J.W.D. Are you looking at these as special cases, or are you inferring that others apprehend them in a corporeal way now in heaven?
J.T. Certainly; I am inferring that Enoch is in heaven, and these two, and those that arose and
{297}
entered into the holy city and appeared to many after the Lord arose from the dead.
J.W.D. Do you think it is especially to bring out some feature of the dispensation?
J.T. I think the intent is that we might know that eternal conditions have already begun. We are already in the light of the fact that eternal conditions have begun, and men are in them and enjoying them.
A.A.T. You refer to these two as men. I thought a man had three parts, body, soul, and spirit. Do you think they were men after and before this appearing?
J.T. Luke stresses that point. It is specified that they were actually Moses and actually Elias.
T.W. Moses had been buried.
J.T. That is a mysterious fact, too, and God buried him. No one knows where he was buried, only we are told there was a conflict: that Michael contended for the body of Moses. I do not infer anything different as to Moses, only the facts recorded suggest a thought as to whether God acted specially in this case in view of the mount of Transfiguration.
G.McP. Is it your thought that we should arrive at manhood now, and enjoy eternal conditions in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. You do not want to enter in as a boy but as a mature person. You want to be able to share in that scene.
S.R.McC. Is not that what James stresses, that Elias was a man of like passions to ourselves?
J.T. That is a point not to be omitted; James implies that he was not a mythical man. He was a real man like ourselves, a man of like passions to ourselves. Now he is in the glory, a real man. When we see him presently he will be as real as any of us.
R.W.S. "We speak God's wisdom in a mystery". Even the speaking is a mystery; and then the apostle goes on to say God has hidden it: "that
{298}
hidden wisdom which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory" (@1 Corinthians 2:7). Would that bear on the subject? We are so natural, and these mysterious things require spirituality, do they not?
J.T. Well, in this scene the idea of divine testimony is that the *real* thing is presented. There were two persons who were Moses and Elias, and they appeared in glory and were talking with Jesus. Surely the intent is testimony. If there were a million men it would be the same thing -- testimony as to what is there and what will be there eternally. That testimony is brought to us by Peter and others but it is brought to us so that it shall affect us, because that is the divine purpose. I am sure the idea is to bring out that the thing exists. Eternal conditions exist, and the Spirit of God is here with a perfect knowledge of their existence and is telling us that we are coming in touch with them now in the assembly; not that we come in touch literally with our brethren who are gone, but Christianity involves what is real.
A.L. Would you help us as to this thought of "appearing in glory"? "Moses and Elias, who, appearing in glory, spoke of his departure". Later it says, "Peter and those with him were oppressed with sleep: but having fully awoke up they saw his glory". Is their glory linked only with the Lord's presence?
J.T. Well, it is there; and then they are withdrawn and the Lord comes back and is seen in normal conditions in testimony down here. But their presence is important; the scene is important as bearing on what real Christianity is. It is a heavenly matter already effected through Christ's resurrection and presence in heaven.
A.L. Is the reference to Moses and Elias as "two men" representative of the heavenly?
J.T. Quite so. They are representative of the
{299}
heavenly. "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones"; not Jesus alone but they also are heavenly. So it is a real thing already existent above, it is only a matter of adding others. The thing is already there, is already set up.
J.W.D. Will the status of those of the assembly be greater than that of Moses and Elias?
J.T. Well, that is another matter. It is a great fact that "such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones. And as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly one". The apostle sees the thing in those men. Clearly those forming the assembly have a unique place, and Moses and Elias have not part in it, as @Matthew 11:11 shows.
J.H.E. Peter, as having the Spirit later on, could speak intelligently of the Lord in the glory. He had seen Him on the holy mount.
J.T. Quite so. It is well to notice the language he uses; it is the acme of Peter's language. He was about to put off his tabernacle and to enter into that eternal world, too, only in a disembodied state. He says, "For we have not made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, following cleverly imagined fables, but having been eye-witnesses of *his* majesty" (@2 Peter 1:16). It was with the natural eyes. There was no change in the disciples; they were the men that were actually here in the Lord's company in everyday life. Peter says further, "For he received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight; and this voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain". All that is to make Christianity known to us as it is in heaven. These words I am speaking of really mean that it already exists in heaven.
{300}
J.R.H. The note as to 'eyewitnesses' confirms what you say, "'admitted into immediate vision of the glory', a word used for full initiation into the mysteries".
J.T. Very good, that is the note to the passage in Peter. The idea is that we should be initiated into things. Peter does not allude to this before; he never speaks of the Lord as seen in this way except here. But he is letting us into the Pauline truth, and that he is a witness to it himself. Paul tells us later that he also is a witness, not in what he saw but rather in what he heard, which converges on the same thing.
Rem. All this would greatly accredit the ministry of these two men. They were talking with Jesus, not with Peter and the others; but their ministry would still speak. The ministry that comes from Elijah in the book of Kings would speak to us with a loud voice. It links up with this majesty.
J.T. Yes; we shall see more of that later, what he and Elisha did together, how they walked and talked together. The point to impress us now is that eternal conditions have already taken effect. They are not simply future, they have already become a fact, and what we are going on with down here is of a piece with what is up there. "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones" (@1 Corinthians 15:48).
J.R.H. @Luke 1 speaks of the spirit and power of Elias. These will be seen in him personally.
J.T. Yes; that was alluding to John the baptist, how he walked in power. It was the impersonation of Elijah in John the baptist. We have to bear these things in mind. The Lord says he will certainly come and restore all things.
C.A.M. In our service Godward we sing hymns written by such a one as J.N.D. and we sing them with the knowledge that that great servant knew the Lord intimately; we voice that knowledge and it
{301}
forms part of the service. The knowledge that he had of Christ is in the saints now.
J.T. Christianity implies what is effected from heaven, although affected as by the Spirit down here. The last Adam is a life-giving Spirit and He is operating up there in relation to the whole assembly; so that things are going on. We have limitations. But we are not 'intruding' into things we have not seen in speaking of these matters, because the Spirit of God bears witness of what is up there.
G.McP. Does Stephen's outlook help us?
J.T. He did not see anyone but Christ, but Peter and John saw others. They saw real men that, we are told, were in the days of their flesh of like passions to ourselves. These are up there, and it is only a step until we too shall be there. What is going on in the assembly now is of a piece with all that. Compare @John 14:18,19.
A.P-f. Are they different from the three men who appeared to Abraham in the tent door?
J.T. They are different, certainly. I would say the suggestion there is Deity, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit coming to Abraham; we are plainly told that One was the Lord and the other two were angels, but the *primary* thought is three *Persons* together. The intent is to impress us with the thought of God pending the time of the incarnation, when there would be full revelation in the Father and the Son.
A.A.T. Is there any instruction in the fact that Peter talked about the three tabernacles? I was wondering whether that is the negative side.
J.T. Well, it is the negative side. It is a man who did not know what he was saying. There is a good deal of that; we say things we do not understand. "Not knowing what he said" (@Luke 9:33). He ought to have known. Why should Peter put the Lord Jesus on the same level as Moses and Elias?
{302}
He did not do that according to what we have in his last letter; he makes no reference there at all to the tabernacles of Moses and Elias. They are not objects of worship. The greatest saint, the greatest angel, is not an object of worship. This condemns the whole Romish system.
A.B.P. Would this regulate us in relation to impulses? In meetings we often feel that we should like to say something, but that in itself is not sufficient. Should we not analyse impulses, as to whether they are merely mental connections or whether the Spirit is behind them?
J.T. Yes. Peter was inspired later in his epistles, but here he does not know what he is saying. It is idolatrous to put the Lord on the same level as Moses and Elias.
H.P. Would you say this departure is to have a bearing on us? As Elisha takes up the ministry of Elijah it is a question of his departure, and Elisha asks for a double portion of Elijah's spirit. It should be granted if he saw him go up. Did the point of departure spoken of here have an effect on Peter, John and James?
J.T. They were to have part in the Spirit of Jesus. @Philippians 1:19 speaks of "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ". Is that what you were thinking of?
H.P. "And lo, two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elias, who, appearing in glory, spoke of his departure which he was about to accomplish in Jerusalem". The disciples would take account of what was being talked about. Then in @2 Kings 2:9,10 Elisha is to take on the ministry of Elijah: "And it came to pass when they had gone over, that Elijah said to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I am taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me. And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing: if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be
{303}
so to thee". Elisha saw him caught up and he would have an impression of a man in heaven, would he not? Elijah was a real man caught up into heaven.
J.T. Quite so. How very real the whole matter was!
J.T.Jr. The service of Moses and Elias is finished as far as the earth is concerned, but what is in them now is substance and what they said would be weighty. This would help those three men in what they were going to say and it would help us in our meetings in what we say.
Dr.W. Although the vision was real, the manner of exit of these two men was rather mystical just as our manner of departure from this world will be mystical.
J.T. The thing to be impressed with is that *they* were there. It was not a mere apparition; it was real. The men appeared and Peter saw them with his natural eyes, the very eyes he always used.
F.C. In relation to his own words and departure, Peter says they had not followed "cleverly imagined fables" (@2 Peter 1:16). This incident would be real over against fables and imagination.
J.T. Showing that we are of a piece with it all. The Christian system includes the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. @John 4 shows how individuals like the woman of Samaria come into it. Of course, we have all come into it; and the presence of the Spirit in us makes it possible that we already have part in eternal conditions, but not as to our bodies. We are awaiting the redemption of our bodies, that is one side; but the other side is sonship and all that is already existent.
J.W.D. It says they talked 'with' Him which is greater than talking 'to' Him.
R.W.S. Should each assembly service yield some touch of these eternal conditions?
{304}
J.T. Yes. The more spiritual we are the more it is so. J.N.D. says: "And see, the Spirit's power Has ope'd the heav'nly door". (`74:5)
C.A.M. What had the Lord in mind by saying they should not taste death until they saw this remarkable matter?
J.T. I think it is to show that Christianity has come in in men of flesh and blood like ourselves. The apostles and others should not taste of death until they saw this; therefore apostolic testimony is valid. It is not simply a person that has risen and gone into heaven, but the point is that Christianity has come in in men like ourselves in flesh and blood, and that the testimony to that is in these three men. They did not taste death until they had seen the transfiguration. It is mentioned in the three synoptic gospels: @Mark 9:1 says, "the kingdom of God come in power"; and @Luke 9:27 says, "the kingdom of God". He had seen it in itself, in all its environs and ramifications. New birth enables us to see it, and so also as to all the testimony that we have in men in flesh and blood conditions.
J.W.D. What about the scripture in @1 John 3:2, "What we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is"? Would that infer something further than Luke?
J.T. I think it is further than the transfiguration. It is not what *He* shall be but what *we* shall be. That is to say, what we are going on with now is in flesh and blood conditions; Christianity is at present in that, so that what we shall be is not a matter of manifestation. Christianity was set up here in men like ourselves, that is, in the apostles; but at the same time heavenly conditions are already existent up there in these Old Testament saints.
J.H-t. Do the words, "*they* kept silence, and
{305}
told no one in those days any of the things they had seen", link on with what you are saying about the conditions needed for the opening up of these heavenly things? "In those days" conditions were not suited. Did it await the coming in of the Spirit and conditions as they are among us now for the opening up of these things?
J.T. Quite so. Christianity requires the Spirit down here. But what has been said as to the scripture that "what we shall be has not yet been manifested", is not to be passed by. I would not say that "what we shall be" is fully manifested in Moses and Elias. They represent the heavenly saints, but there is more than that to be seen in heavenly saints. Christ in glory is the full expression of what we shall be, "we shall be like him for we shall see him as he is". That is Christianity in the full thought, so that we shall be changed into the image of His body of glory. The likeness of the present body of Jesus above is what we are to be changed to; that is what we are waiting for. When we shall see Him we shall be like Him. What we have here on the mount of Transfiguration is not just that; it does not say more than that it is the kingdom of God come in power. But full Christianity was still a secret because it was still a mystery hidden in God.
G.McP. When the apostle speaks of heavenly places does he have something like this in mind, that which corresponds to heaven?
J.T. Yes. The expression 'heavenly places' is only in Ephesians, I believe; it is peculiar, and would appear to convey that the thing we are brought to is very near. It is not simply heaven, but heavenly places. We have in @Genesis 1 the word 'expanse', it is an *addition* to what is in the first verse, that "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". We are told that the expanse was in the second day's work; it would appear to reach down to where we
{306}
are and include the atmospheric heavens where they saw the Lord go up.
J.R.H. Would it be right to say the transfiguration is the full height of display?
J.T. Of course, we must bear in mind that the display is of the *kingdom*; more particularly in Matthew, the Son of man coming in His kingdom. Sonship is there: "Such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight; and this voice *we* heard uttered from heaven being with him on the holy mountain". But, although the heavenly saints are there it is only as filling out the scene, not as a family. Peter could say much more in his epistle than he could before the Spirit came down, but he confines himself to what the prophetic eye could see, stressing the majesty of the King in Sonship.
Ques. How does this compare with Paul being caught up?
J.T. Well, they are corresponding ideas. If we were to hear Peter and Paul talk about their experiences, would Peter not speak to Paul of all that he experienced on the mount? Paul, in his first visit to Peter, remained with him for fifteen days. Can we not imagine that they talked about that? Paul could not then say anything to Peter about his experience in Paradise, but suppose we think of them later talking together: Paul would say, I heard wonderful things, Peter; things "which it is not lawful for a man to utter" (2 Corinthians 12:4). But he was there in Paradise, and surely something remained with him to affect him in his testimony. I think in that way the Lord encourages us to go in for heavenly things -- for ecstasy, and for part in the things we shall soon be brought into.
J.H.E. Would it be right to say that Paul in spirit never left Paradise?
J.T. In spirit -- that, of course, is a modification;
{307}
but we must remember Paul was a man like ourselves. It is said of Elias that he was a man of like passions to ourselves. We must leave room for what the brethren are able to do; but undoubtedly Paul never lost the impression of what he received up there.
J.B. How does John on the isle of Patmos fit in with this?
J.T. Well, he was "in the Spirit" (@Revelation 1:10). I would say that is an actual state that belongs to a spiritual man, but what he saw was a vision. What the apostles saw on the mount is more than what is ordinarily called a vision; it was a vision of course, but it was a scene of real persons. In the first chapter of Revelation John says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day", but in the fourth chapter he is taken up to heaven. I do not suppose he was taken up in a literal sense; Paul was literally taken up, but John does not speak of himself as if he was physically taken up. The difference between an actual sight and a vision is that the vision may all happen while you are asleep; God may cause you to see things then. But the mount of Transfiguration is more than that; it involves seeing these two men so that there should be real witnesses of them down here.
C.A.M. As to this matter of sonship and the way it impressed Peter -- in his second epistle he speaks of prophecy and immediately after that of holy men of God. Do you think this matter of the truth of sonship is awakened in us through prophecy? Is there a link there? I was wondering whether the prophetic ministry such as in the chapter read, @1 Kings 17, would show that prophecy has great power to bring sonship into conscious reality.
J.T. Yes, I would say that, prophetic ministry as we have it in @John 4. There is point in what the woman discerned: "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet". Prophetic ministry is not only the foretelling of events, but bringing God into the soul, and
{308}
exposing one's self to one's self, to prepare him for the heavenly things which are involved in the Spirit -- the springing well in @John 4.
F.C. Although Paul's experience would be special, do you think we are entitled in measure to go in for what he had?
J.T. I do not see why not. We can at least say that ecstasy was possible in the beginning; indeed that it was nothing so very extraordinary. It says of Peter that "an ecstasy came upon him" (@Acts 10:10), as if he had had such experiences before. If these things were then, if the apostles had them, they belong to Christianity.
J.W.D. Do you think @Isaiah 6 is a vision or a reality? You do not think the prophet actually came in touch with the seraphim and so forth?
J.T. I do not think so; I would think it was a vision. He tells us, however, that the year Uzziah died he saw the Lord. I think that was just a vision, as @Genesis 15 also was; there God spoke to Abraham in a vision.
J.T.Jr. I suppose @Genesis 14 would hardly be a vision -- Melchisedec, an actual person, was there, a king. Indeed, a whole system of things was there.
J.T. Melchisedec is spoken of as a real person in Hebrews. Surely the suggestion in what has come before us is that we should be awake to the fact that Christianity involves these things, and that the Holy Spirit is here personally and ready to serve us and use us. Any experiences of this kind, however small comparatively, only increase the reality of Christianity and assembly service and make us more fitted for it. It is a question of what the Spirit can do for us.
C.N. We read of the two olive trees and the two lamps which stand before the Lord of the earth, in @Zechariah 4 and @Revelation 11. Is the idea of standing before the Lord of the earth connected with what you have in mind?
{309}
J.T. We have there what has been already touched on, the impersonation of Elijah. These two witnesses contemplated in Revelation act like Elijah and cause the heaven to be shut up that no rain may fall, and fire to go out of their mouth. We shall have to touch on that later, as to how Elijah may be coming in. The book of Revelation contemplates how he will come in, not so much in his person but in his ministry. These two witnesses suggest to us what is coming as corresponding to Elijah.
C.N. Therefore it would fit in with Peter's testimony in @Acts 3, that "times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord".
J.T. That is all future, and Elijah is going to have part in it according to Malachi. We have a formal statement in @Malachi 4:5 alluded to by the Lord: "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and terrible day of Jehovah. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse". That is a mystery that is to come. Scripture does not say much of Elijah having to do with children, but Malachi implied that he will serve children specially.
T.W. Why does the Lord Jesus in @Matthew 17 refer to John the baptist as Elijah?
J.T. Because he was Elijah if the state of the people was such as to receive it. So that the impersonation of the ministry awaits certain conditions and therefore the matter is still open -- that is, what is coming in view of the times of refreshing, and the great care that will be taken of children. Elijah will be a children's man; he "shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers". It is very important that the hearts of the children shall be turned to their fathers. Children are rebellious now, but in the future there is going to be a powerful ministry bearing
{310}
on children, indeed, bearing on the whole family.
G.H. I suppose what Moses and Elijah represent in the way of ministry always continues to the end.
J.T. Not always; they do link with each other, however. Personally they are only seen together on the mount of Transfiguration. Elijah's ministry is calling people back to the law; that is what we need today -- the recovery of right principles. Moses was the mediator, to bring in divine principles, but Elijah seeks to bring Israel back to principles they have departed from, and he does bring them back according to what we see later. Also, as we have seen, he is going to do great things among the children according to the book of Malachi. All that opens up a great deal as to how ministry may be repeated. Elisha was very much like Elijah in his ministry.
C.A.M. I suppose that is seen in the prince of the house of David in Ezekiel. There will be one like David by and by.
J.T. Quite so, Ezekiel has one who is called David "the prince"; not the literal David; no doubt it is Jesus.
C.A.M. This shows that in all these personalities it is Christ in some way.
J.T. We should not be ashamed of imitating a brother if he is like Christ. Elisha surely acted like his master in much of his service, so that in that way there is a continuation of Elijah in the ministry. If a man is impressed with ministry and takes it on, God would use him in that sense.
C.A.M. Do you not think that in those cases it is necessary for the love element to be very prominent? It is no use to take on another's ministry in a mental way. I am trying to guard the fact that you might have great respect for a ministry and yet bring it out to advertise yourself. All that comes to grief. There is such a thing as Paul handing on to his son Timothy what he had taught.
{311}
J.T. That is what we see in Elisha calling Elijah his father: "My father, my father!" These are respectful terms, and you can see how God would honour that in Elisha. He was greatly impressed with his father; he poured water on Elijah's hands -- evidently that he might serve better.
{312}
THE PROPHETS (3)
@1 Kings 17:1 - 24
J.T. We began these readings with @Acts 3 where we are told by the Spirit that the heavens must receive the Lord Jesus until the times of the restitution of all things, of which God has spoken by His prophets. The suggestion was made that the prophets being thus mentioned and the times to which they pointed, that is, the times of refreshing which are to come, we might look into the general position in that respect, considering Elijah and Elisha to clarify the subject. We considered the Lord viewed in the Acts as received into heaven until the times of the restitution of all things. He is thus there and, while not on His own throne, He is occupied. The book of Acts and the epistles would unfold in due course how He is employed now in this provisional time until He takes up the government of the universe, including the earth, and sits on His own throne. This led us to considerable inquiry into @Luke 9 and @Matthew 17, which chapters tell us of the holy mount of Transfiguration; but the point especially in mind was in @Luke 9, that Moses and Elias appeared in glory. They appeared as identified, not simply as figurative persons or persons that might be ordinarily seen in a vision; they were real, being referred to as 'men', talking with the Lord about His departure which He should accomplish at Jerusalem, facts which open up a wide theme as to what exists now in heaven. The divine thought is already reached. Although the resurrection in its full sense has not yet taken place, yet some have been raised and some have gone to heaven without having died; so that eternal conditions are already effected, the Lord indeed having said in @John 14:2, "I go to prepare you
{313}
a place". The Lord is ready, but in the interim much is being done, according to @Acts 3. Indeed, the greatest things are being effected, namely, the calling out of the assembly, its formation and service. Paul's doctrine enters into all this, so that we understand on the one hand what is already literally in heaven, and on the other what is of a piece with it here. Christianity involves that the purposes of God are in principle already effected, and that the services of God are proceeding already in a spiritual way here, although those who have part in them are still in conditions of blood and flesh. Nevertheless we reach finality, what is in heaven and what is here by the Spirit implying this; all is, in principle, effected.
We did not really touch this chapter (@1 Kings 17) at our last reading, so we have read it again that we might see how Elijah himself, who is said by James to be a man of like passions to ourselves, was taken up by God; and what he had to experience in order to enter into the full service that was in mind for him. This chapter takes him up on that line: "And Elijah the Tishbite, of the inhabitants of Gilead, said to Ahab, As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by my word". It opens up to us certain facts relative not only to Elijah's service but to his discipline and education. Although he is taken up in a certain sense as a symbolic man, pointing to what is coming, and is seen impersonated by others in the prophets and also in the New Testament, yet he was a man of like passions to ourselves. His services were carried on on the principle of dependence on God, for it is said by James that he prayed with prayer and God shut up the heavens for three years and six months in answer to his prayer. He prayed again and the heavens gave rain. Now we are in a chapter in which this great prophet and servant is before us as an example of how the service of God is
{314}
to be carried on, and what the experiences of the servant are as dependent on God.
A.A.T. Is it not a principle with God that the servant is educated for the service beforehand?
J.T. That is particularly so with Elijah. He is said to have been of the inhabitants of Gilead, the suggestion in that statement being that outwardly he was not an extraordinary man, he was just one of the inhabitants of Gilead. Gilead was not relatively a distinguished place. The designation "the Tishbite" does not seem to add any special distinction to Elijah. Jephthah belonged to Gilead, too, but he was primarily a sort of freebooter. Therefore that section of the country would be somewhat rough and crude, without any special human culture or distinction. Nevertheless Elijah appears from those circumstances without any notice beforehand and just says, "As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by my word". It is as if he represents what God can do sovereignly in a servant without human aid or education. That he could say that he stood before Jehovah the God of Israel affords immense importance to what Elijah said.
R.W.S. The verse we read in Acts connects the prophetic speaking with the restoring of all things. Is Elijah connected more with our day than with the day when all things will be restored?
J.T. Well, he is a *prophet*. He represents prophetic service exercised sovereignly, that is, God takes him up sovereignly. Properly his service, according to the facts in the New Testament and even in Malachi, will be largely in relation to the coming day, the millennium or what precedes it. As with all other servants seen in that connection he is a model and example for us, James presenting him in that very way. He prayed and God answered his prayer. Why not let it be so with us? The point
{315}
here is not so much the burden of his service or prophecy, but that God has taken him up sovereignly and he is able to speak with confidence that certain things will happen. The intent is that King Ahab should be impressed with what this man is, and it is for each of us to take the matter up on those lines, so that whatever our ordinary circumstances may be we may learn to depend on God and to be confident in His service.
J.B. Is there any instruction in the fact that the prophecy of Joshua is fulfilled in the end of chapter 16 before Elijah is spoken of in chapter 17?
J.T. There is. It is a solemn thing that in Ahab's day, hundreds of years after it was pronounced, a curse is fulfilled. "In his days Hiel the Bethelite built Jericho". Joshua had spoken about this; there was a curse attached to it, so it is said "he laid its foundation in Abiram his first-born, and set up its gates in Segub his youngest, according to the word of Jehovah which he spoke through Joshua the son of Nun". That is a solemn fact. It precedes our chapter, but it reminds us how a curse can be executed even after long years if will is active. In that case it was "according to the word of Jehovah", not simply that Joshua had said it. Here, however, Elijah says, "except by my word", and I think, therefore, we are to learn how to be assured in our service that God is helping us. God is working with us so that we may be confident that what we are saying is in principle according to the mind of God, for it surely must be that in some sense. We cannot attempt to labour in a haphazard way or on the principle of venture, but with the sense of assurance. So Elijah says here, "except by my word". He had been praying to God according to James, though just an ordinary man as we see here -- a man from Gilead.
F.C. Is that in line with what they say of the Lord, "Search and look, that no prophet arises out
{316}
of Galilee"? It was an untoward place for anyone to come from.
J.T. Yes, there are such places; and through my own experience I know that the brethren sometimes think little or nothing of those who come from certain localities; but God would say that wherever human judgment arrives at such a conclusion He will deny it and show it is otherwise. *God* determines. As we had yesterday, there were seven assemblies in Asia. The Jewish mind would say, If there are seven assemblies selected they must be on Jewish territory; that land must have priority. That is really how matters stood. But the assumption to priority is denied by spiritual history; it existed at one time in the history of Israel, but it does not any more. God has gone out among the Gentiles and He has selected the seven assemblies to which the Lord writes in the small province of Asia.
A.M. Would @Mark 16 indicate that we should have faith and be on the same lines as Elijah?
J.T. That is the teaching of the gospel of Mark; the Lord reproached them in that scripture; He found them without faith, and that is a serious situation that Mark contemplates at the end. From @Mark 16:9 to the end is a doubtful passage in the minds of certain persons who think they know, but these verses are Scripture and they particularly stress unbelief. So it is said (verse 12), "after these things he was manifested in another form to two of them as they walked, going into the country; and *they* went and brought word to the rest; neither did they believe them". Other evidences of unbelief are previously mentioned; then it goes on, "Afterwards as they lay at table he was manifested to the eleven, and reproached them with their unbelief and hardness of heart". These persons were favoured more than any others and this is the way the Lord had to deal with them; and it is for us to enquire
{317}
in the present day as to whether we have faith. If we are attempting to serve we must be on the watch for this; He reproached them "because they had not believed those who had seen him risen". The Lord goes on to say, "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation. He that believes" (that is, faith is stressed in this gospel peculiarly) "and is baptised shall be saved, and he that disbelieves shall be condemned. And these signs shall follow those that have believed: in my name they shall cast out demons; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they should drink any deadly thing it shall not injure them; they shall lay hands upon the infirm, and they shall be well". That is the position in Mark and surely it has a voice. Elijah believed; he must have had experience with God, training in the school of God, although it is not stated. James tells us hundreds of years later that he prayed and God answered him.
A.M. So you would say if we have faith we can be on this line?
J.T. Yes. Without faith it is impossible to please God. That applies to the whole faith period which began when the Lord Jesus went up and the heavens received Him. That is the time we are in now. It is a waiting period, a provisional period, but it is the church period, and great things are being done and being done this very day.
A.M. Would you say certain things are fixed, the state of certain persons is fixed by the Lord? Paul says he prayed three times but the Lord said, "My grace is sufficient for thee".
J.T. That is right. If a man is filthy, let him be filthy still. We get that statement and others like it in the book of Revelation. If our gospel be hid, Paul says, it is hid to those that are lost, and that is fixed, too.
{318}
G.McP. "As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand": does this indicate there is something of moral worth in Elijah in that he can stand before God, as linking up with @Luke 9, Peter James and John with the Lord on the mount?
J.T. "Before whom I stand" would mean that Elijah is in the position of a servant, one standing before Jehovah. It would be for Jehovah to send him. "Before whom I stand" alludes to the attitude of service, but the service can only be taken up by divine appointment.
A.B. At the end of the previous chapter the fulfilment of the prophecy of Joshua is presented in a historical way; but the name of Elijah means 'whose God is Jehovah'; he has a present link with God even though there is a historical side, too.
J.T. Quite so, he has a present link. It is not 'whose God was', it is "whose God is"; so in his prayer at the end of the chapter it says, "And he ... cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, *my God*". His name involves "whose God is Jehovah", and Elijah is claiming that and God owns it. So it says, "And Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into him again, and he lived". Elijah had prayed for the soul to come back, and Jehovah uses the same word to show how God moves with us in our prayers and exercises.
J.T.Jr. Do you think Elijah was in a sense outside the regular service of the prophets in Israel? He seems to be something special over against the prophets that were under Obadiah, that Obadiah preserved. Was he distinctive over against what might assume to have priority?
J.T. I think so, and not only that, but he was beyond the range of Jezebel. He, alas! failed in general as to that, but he really was beyond the range of Jezebel. Obadiah speaks of the prophets he had hidden, fifty in a cave. He takes pains to tell
{319}
Elijah that he did that and that he fed them with bread and water. But I think God is finding in this prophet a man who is outside the range of Jezebel, and God is saying today that His prophets, His ministry, are outside her range. There was a time when it was not so; the Middle Ages were marked by Jezebel's power and the ministry was restricted, almost hidden, almost blotted out, you might say. But God has come in and taken it out of the range of Jezebel. Of course in England after the Reformation there was a certain attempt to restrict ministry, and even later, but God has taken it out of the range of that. Prophetic ministry is now free and I think it is very wonderful that God has brought it about. The Atlantic Charter makes room for liberty for the Christian and for the Bible, and we ought to thank God for that.
C.A.M. Do you think the restoration of this son of the widow is typically one of the items in connection with the restoring of all things?
J.T. I think that is a good suggestion. The chapter really opens with the history of Elijah himself and has in mind how the restoration of all things will be effected; particularly in the resurrection, that the *souls* of persons come back. Someone said to me years ago -- discrediting this country, and with some justice -- 'It is a place where men have no souls and the birds do not sing'. It is a soulless condition of things, whereas Christianity involves souls.
C.A.M. I suppose that would be the Jericho idea of things, where from the eldest to the youngest they perish under a curse; but this is a marvellous revival.
J.T. I think what is set out in the history of Elijah in this chapter shows what God can do. It begins with the ravens and then takes up a woman. The ravens were used in the east, but this woman lived in the west, in a Canaanitish district. Jehovah says, "I have commanded a widow woman there to
{320}
maintain thee". As regards the ravens it says, "Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan. And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the torrent; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there". The torrent means that the water comes of itself. "And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the torrent". That is how God looked after him, by the ravens and the torrent. But now he has to go across the country to see how God can provide for him there. "And it came to pass after a while that the torrent dried up, for there had been no rain in the land". Of course we have to refer back to his prayer in that respect, how he has to suffer with the others, but God is showing him how He will continue to care for him. "And the word of Jehovah came to him saying, Arise, go to Zarephath, which is by Zidon, and abide there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". It is a very full word, "to maintain thee", and it is to be carried out by a person already under divine command. I think we are encouraged in this chapter, if in any way in God's service, to pray and to count on God even for details.
Ques. Does this bear on the need of household hospitality, especially as Paul's ministry comes in in the movements of the testimony? I had in mind that Paul requires households, lodgings and care, which would connect with what we had yesterday, love among the brethren over against the ravens.
J.T. Yes, especially in regard to Asia. I do not know whether the polygamy prevailing in the east may not be hindering the gospel; whether referring to Asia -- the continent generally -- the conditions Elijah found in the east may not allude to what has come about in the sufferings of humanity through the arrangement that disregards the marriage institution.
{321}
This woman is a widow. She lived in the west near Zidon, and she is under divine command. She has a son and she is industrious because Elijah finds her occupied as he reaches the town. It is said, "And he arose and went to Zarephath; and when he came to the entrance of the city, behold, a widow woman was there gathering sticks". She is the first one that he met apparently, and she is industriously occupied with work for herself and her son.
A.B.P. Why did she think she was about to die if she had been commanded to maintain the prophet?
J.T. She has to learn with the prophet. The ravens are not to learn from him nor does he influence the torrent, but he can by word and example help and serve this woman and her son. I think it is the family that is to be noticed, it is a family matter. The head is not there; he is dead, for she is a widow; but she is true to her responsibility which is most important as to households, that persons should be true to their responsibilities.
R.W.S. It puts a great responsibility upon our sisters with children whose husbands are now in military service.
J.T. Yes. God loves a person who takes up his responsibilities; and if He has ordered in His government that these increase, I am sure He is especially pleased with sisters who are taking up the burdens caused by their husbands¬ absence. This chapter would encourage them. In that way they are in widowhood with children to look after, but God is telling us that He helps them and looks after them. This woman is industrious, although more or less in unbelief; still she is doing something with her son in mind.
A.B.P. What light does the Lord throw on this in His word that "There were many widows in Israel ... and to none of them was Elias sent but to Sarepta" (@Luke 4:25,26)?
{322}
J.T. I think it is God's sovereign way of going beyond those who might assume to be in privilege. The same thing applies to Naaman. There were many lepers in Israel, but God went out to a man in Syria. I suppose we know more about the globe today than ever before, as to what God has down here, what rights He has. The thought is that we should be broadened, thinking not only of the nations but of *men* as such.
A.B. In the first instance it is creation connected with the raven and the brook, but in the second instance it is the widow who is commanded, and she has water which would be scarce in Israel at that time.
J.T. Yes, she has water, oil, and meal; and she not only has these things but she is keeping them where they should be kept, that is, in vessels. She is a careful person. We are very often careless in the way we hold our property whereas she has things in vessels.
A.B.P. Does this correspond to "a widow indeed" that Paul refers to in @1 Timothy 5:5?
J.T. Quite so. But notice she is very industrious in caring for her one son as well as for herself. She is in unbelief, she is gathering a few sticks to cook what she has and die, but the testimony requires that she shall live. She has to wait to see how it is to come about, but we can see that it does come about. It is a yearly matter, too.
C.A.M. What is mysterious enters into the chapter in that way. Often you do not know how things are going to work out but in due time God works them out in a marvellous way.
J.T. Quite so. She did not do any budgeting; what she had she was going to eat, and then die. She made no provision for a minute later, whereas there is a whole year provided for by God.
A.B.P. Would you say that such would not have
{323}
been the case if she had not come into touch with Elijah? Would it indicate how important the ministry is, that the saints may live and go forward?
J.T. She might have died, but faith is not using any 'ifs'. The light of God has come in. It is a question of faith, as we had in Mark, and that is the point with Elijah, a man of faith. Now he has come in touch with a widow and the truth develops through him; she and her house are provided for for a year. He says to her, "Fear not; go, do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first; and bring it to me; and afterwards make for thee and for thy son. For thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: The meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the oil in the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the face of the earth!" That is, it was a period that Elijah already had had to do with.
J.H-t. This woman tells Elijah what she is going to do and he does not correct her, but he brings in this idea of putting first things first: "Go, do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first".
J.T. That is very important to come to, but we ought to stress this point that we are on -- what she has and what she is doing in view of it. It is only a small thought, and she was thinking of dying immediately, but she had the things where they should be, in vessels. Then it is said, "The meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the oil in the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the face of the earth! And she went and did according to the word of Elijah; and she, and he, and her house, ate a whole year. The meal in the barrel did not waste, neither did the oil in the cruse fail, according to the word of Jehovah which he had spoken through Elijah". That is, now we are in the presence of the divine economy and what God is doing, and He is doing it through His selected vessel. Now the
{324}
woman comes under the word of the selected vessel and she is in it; they are all in it. It is an economy, a house, and she is called the mistress of it. All that is important as to the service of God.
J.R.H. Do you think she is receiving a prophet in the name of a prophet?
J.T. Well, she was commanded, of course. The divine command enters into it. @Matthew 10:41 says, "He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet", he is stressing the name of a prophet; and even the name of a disciple is important. Names are important if they have their origin in God.
J.R.H. I was thinking of the matter of hospitality in relation to the testimony.
J.T. Just so; it is a question at first of the ravens and the torrent, and now of a widow that God has selected Himself, who is under His command; and what she is to do is a full thought -- she is "to maintain" Elijah. She is to do it according to the divine command and to do it well; but then, she is helped to do it well and that is the principle of the divine economy. We are brought into it on the principle of faith and we learn to do things properly; as we come into the service of God let us learn to do things properly, carefully and industriously. Then we get dignity and we get help in the house itself; we read of the mistress and the son. Finally we see how she is learning: she says, "I know ... that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". That is, God has things according to divine appointment. Everything in the divine economy is according to appointment, it is not haphazard, and it is for us to come into it and see what regulates it.
A.B.P. Are these Philadelphian conditions, "hold fast what thou hast" (@Revelation 3:11)? There is no restitution of Ephesian conditions, but the meal is in the barrel and the oil is in the cruse. The whole idea is in
{325}
mind although there is only a small outward indication of what might be there.
J.T. "Thou hast a little", quite so. This woman had *something*.
C.N. Would it be right to regard this woman as a figure of the assembly, and that the prophetic word or ministry brings to light the restitution of all things? Is she a figure of the assembly which requires the prophetic word to bring to light the resources God has?
J.T. That is good. What has been remarked about Philadelphia is also very suggestive. As to these two prophets, it is remarkable how the characteristics of Elijah work out in Elisha. He has to do with a widow, too; he says to her, "what hast thou in the house?" (@2 Kings 4:2). She had a little and she had to borrow vessels, but this woman already had them. She had the cruse and the barrel. It is most important that we have things that correspond to these. So the Lord says, "Have ye anything here to eat?" (@Luke 24:41). Again, what had they when the five thousand were to be fed? It was just a little, but they had it. The Lord takes up what there is; it is what belongs to Him.
J.W.D. Would the mistress idea be a local thought?
J.T. I suppose so; it is not a term applied to the ruling of a kingdom. There are terms that have to be understood; here it is 'mistress' as corresponding to the word 'master', but restricted to the idea of the house.
J.W.D. It would seem to be limited to a household in a locality.
J.T. Yes; and I suppose we may look at the local assembly in some sense as a household that each has to do with; but here it is "the mistress of the house".
R.C. Does this woman indicate a repentant state
{326}
when she says, "I have not a cake"? She says what she has not; she owns her position, as suggestive of a true sense of what was in her.
J.T. Well, we have to wait for a later word as to repentance, that is, when she brings up the matter of sins; the question of sins must come up with her. She says in verse 18, "What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to me to call mine iniquity to remembrance, and to slay my son?" I am only speaking of that to show the order of the truth. The question of sins has to come up in these circumstances because we cannot evade the matter of our sins and how they are brought to remembrance, whether by sickness or by a prophetic word. She is affected morally now. Earlier it was a question of her property; she was an industrious person, keeping things properly; now she comes into the benefit of divine intervention. As God approaches us He carries things with Him that are needed, and He has His property here.
Ques. Would the prophetic word show us how to make a little cake? There seems to be more than just an ordinary suggestion of dressing a little meal and a little oil and eating.
J.T. Would that not bring in and enlarge the idea of the economy into which she is brought? Elijah alludes to her ability. When it was a question of Joseph selecting his five brothers to bring before Pharaoh, Pharaoh recognised them and raised the question of their ability, what they could do. He said he could use them. This woman has a little meal and oil; it is said, "a widow woman was there gathering sticks. And he called to her and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink". That does not require very much skill. "And she went to fetch it, and he called to her and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand. And she said, As Jehovah thy God
{327}
liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. And Elijah said to her, Fear not; go, do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first". It seems to me that we are reminded that God would use us according to what ability we may have. Not only have we material, but ability to use it or make it usable.
S.McC. It seems interesting that when the servant is in power the household institution or economy is brought into this matter of making a cake; but when the servant is in weakness and marked by breakdown, it is miraculously provided on the hot stones -- the cake and the water in chapter 19.
J.T. Very good; Elijah is in harder circumstances there. He is talking about dying. Where did he learn that? He is not simply thinking of dying by hunger, he asked God to take away his life. That is a poor situation. It seems to me we are all challenged in these Bible readings as to where we are. What have you in the house? If you are a Christian, what have you? You ought to be able to say to the Lord, Can you make it usable? The little maid in Naaman's house had information about a man in Israel. The world is being opened up to us today; it is remarkable what we hear of God's work around the globe these days. This little maid had the most precious knowledge the Syrians could have had at that particular time, knowledge that was needed, and she is very feeling about it. We are in a day of small things, a Philadelphian day, but we have a little strength; and whatever we have, can we not as belonging to an economy learn to use it? Let us learn to pray to God about the little we have and see if we cannot have a little more skill in using it. If this woman had not had some baking skill she could
{328}
hardly have answered to the prophet's request, "Make me thereof a little cake first".
J.T.Jr. It would give us a proper outlook, which is needed in our households and in our local assemblies. The woman says she is going to eat and die. That is a poor outlook for a Christian.
J.T. Quite so. 'Outlook' is a fine word. God is opening up such thoughts and enlarging them for us. When Paul was about to be taken in Damascus he was let down through a window. A basket was used to let him down, but in the window he had undoubtedly the suggestion of an outlook. I believe there is a great outlook now and God would have us to see "from afar off". People forget they are purged from their former sins; they cannot see afar off; they have not gone on with the truth. This poor woman could not see afar off, she saw only to death.
A.B.P. Is she in one sense taken out of Sardis conditions, "strengthen the things that remain which are about to die" (@Revelation 3:2), and placed in Philadelphian conditions?
J.T. Yes. Sardis conditions are very narrow, people cannot see much there. I believe Philadelphia corresponds with Ephesus. Hope revives in those conditions.
R.W.S. It is a long time for this man of God to be in one house, a whole year. Is there something in that for us?
J.T. It must have been very exercising and in a way irksome. When you go around in the Lord's service you have to face conditions in households where you cannot cultivate priestly skill to get the best they have! I think Elijah must have gone through serious exercise in this house for a whole year.
M.O. Why is it that in this instance the moral side comes into view last, whereas in @John 4 the Lord raises it first in regard to the woman?
J.T. Well, it was raised. He said to her, "Go,
{329}
call thy husband", and that brought out the truth as to her and she says, "I see that thou art a prophet". Then he *calls* her "Woman", as if she did not deserve that name before, she had degraded it. But this one was already called "a widow woman", she had not degraded the name. It is most important that families should be preserved; but at the same time there may be conditions inwardly that perhaps we have not found out, that we all have to find out. That is what God has in mind as to this woman's iniquity.
G.McP. Would the upper chamber suggest the Ephesian position?
J.T. Well, it may be moral elevation, it is called an 'upper chamber'. Elijah took the woman's son there; he must be revived in the conditions of the dispensation. If I am to be in the economy let me learn to be in it, and in the conditions that belong to it. Elisha had that in mind when he had to do with the Shunammite's son; he had in his room a little more comfort: "a table, and a seat, and a lamp-stand", but the Shunammite's boy was revived there. So we are to learn that the circumstances in which the light comes to us are those of reproach and suffering; let us learn that, even if we are children, but growing up in the light.
M.O. So Elijah says, "Give me thy son".
J.T. Quite so, he took him from his mother's bosom, away from the natural into *his* circumstances, into the upper chamber, or 'loft' as translated in the Authorised Version.
S.R.McC. What is the idea of stretching himself upon him three times?
J.T. It is the idea of identification. It would mean the Lord Jesus identifying Himself with us in manhood; His vicarious work is carried out as Man.
J.H-t. What would you say is the difference between the house and this loft? There are certain
{330}
questions arising among the brethren such as the matter of conscience; it is not to be decided in any locality or by any meeting. Would you say the light comes through prophetic ministry?
J.T. Yes. The whole point now is that the ministers, whether Christ or those He sends, are identified with the economy. If anything is to happen, a revival or a recovery from sickness, it is on those lines. So that here the sick son of the woman is taken out of the natural source of influence.
J.B. Would you say Dorcas in the Acts was taken out of natural conditions?
J.T. Quite so, that is, after she died. But here Elijah takes the boy out of his mother's bosom; she had to hand him over to Elijah because it is a question of God's representation in a servant. "And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the upper chamber where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed". It goes on to say he cried to Jehovah, he has to go back to prayer, and he says, "Jehovah, my God". He is in direct relation with God as His servant. "Hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again!" Notice that -- how he understands spirit, soul and body, as Mary, the Lord's mother, did. "And Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah" -- it is not the voice of the mother here, but of Elijah, God honouring His servant and using the word 'soul', the very word Elijah used -- "and the soul of the child came into him again, and he lived. And Elijah took the child, and brought him down from the upper chamber into the house, and delivered him to his mother; and Elijah said, See, thy son lives". So we can see what an exercise Elijah went through, and how in view of the restoration of all things life is brought back, the
{331}
principle of life from among the dead. The boy's soul is brought back. "And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers" (@Malachi 4:6).
F.C. It says, "Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah". Do you think the man's personality is in mind? As you say, it is not the voice of the mother. There is something that God can take account of in the man.
J.T. Quite so; it is a question of the mediatorial system; one Man, Christ Jesus. That all comes in here with the idea of soul. The Lord speaks of it as to Himself, "Now is my soul troubled" (@John 12:27).
J.W.D. Do you think the Lord's supper is largely a soul matter -- that part of what we are spiritually that involves spiritual feelings, sensibilities and affections?
J.T. I am sure that is so. We have already remarked about the soulless character of things in this country. People are callous and hard, fathers, mothers and children, too. This boy's soul is brought back to him, and doubtless he would now think more of his mother than ever before.
H.B. Would you bring in the principle here of "death works in us, but life in you" (@2 Corinthians 4:12)?
J.T. You mean death worked in Elijah? Just so. He went through the thing with God.
A.B. Is there a moral procedure here in this woman? First she is spoken of as "a widow woman", then she is called attention to as "the mistress"; but in relation to the recovery from death the Spirit of God says the child was delivered "to his mother". It is a mother and a son. In the last verse the widow says, "I know that thou art a man of God".
J.T. Yes, "and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". What a result in her! As sisters come to see the ones whom God is using and honour
{332}
them, God brings these things about. The chapter is to adjust the whole position, so that we have Elijah now capable of the great service that comes in later.
J.R.H. Is there a link between this woman's declaration and what the disciples said to the Lord, "thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God" (@John 6:68,69)?
J.T. They had come to that, "we have believed and known". They had arrived at that some time before, but here the answer is instantaneous: she says, "Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". The immediate result of this particular matter, this miracle of the child being revived and his soul coming back to him, is that the woman of the house *knows* things; she says, "Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". She comes into knowledge of this kind through experience. It is the kind of knowledge that stays with us and forms us.
{333}
THE PROPHETS (4)
@1 Kings 18:30 - 46; @1 Kings 19:9 - 21
J.T. These passages from the book before us are suggestive in their accounts of the building of the altar and of the anointing which was committed to Elijah; and at the same time in the announcement by Jehovah that He had reserved to Himself a remnant of seven thousand. It is thought that these scriptures looked at in relation to the whole section will help us as to the ministry of Elijah, how it accords with the passage in @Acts 3 that we considered in the first reading as to the restitution of all things. The Lord tells us in the passage read in @Matthew 17 that Elijah indeed comes and restores all things. So that the restitution of all things is in mind in this section, the purpose of God relative to Israel and the earth; whereas the early part of the next book will help us as to Elijah's ministry in relation to Christianity, because there it is a question of his going into heaven. In this section we have the altar, an altar built of twelve stones, all Israel being in mind; and then the anointing and the idea of a remnant. God, in view of the restoration of Israel, will begin with a remnant. The whole is in mind, but it begins with the remnant. It may be added that these two sections, the end of 1 Kings and the beginning of 2 Kings, may be regarded as overlapping spiritually. God's resumption of His relations with Israel has already begun in our minds, at least in the prophetic mind, by the Spirit. But while the resumption of relations with Israel is in mind it is actually the close of the assembly's history in the dispensation of the Spirit. So that we are to be intelligent, to consider these two thoughts as running in a certain sense collaterally.
{334}
First we should consider God's thoughts as to His ancient people and how the ministry of Elijah affects them on the principle of the restoration of all things. God has that in mind even now, and I believe the Spirit of God is laying it on our hearts, too. It is imminent and we are to be conversant with it and sympathetic with it, at the same time going on in our own dispensation with the service of God. There has been difficulty perhaps in the minds of some in the way the truth has been reviewed in these meetings, but I think the matter became clarified in the last reading. There we were out in the open, as it were, considering a great prophet and a great ministry in its bearing on ourselves. We ought to keep that in mind now and also what has been said as to the section contemplating the restitution of all things, which is now imminent. Hence the prominence given to the altar, not the brazen altar, but one made of twelve stones having the whole of Israel in mind, not simply the priesthood but the whole of Israel; and then the effect on the remnant which also applies to Israel. Collaterally we may look at the same things in relation to the assembly, which is now at the close of this dispensation, whereas the remnant of Israel is in the beginning of the next.
J.R.H. Jacob is brought into view here in the twelve stones spoken of: "according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob". What is the thought in that?
J.T. I suppose it is the identification of responsibility in Israel, that the Lord is to rule over the house of Jacob on the same line; the idea of twelve comes in with him, not with Abraham.
J.W.D. Do you link on the last half-week of Daniel with this thought of Elijah?
J.T. I think we should because his ministry according to the prophets and the Lord's own remarks would come in there. I should think the
{335}
closing three and a half days in @Revelation 11 show that there is a great ministry in that particular time in which the characteristics of Elijah's ministry appear.
R.W.S. It says he repaired the altar of Jehovah which was broken down. Does that allude in your mind to Christ being rejected by the Jews? Did that breakdown commence when Israel rejected Christ?
J.T. I think so. This is not a new movement, it is *reparation*, the idea of restoring all things; that is, the link is with the ancient dealings of God with Israel. Christianity is a wholly new thing. Israel is not a new thing, it is an old thing revived; so the repairing here would come in under Elijah's ministry.
J.H.E. Can we apply it to the assembly at Ephesus, "thou hast left thy first love" (@Revelation 2:4)? Would this be coming back to lovable conditions?
J.T. That is what is in mind, that things overlap in a certain sense. The work in Israel has not begun yet, it did, however, enter into the Christian dispensation according to Acts, and gradually disappeared. It is to be revived, but not formally taken up within the period of the Spirit; it will be taken up after the assembly is taken away. That is how the truth stands but we have it in our minds. We are like friends of God who are sympathetic with all He has in mind, like Abraham. The repairing of the altar is clearly the resumption of God's work in Israel; it is in keeping with Ezra when they set up the altar on its base because of the enemies. We find it in Ezekiel, too, indeed it is prominent there, whereas it is not so prominent in the beginning of Acts, where it is more what stands in relation to the Spirit, the positive side.
Ques. Does this thought of overlapping perhaps explain the confusion in the minds of many as to whether there is a half week or a whole week to be
{336}
fulfilled in the prophetic word? There is a good deal of difference of thought among prophetic scholars as to this. Would your remarks bear on that?
J.T. They bear on it in the sense of the great place the prophetic ministry of the Old Testament acquired at the beginning of the revival that we have had to do with now for one hundred years or more. Prophetic ministry had a great place then and the prophetic map opened up to the brethren with light as to God's mind about Israel and the earth. But there is really no suggestion beyond that, no suggestion of positive work or ministry in relation to God's earthly people at the end of this dispensation, as there was at the beginning of it. I think it entered into the beginning to show how patient God was with Israel. The repair of the altar is an allusion to the actual resumption of God's work with Israel because it alludes to the twelve tribes.
A.E.H. Is your suggestion that the moral features that will come to light in the remnant are to be found now among us through a ministry like Elijah's and that these ideas run concurrently with us in a moral and spiritual way?
J.T. Well, it is a question of how you would connect the moral line of things. I think what was just alluded to implies in itself that the thing has begun, that is, the place that the purpose of God regarding the earth and involving Israel acquired at the beginning of the present revival. It has begun in the sympathies of our hearts and in our intelligences, but I do not think we should go beyond that because the Spirit of God will not leave the assembly. The Lord is not yet free; He is not on His own throne yet, but on His Father's throne. He is occupied with the assembly, intimately occupied with it. I think the next reading will help us as to how Elijah's ministry comes into Christianity definitely.
J.W.D. Do you see any link between the overcomer
{337}
in Laodicea sitting on the Lord's throne and what you have here?
J.T. Well, He is about to sit on His own throne.
J.W.D. I was thinking that this sympathetic link means that we are already in a spiritual way moving with Him.
J.T. I think we are, we are with Him. "Ye are my friends" (@John 15:14), He said. Jehovah said Abraham was His friend and I think we are such in that sense, but whether there is anything beyond that, whether the Spirit in any sense has been diverted from the present dispensation is the question. But it is important that we should see the order of Elijah's ministry in the Scriptures before his ascension. We have to wait for his ascension in the next book and what flows out of it to see his connection with Christianity. In the meantime we are free to consider how God is coming in in Elijah in relation to His ancient people and how the altar is to be repaired.
H.B. In the first part of @Romans 11 Paul speaks about the remnant, and in the end he says, "all Israel shall be saved".
J.T. That is what I was thinking. God is telling Elijah before He takes him up the second time that He has a remnant on the principle of sovereignty. "I have left to myself", He says: that is how God's work will begin in relation to the earth in the future and, of course, we also are part of the remnant, but a remnant of the assembly. We might be a little confused unless we keep to the point -- God's relations with Israel about to be resumed and the repairing of the altar.
G.McP Does the apostle have this in mind when he speaks of the whole twelve tribes?
J.T. That is the present time: "our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night" (@Acts 26:7). That enters into the present dispensation. We have to understand that spiritually, because the Israel of
{338}
God is also alluded to spiritually at the present time. But we should keep our minds free and clear for the Israelitish part of the subject at the moment, that is, the earthly part, and Elijah's ministry in it.
J.T.Jr. Would the repairing of the altar go back as far as Noah's altar?
J.T. Well, the word, of course, might be linked with it, but I think the twelve tribes alluded to here are a clue to what is in mind. It is not simply the idea of an altar, but the idea of administration on the altar principle inclusive of all the tribes, so that it is really the house of Jacob that is in mind in the administrative side.
J.T.Jr. I was wondering if Noah's altar does not have the whole earth in view, and whether the repairing side might include the whole earth.
J.T. That is an important line of things, but it is in relation to the rest of mankind, not to a selection out of it. The altar here relates to the selection out of the rest, that is, the house of Jacob, meaning that it is God's choice; not humanity, but God's choice out of it.
R.W.S. Would what you are bringing before us about Israel bear upon our prayers, as of the assembly, in relation to what the Jews are going through now?
J.T. Well, you can see how our sympathies are aroused. I believe the brethren have felt it, and yet it is only anticipative of what is to come because there is no sign of any subjective work in them at all; and therefore God is not working at all except in a providential way. Here it is the altar of twelve stones relating to the twelve tribes of Israel, meaning that God is returning to them.
A.B. Does that enter into @Revelation 11 that you were referring to? There the temple was to be measured and the worshippers and the altar.
J.T. That is important to bring in here because I believe we are somewhat defective as to measurement.
{339}
Measurement has a great place in relation to the altar in Exodus and in Ezekiel. God is said to be the God of measure. He is said to be the God of many things, but that He should be the God of measure is remarkable. It ought to be a check on us as to what is current, because it is to be according to the measure of faith. If we are serving the Lord in any way, it is to be according to measure; so that each brother has his measure and the brethren ought to know that. If it is a small measure, the brethren ought not to put on him as much as if he had a large measure.
J.W.D. It has been said that all service should be on the model of the greatest.
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of the general idea. That is the great objective thought, and then there is what is actually true in the sense of the work of God; and that is where the need of measure comes in, how much there is in any person. If a brother is invited to serve on Saturday and the Lord's day, what is his measure? The brethren ought to have a measuring rule and he ought to have one, too. This is coming up now, and I think rightly, because we are not to be democratic or sentimental. The brethren are not all of the same value, not all have the same measure. God is the God of measure and we should not be without the means of measuring.
J.W.D. I notice you usually pray at the beginning of a fellowship meeting and everyone else who seeks to serve does the same thing. Is that right, or does measure enter into that?
J.T. There is no question of measuring as to a brother's prayer.
J.W.D. Is it right to copy any characteristic a brother may have in service?
J.T. I do not think so. There ought to be much mutual feeling in regard to prayer because prayer is clearly not a gift. We are speaking of measure now in regard to *ministry*.
{340}
J.W.D. I think it has been thought that the idea of measure is recognised, but that we ought to follow the form of the greatest expression of ministry. When you come to -- -- you break the bread and give a word of ministry, and now that is considered the normal form of service that every Levite, no matter what his measure, should take on.
J.T. That is not right. If you will pardon me for referring to myself, anything I do is largely because I feel free to do it and feel the brethren are expecting it. I would be glad to leave it for another, but I sense what the brethren expect. The breaking of bread is not a matter of gift; it may be a matter of spiritual power, but there is no reason why any local brother or any brother present should not give thanks for the emblems in the Lord's supper.
C.DeB. What is the thought of the apostle saying, "We stretch not ourselves beyond our measure" (@2 Corinthians 10:14)?
J.T. Well, he alludes in speaking to the Corinthians to a measure reaching unto them, meaning his presence in Corinth had had a great result. There was evidence of great spiritual ability in his work, but he did not take up another man's line of things. Our brother has in mind the brethren taking up another man's line of things and copying it. Paul did not do that. He had his own measure that God gave him and the Corinthians were the proof of his ability.
Ques. Where does this judgment of a brother's measure find expression? Is it a care meeting matter?
J.T. I think it ought to find expression in the intelligent, affectionate judgment of the brethren. Let us consult them, not their sentiments, because they may have preferences, but their calm, deliberate judgment before God of a brother's measure, his ministry. We should each have a judgment. God is the God of measure, and so we should be governed
{341}
by measure. Measuring must allude to what the Holy Spirit is doing or has done.
Ques. I am alluding to the way this would find expression. Would it be a matter for the care meeting, as to inviting a brother, for instance?
J.T. That might be where it is expressed collectively, but the care meeting ought to be the outcome of a deliberate judgment by the saints of what God is doing. That brings up much, because many have no idea at all of judging anything, but just of attending the meetings. It ought to be a question of what God is doing.
A.E.H. On the other side in regard to the brother invited, if he has an invitation to which he feels he is not equal, or that his measure does not reach so far, would you counsel him not to accept the invitation?
J.T. Well, you cannot speak of it in a cut and dried way because God may come in and help a brother beyond his expectations; but that would be exceptional. To measure a brother's ability you would have to bring in time, what has been *proved* in him.
A.E.H. Are we to look for some real, substantial, and concrete results in the service that will help to guide us in taking a brother's measure?
J.T. Quite so. That is what I was alluding to when Paul said he had a measure reaching unto the Corinthians; and then confirming that he says, "Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men" (@2 Corinthians 3:2). The letter that Paul had to commend him to the brethren was the work at Corinth. Anyone going to Corinth would say, It is Paul's work. So he says, See to yourselves, whether you are really converted at all, because if you are converted it is through me.
A.B. Would you say we have to be governed by the results as well?
J.T. The results are there at Corinth. There was
{342}
a great work at Corinth. Paul says, "Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men"; which means that he spoke well of them wherever he went.
J.T.Jr. Would Paul's judgment of a brother enter into what we are saying? For instance, "Take Mark, and bring him with thyself for he is serviceable to me" (@2 Timothy 4:11). That is after Mark failed, but we cannot hold that in our minds against a brother.
J.T. No, it is what he is now. Even Peter failed, and you might say, Look at that sermon at Jerusalem! It is only a few weeks since he denied the Lord. But Peter would say, I am not doing that now; and Paul would say the same thing as to Mark. Look at Peter's work -- three thousand persons affected! Who can question it? That is the way the divine measure comes out.
A.L. In regard to the measure of a brother in serving over a weekend, should that not be a two-fold exercise? Sometimes we see a brother going somewhere to serve about whom we perhaps have an exercise locally. Another meeting may not be conversant with what the brother is locally.
J.T. Well, they should be, and a good deal enters into it -- how he regards the brethren, how he speaks of them. "Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men". It was the place they had in the heart of Paul. If a brother speaks ill of the brethren his ministry is not much, because love for the brethren must go with the work of God.
R.C. We often hear that a brother has been used in another locality and the brethren were encouraged, so we invite the brother. Is that a true judgment?
J.T. It may be, because we have to go largely on testimony as to these matters. We have to believe what we hear if it is fairly well accredited. We can judge. We ought at least to have confidence in our brethren who tell us about a brother who serves;
{343}
but then there is the idea, too, of experience. If he has been among you, you have actual local evidence.
Ques. Would you leave room for a brother to write and say he wishes to come?
J.T. If he does, where are his credentials? Paul refers to credentials, "Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men". He can write anywhere; anyone being at Corinth could tell you about Paul's work. It is a most important matter because of the question of the work of God in a subjective sense, not what God has wrought in Christ, but what He is doing among the brethren.
Rem. Evidently there is a great lack of judgment among the brethren generally as to distinction of measure.
J.T. That is what I was remarking, that brethren do not stop to think whether they should measure at all, whether they should or should not invite. Most think of just having 'a good time'.
J.R.H. How far would you say the matter of being conversant with local need should enter into the selection and invitation of a brother?
J.T. It certainly should enter into it, as to whether the brother is capable of meeting local needs. Experience shows whether he is. But we have launched on a subject that was not intended and perhaps we can now leave it. The point here is the altar, not the measure of it, but the number of stones. In Exodus and Ezekiel the altar is measured, but in Ezra it is not a question of measure, it is just the altar and the place it occupied. It is on its base. Here it is the number of stones that Elijah used, meaning that he is now thinking of administration; not only of the service of God in the sense of offering, but administration in the number twelve. And so a most important line of truth comes up. "Elijah said to all the people, Draw near to me". God has wrought in a most significant way in Elijah. He is directed to show
{344}
himself to Ahab; his person is to be shown. Ahab is to meet him and see him and the result is that Elijah acquires great dominance over the king so that the king becomes subservient to him. At his demand the false prophets are brought together, and the people, and Elijah says, "Draw near to me. And all the people drew near to him". That is remarkable, that a brother is so attractive, that he has such power, that the people all come to him and he can affect them. Here is one man in the presence of the king of Israel and of those eight hundred and fifty prophets and of all the influence of Jezebel, and he says, "Draw near to me. And all the people drew near to him. And he repaired the altar of Jehovah which was broken down. And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of Jehovah came saying, Israel shall be thy name; and with the stones he built an altar in the name of Jehovah, and made a trench round about the altar, of the capacity of two measures of seed; and he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid it on the wood. And he said, Fill four pitchers with water, and pour it on the burnt-offering, and on the wood. And he said, Do it the second time. And they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time. And the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the trench also with water. And it came to pass at the time of the offering up of the oblation, that Elijah the prophet drew near, and said, Jehovah, God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things by thy word. Answer me, Jehovah, answer me, that this people may know that thou Jehovah art God, and that *thou* hast turned their heart back again. And the fire of Jehovah fell, and consumed the burnt-offering, and the wood, and
{345}
the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench. And all the people saw it, and they fell on their faces and said, Jehovah, he is God! Jehovah, he is God!" I think the Spirit of God would lay the significance of this scene upon our hearts, how the restoration of all things will come about. What a ministry will be effective there! The ministry which is accredited to Elijah according to Malachi.
J.B. "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come" (@Hebrews 13:7,8).. Would this passage suggest what you have said as to the power of attraction in Elijah? Then later you have the altar and the sacrifice which is pleasing to God.
J.T. Well, there is a connection there, clearly. However, what is to be noted here is the feeling that enters into this matter in one man, what God can do by one man. And so we understand how the times of the restoration of all things will come about; the Lord Himself will do it. God has appointed a day to do things by this Man whom He has ordained. Elijah has his own line of things. The twelve stones, and Elijah's appeal to Jehovah as the God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel and the place that Jehovah has with him -- that he has with Jehovah, too -- how all that is intended to affect us at this time! It is what God can do, and what He will do in a coming day and at any time, by one man.
A.E.H. There is some kind of stir in the camp of Israel now, we might say, some rabbis making public statements as to Jesus being the Messiah. Do you connect that with the beginning of the work of God, or is it merely a matter of providential circumstances forcing them to their knees?
J.T. You are alluding to providential matters. I
{346}
do not think this is a type of that, really. We may see something in them of what God may do providentially, but what is in mind here is the direct intervention of God in taking up the earthly side of the testimony. If we use it in regard to ourselves, it is to show what God can do through one man now.
A.E.H. We are not to look for anything like this until the assembly is gone. Our link with Israel is in a sympathetic way and to get the moral bearing of the truth on ourselves.
J.T. Quite so.
A.B. The dearth is still prevailing here. Elijah had to acknowledge that there was water with the widow and now he is here making a discovery of water during a great dearth in relation to his ministry. We might have been on the line that this use of water was a great waste, complaining as they did in @John 12, but there is a plentiful supply.
J.T. There is no inquiry here as to where the water is coming from. The torrent had dried up because there was no rain, but there is plenty of water here, as Elijah needs it. I think it is to remind us of the resources of God. That is what Elijah represents here, a man acting according to faith and God with him.
R.W.S. You alluded to the feelings and power of Elijah in this section. Will the restoration of all things be in this same feeling and powerful way?
J.T. That is just what is meant. "The spirit and power of Elijah" was to mark John the baptist, and the Lord says, "If ye will receive it, this is Elias, who is to come" (@Matthew 11:14). There is an 'if' there, but in Malachi it is stated that Elijah *is* to be sent.
J.H-t. Would the feeling expressed in @Psalm 115 link on with this? The psalmist speaks of idols having hands, ears, and feet, but there is no movement
{347}
or activity. But Jehovah feels for Israel; he says, "he is their help and their shield" (@Psalm 115:9).
J.T. Yes. The prophet is at his height here, and therefore it is a question of our getting instruction through this passage as to God's resumption of His operations with His ancient people in the future and the power by which all this will come about. Therefore we have to look for persons such as the two witnesses in @Revelation 11 and even John the baptist. It is what will be on earth, because it is not a heavenly matter here. We shall see Elijah from the heavenly point of view this afternoon, but this is not the heavenly side; it is the great prophet coming in, Elijah the Tishbite from Gilead, and exhibiting such power that he dominates the king and all the people, and whatever he says is done. The power of God is there and it is there on the principle of restoration.
J.R.H. Is it to express the true thought of the name 'Israel', power with God and men?
J.T. It is the restoration of all things that is suggested. It is the true restoration of Israel, nothing left out. The result is a wonderful success. Only God could give such success; and the millennium and what precedes it will be a divine success and overwhelming. We are to be ready for these things, we shall have part from the heavenly side. We shall not be onlookers; in fact, we shall have part in the rule of cities.
C.N. The apostle says in @Romans 9:27,28, "But Esaias cries concerning Israel, Should the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be saved: for he is bringing the matter to an end, and cutting it short in righteousness; because a cutting short of the matter will the Lord accomplish upon the earth". Would you help us as to how this matter is cut short?
J.T. The principle of cutting short is not stressed here because the book continues on with the patience
{348}
of God. Ahab, wicked though he is, God takes on, and gives him victories too, as a military man. So we have to allow for the patience of God in all these circumstances. God is always God. He began with patience toward Israel and it will come out in regard to Israel in the future, patience in regard to His intervention. But what we have to consider now is not what follows in the succeeding chapters and Elijah's power in that, but his power in this remarkable scene. What power there is in one man who comes out from a section that is in a way under reproach! He comes from Gilead beyond the Jordan; he is one of the inhabitants of that place, nothing more, called the Tishbite, and he says there shall be no rain except by my word. Then in chapter 18 he is to show himself to Ahab. "The word of Jehovah came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself to Ahab", as if the prophet's person should be in evidence. He is to show himself and in doing so he becomes dominant, so that the king gives way. The prophets and people are to be there and everything that is required by Elijah is supplied. All this is to remind us, as already said, what God can do with one man, and what He will do; what He has done in our own times, too, with one man. I am speaking of the servants that God raised up in the revival of a hundred years ago, and we are profiting from them now.
J.T.Jr. It will be a great current matter publicly when this man in the spirit and power of Elias comes to light on the earth. Men of the world are known through their exploits, but this name will eclipse all others.
J.T. So that the two witnesses in @Revelation 11 illustrate what it will be. They are slain but they revive and the spirit of life comes into them and they go into heaven.
G.McP. Do these conditions of Elijah's ministry just precede the millennium?
{349}
J.T. That is what we are saying. It is the introduction of God's resumption of His relations with His earthly people.
J.W.D. Will the last great war be against God and His Christ? It will be a very great and well-known issue as our brother suggests.
J.T. That is good. Present matters show that antichrist is not yet dominant. His spirit has asserted itself but he is not dominant. We are, of course, alluding to what is called the Atlantic Charter; it is not an anti-Christian charter, although it may work into that, but it is not that yet. The same thing is seen in these chapters: we have a wicked man and we have Jezebel who is an awful person; both are here and yet God is *using* Ahab and using him victoriously, too, for the sake of His people. Not only that but though Ahab becomes ultimately worse and worse and attempts to take away the inheritance of God and of His people (chapter 21:27), yet he humbles himself before Jehovah through the ministry of Elijah and God changes matters and mitigates his punishment. That is remarkable. There is a spirit abroad now that is of God and that is going on in spite of the wickedness; the prayers of the brethren support it, too. That is the way 1 Kings finishes. In the presence of Ahab and Jezebel we find the patience of God in regard to His people pending the next book when we find Elijah going up into heaven. That is, we are coming back to real Christianity as it was introduced by the incoming of the Spirit.
A.B. You referred to 'power' in @Revelation 11:3. According to the note it is 'efficacy' in relation to persons, apparently a matter of great influential power. I was thinking of how the chapter proceeds: "Come up here", is the great final note, "and they went up to the heaven in the cloud, and their enemies beheld them. And in that hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth of the city fell, and seven
{350}
thousand names of men were slain in the earthquake. And the remnant were filled with fear, and gave glory to the God of the heaven". It was a great victory.
J.T. Quite so; that is Elijah. The ministry of Elijah is in them and then they go up into heaven. We shall see that later. But what you say as to power should be noted, what one man can do. In this chapter Elijah is not yet taken up to heaven; he fails, alas, but before that we have the altar. That is, the official thing is set up, the mind of God is represented in the altar. That must be kept in mind and then the slaying of the false prophets, because what comes out in this section is the overthrow of idolatry in Israel. But Jezebel is not overthrown, that is a solemn thing. Jezebel is still at our doors in Christendom. The Lord says to Thyatira, "I have against thee that thou permittest the woman Jezebel". That is what Ahab is doing. He has a certain influence but he is not restraining her, and what we see here is that these things exist. Jezebel exists and Ahab exists, but the work of God goes on. So that Elijah goes to Carmel after telling Ahab that plenty of rain is coming. There is no reproof now, he goes to Carmel and we are told how the rain comes; it comes gradually but it comes through prayer. "Again he prayed" @James 5:18 says. That is a beautiful word -- the extension of the praying time. Let us keep on with it. God has given it a great place at the beginning and end of the week, a praying time. That is what comes out the second time he prayed -- the heavens gave rain.
T.W. He prayed in spite of the fact that God had said in the first verse, "I will send rain".
J.T. Quite so.
A.E.H. There are certain public occurrences that seem to give increasing prominence to Jezebel. Would not the prayer of Elijah fortify us so that we
{351}
should not be caught in Elijah's run-away spirit, trying to get away from Jezebel; but instead bringing God in? The meaning of his own name, "Whose God is Jehovah", should have fortified him, and the answer to his prayer should have further fortified him against giving way to these public things that give such prominence to Jezebel.
J.T. That is important to consider, and what comes to mind is that the law made nothing perfect. The prominence given to the failures of Old Testament saints and servants is striking. Elijah's failure is a very painful one, not a gross sinful condition, but the want of faith. That is because of the fear of Jezebel; she is the only person he feared, and that only at a particular time. Ahab told her what Elijah had done and in detail how he had slain all the prophets with the sword and Jezebel sent a message saying, "So do the gods to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time! And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongs to Judah, and left his servant there". Now she is bolder and bolder, that is what marks this system. There is no restraint at all, she is more and more brazen. What is she doing today? We are in the presence of it; she is at our doorstep, so to speak; Ahab is here, too, in his weakness, but she is the instrument of the devil. She is held in abeyance just now, but her time is coming quickly. So it is a question now of how the brethren are to meet all this. If Elijah had continued in his praying he would not have fled. Evidently he gave up his faith in God, but we learn from this to keep on praying. @Revelation 16:19 shows that it comes into God's mind to deal with her, and He puts it into the minds of the ten horns and of the beast to hate her and to eat her flesh and burn her with fire; chapter 17:16,17.
F.C. Do you think we should feel free to pray to
{352}
God that the power of Rome might be weakened and restrained at the moment?
J.T. I think so, not to be extreme, but to keep it in mind in prayer. See what is said: she comes into God's mind, as already noted in chapter 16:19, as if to say He had left her out of His mind for a time; but she is coming back into His mind to be dealt with finally and for ever.
J.R.H. I think you are acquainted with the fact that in Ontario we are greatly troubled with Jezebel features, I mean in such a thing as clerical domination in the matter of marriage. That is a Jezebel feature, I judge. Your remark as to continuance in prayer helps.
J.T. It seems to be the point with Elijah. He prayed, and he prayed again. It is the *continuance* of prayer and the heavens come in after the second prayer and give rain. Now it is in the presence of this that Jezebel's continuance is stressed; she is continuing and using her usual sagacity to do her will, and the word to Thyatira is, "thou permittest the woman Jezebel". That is what the Lord Jesus said in relation to the assembly, and the professing church is suffering it and indeed making much of it. But it behoves us, the few of us who are in the light of these things, to keep on praying. Praying 'again' would imply that the time for prayer is still open. So that what follows, as we have said, is that Ahab is used in a military sense successfully; but then he wants to lay hold of the inheritance of Naboth. Naboth is a typical person as representing those who have an inheritance, and Israel has an inheritance. The earth is disposed of by God in relation to Israel; in whatever the nations do she has her place. But then this thought enters into our own position, too -- we have an inheritance. What comes out here is that Jezebel becomes more and more wicked in this matter; she suborns men to lie publicly so as to get
{353}
Naboth destroyed. Will she have recourse to public lying again? The Middle Ages were marked by it.
J.W.D. Do you think we may have to face much more serious issues than we do now in regard to our public position of conscience in military service?
J.T. We may. It is significant that there is a certain sinister influence working in relation to the government of Canada and it is somewhat linked with the government of southern Ireland. It is very significant how that system influences those two spots, and it is to remind us that the praying time is still here and we are to keep on in it. It is a question of what God can do. God has brought out the truth of the Trinity, involving sonship, in a most remarkable way, and as understood works out in prayer.
R.W.S. Elijah's servant said as he looked at the heavens, "There is nothing". And Elijah said, "Go again seven times".
J.T. That is the idea, it is the continuance of the exercise; as Paul says, "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father" (@Ephesians 3:14).
J.R.H. You are setting this over against the idea of 'permitting'?
J.T. She is being suffered; the government of Canada is allowing the thing.
J.R.H. There is a danger of that among ourselves.
J.T. Quite so, there is a danger of tolerating that sort of thing. The High Church of England is of a piece with this, and God is going to have to say to the whole matter. But something else is current now and God is answering our prayers and is going to give deliverance for a little while. This book ends with the prolongation of grace in spite of Jezebel and Ahab.
Ques. In the summing up of this matter as to Jezebel and Ahab, while she urged him on Elijah's ministry is urging him in another way, a right way. Would this be a basis for us not to accept entirely
{354}
that Jezebel is to control the governing powers, but that we might urge them somewhat in the spirit and power of Elijah to do right; to grant us liberty of conscience, for instance?
J.T. Well, if we can effect it by prayer. Something has been done in Canada, no doubt, by presenting the facts to the Government as to the young men, but whatever relief comes is through prayer. And relief has come, so that Ahab is influenced in a way by Elijah, and Jehovah says, "Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me?" That is very striking and God prolongs or extends His patience and mercy towards the king. I think we ought to be encouraged to keep on during the acceptable time. Elijah prayed again, James says. Putting our faces between our knees is serious exercise; "For this reason I bow my knees", Paul says.
A.D. Would the apostle Peter in his first letter have this in mind? "But the end of all things is drawn nigh: be sober, therefore, and be watchful unto prayers" (@1 Peter 4:7). Do we need sobriety as well as the continuance in prayer?
J.T. No doubt. The point in @Revelation 18 is that "God has judged your judgment upon her". I understand that would mean the judgment of the brethren. God takes account of that and judges accordingly.
J.W.D. In addition to prayer would there not be some real public representation to the authorities at all times? If you are in a factory and the question of unionism comes up, you would stand against it, would you not?
J.T. The question is whether we have wisdom enough in each case to do it.
J.R.H. I believe you have touched a vital point in the matter of the judgment of the brethren. Have the brethren arrived at a judgment generally regarding it?
{355}
J.T. The idea of judgment is very little thought of among us and less exercised. Samson became thirsty after a great victory, but the water that he needed was supplied by God and it is added immediately that he judged Israel for twenty years (@Judges 15:18 - 20). We need the support of divine grace to judge, and not only to judge what is among us, but what is in Christendom generally.
{356}
THE PROPHETS (5)
@2 Kings 2:1 - 25
J.T. It is well to have the opening words of this chapter before us at the beginning of this meeting: "And it came to pass when Jehovah would take up Elijah into the heavens by a whirlwind", and so forth. The book is thus opened up to us with peculiar stress on the idea of ascension, carrying the thought of a transfer of the centre of operations to heaven. The idea of time is stressed, too, "when Jehovah would take up Elijah", showing that it is a fixed matter. Peculiar care and emphasis are used to impress us with the great fact of ascension and to indicate how the link with Elisha is maintained through his own insistence, as if we are reminded that great intentness is required for part in what is heavenly. Nothing is to be omitted so that gain should accrue to us in view of the continuance of an order of things other than that with which we have been engaged. It is not repairing what has been damaged in verse 20, but a new cruse -- something entirely new, so that undoubtedly the Christian order of things, this dispensation, is in mind.
A.E.H. The first verse of the book, in reference to the rebellion of Moab, is suggestive, in that when the centre of operations was on the earth there was opportunity for the principle of rebellion to come into evidence; but the centre of operations being transferred to heaven there is no possibility of failure. God has reached the moment He has looked forward to feelingly and earnestly, and He would take Elijah up to heaven.
J.T. A dislocated condition is indicated in chapter 1: Moab rebelled against Israel, and Ahaziah king of Israel fell down. In connection with his fall
{357}
the idea of idolatry is brought in and immediately judgment is meted out, yet in a modified way for the captain alluded to in verse 13 is spared: "And again he sent the captain of a third fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before Elijah, and besought him and said to him, Man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight. Behold, there came down fire from the heavens, and consumed the two captains of the former fifties with their fifties; but now, let my life be precious in thy sight. And the angel of Jehovah said to Elijah, Go down with him: be not afraid of him". The idea of mercy is continued, we might say, as a further evidence of grace in God's continued relations with His ancient people. The entrance into heaven is imminent, the judgment pending is modified; grace is still active and will be active, for it works out in Elisha.
R.W.S. Why does Elijah go with Elisha from Gilgal?
J.T. I suppose it would point to a lead given, for now Elijah must be in the lead in this way -- "the way", as it is called according to the formula in the Acts. "The way" refers to the fellowship in Christianity, and of course that must be worked out from Christ's way here, in following His steps. Christianity is Christ, of course, but Christ worked out here by the Spirit in the saints, so that Elijah gives a lead. It is said, "when Jehovah would take up Elijah into the heavens by a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal". It looks as if it is not now that Elisha is to be with Elijah, but Elijah would go with him and he would be with him in all these places. It would, as it were, give Elisha a great advantage in knowing how to act in these places, suggestive of localities in which the testimony had been set out and would be set out again. Elisha
{358}
is to understand how Elijah would be with him in these circumstances.
A.E.H. Is the principle of the supreme attractiveness of Christ perhaps wrapped up in it? No one is to be forced physically to go along this path. Elijah says to Elisha each time, "Abide here", as though the only thing that will lead you into this great heavenly current of things is the supreme attractiveness of Christ.
J.T. I think that is the idea. Christianity is a happy, free state of things; it is not a legal system such as Judaism had been, it is on the principle of attraction. The Lord said, "and I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (@John 12:32); so that it is on the principle of attraction. Yet the Lord is leading and going with us first, as if the suggestion is that we might learn how things are to be done.
A.B. Has Elijah in mind the instruction given earlier that Elisha is to be anointed as prophet in his stead?
J.T. Well, we have not dwelt much on that, but the matter of anointing is important. It is committed to Elijah. He is directed to anoint certain ones: Hazael as king of Syria, then Jehu, and then Elisha; but the liberty that belongs to the position is expressed in the fact that Elijah anoints Elisha first, not last. Hazael and Jehu would bring in judgment, but Elisha suggests grace, and the principle to be learned in the opening of 2 Kings is grace in liberty, not a legal system. The commandments must be adhered to, but there is the liberty in which Christ sets us free. In @Matthew 12 the Lord went through the cornfields and the disciples plucked the ears of corn; that was to give a lead.
A.B.P. Would the movement of Elisha as following, despite what Elijah said about his remaining, suggest the truth held in the souls of the saints as
{359}
loving it and as following instincts rather than mere commandment? Is it thereby typical of the present period, "ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free" (@John 8:32)? I thought there was a greater liberty suggested in Elisha's movements than as merely moving under regulation or doctrine.
J.T. I think that is what marks the introduction of this book. "And Elijah said to Elisha, Abide here, I pray thee; for Jehovah has sent me to Bethel". That is, Elijah is under orders, and what is Elisha going to do? He is just directed to abide there. Is it simply that he is to do what he is told, or is he free to move in love and by attraction? What comes out is that he is free to do that. "As Jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee!" Well, what is Elijah going to say? Nothing: "So they went down to Bethel". 'So' is to show that Elijah is thoroughly willing in the position, for although he says, "Abide here", when the reply is, "I will not leave thee", he accepts it. I believe that is the Christian position -- that the Lord is attractive, and He is intending to attract us and to bring out what the power of attraction is in Himself and in others. So it is a realm of general attraction and acceptance, a state of mutuality between Elijah and Elisha. The mutual side is stressed and yet all is perfect, there are no moral discrepancies. You might question Elisha's persistence but there are no moral discrepancies at all. It is delightful to Christ to have us move in this way.
J.T.Jr. Would the position of Christ and the apostles in @Acts 1 fit in? He charged them by the Holy Spirit and then He was taken up; He was with them until He was taken up.
J.T. I think so, and He presented Himself living to them; He would make Himself attractive. Then it is added that He was seen of them for forty days; He assembled with them and they made inquiries as to the restoration of the kingdom. He does not
{360}
answer that; what is in the Lord's mind is a new matter altogether, it is not that the kingdom will be governed by other principles. So He says it is a matter that has to be left with the Father, but that the Spirit is coming. Then He goes up, they beholding Him. The matter is all carefully arranged so that it is a scene of attraction, a scene of love; the Lord is attractive. Subsequent facts show that it was a scene of love and liberty, for they were able to act and act rightly.
J.T.Jr. Being "taken up" would involve Christ's attractiveness to heaven: "He was taken up".
J.T. Exactly, it is heaven's action. It is not ascension as it is from the standpoint of John's gospel, it is being taken up; so that it is heaven's matter now. Heaven must receive Him. And there is abundant latitude for love's way on earth.
J.H.E. The link in this setting is with heaven, is it not? Elisha says repeatedly, "As Jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth".
J.T. Quite so; it is almost a swearing attitude, if I might say that. He is so taken up with this thing that it must be so. God loves this, the power of love asserting itself, because it is exactly according to His mind.
M.B.F. Do we see spiritual growth in Elisha? When he was called he was doing something and left it, but now he is going to abide by the position for which he was called.
J.T. That is good. It directs us for the moment to the matter of the anointing of these three men that are mentioned in @1 Kings 19. It says in verse 19, "And he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was ploughing with twelve yokes before him, and he with the twelfth; and Elijah went over to him, and cast his mantle on him". I am alluding to this because it brings out that with which we are engaged, and shows the matter of
{361}
influence from above, the influence of Christ over us. "And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother". That is not out of place for the moment, but it comes up later. This matter of the young people kissing their father and mother is important; they do not do it much now; they expect all the love to flow from their fathers and mothers to them. "Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and I will follow thee". This will be in order when Elijah, or whoever acts like Elijah, comes back; there will be much then made of the fathers, but not here; Elijah is not making much of this. "And he said to him, Go back again; for what have I done to thee? And he returned back from him, and took the yoke of oxen, and killed them, and boiled their flesh with the implements of the oxen, and gave to the people, and they ate. And he arose and went after Elijah, and ministered to him". There is nothing more about a kiss for the father and the mother, but notice his magnanimous attitude in regard to the workmen. And then "he arose and went after Elijah, and ministered to him". We are told later that he poured water on the hands of Elijah instead of looking after his father and mother. As pouring water on Elijah he is a young brother looking after an elder, so that the beginning is thus seen; it is a model state of things, all under good influence.
R.W.S. Involving refinement, so that when the sons of the prophets speak about the obvious he says, "be silent!" Is there such a thing as spiritually understanding certain movements without a great deal of detail as to words? The dispensation involves refined feelings so that things do not have to be said in detail; spiritual influence has its own way of affecting a spiritual person.
J.T. Yes, and those in the new system are superior; you cannot tell them anything. They are in the
{362}
new system under the influence of Christ. Elisha says, "I also know it", he knew better than they. The sons of the prophets are at a distance, they do not represent "out and out" men: "And the sons of the prophets that were at Bethel came forth to Elisha, and said to him, Dost thou know that Jehovah will take away thy master from over thy head today? And he said, I also know it: be silent!" They are shut out, as it were.
A.E.H. Is there a sense in which we may be under the grace and power of the anointing with still a great deal of tugging at our hearts in connection with natural influences? Whereas the working out of the heavenly system involves that I am so free in spiritual influence that the tugging does not seem to hinder.
J.T. It is quite evident. It is a free system of things and yet it is an influence, but it is influence in the sense of authority. Elijah has a purpose; he takes the initiative in the first movement and this must give character to it all. The whole system must take on this feature. So that the sons of the prophets are young people who would talk at the table about this and that but they know only certain truths; they are not in the full secret, others know better.
Ques. Do you think they represent an element of unspirituality which always interferes with the development of spiritual thoughts?
J.T. I think that is the truth. Their fathers are of some distinction, not that some of the young men did not have distinction, too, but they are not characteristically men of originality. They take character from their fathers, not in the true sense of fatherly influence but because their fathers had distinction; for this reason they have distinction, and they profess to know. Elisha rebukes them really and says, "I also know it: be silent!" He knew in his heart that his master was being taken from him.
{363}
H.B. Would it be right to bring in @Acts 11 where Barnabas saw the grace of God and rejoiced and exhorted all with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord? Is there a similar principle there in the matter of purpose of heart?
J.T. Quite so; I think the lesson is fixity in the new system on the principle of attraction, you *must* be there. "I will not leave thee!" and Elijah accepts it.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the order of these places that are referred to? Elijah is moving to them under commandment or direction of Jehovah.
J.T. "Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal", that is the first point. They must have been there together. I believe each point is to be noted and it is our privilege to be in the position with Elijah, the Lord is granting us that favour. Although he says, I am going there, he does not ask Elisha to go. It first says Elijah went with *him* so there must have been some movement with Elisha; the word 'with' implies that movement is there, but Elijah is going, too, "Elijah went with Elisha". He has Elisha in mind in the movement, but then where did they start from? Whatever particular place this Gilgal is geographically, it has the idea of the Gilgal of @Joshua 5 and it would refer to where circumcision takes place in a genuine way. We have an example of it in Christ, that is typically Elijah. We learn what circumcision really means from Christ. We begin with Gilgal as Israel did when they entered the land. They began there, which implies the putting off of the body of the flesh in the circumcision of Christ. It really implies Colossians. But the advantage is that you see how it takes place in Elijah, as if he is there with us in each place; that is how the matter stands, he was in each of these places with Elisha. Hence Elisha has an immense advantage as to what these places mean and when he visits them
{364}
later he knows how to act in them. I believe it is to teach us how to be in localities and carry out assembly principles. This is not a country town, but a city, and Elijah and Elisha are together; but then Elisha is to be there later himself alone. So that when he comes to Bethel he knows how to behave because he has been there with Elijah. The apostle says to Timothy, "but if I delay, in order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house" (@1 Timothy 3:15). That is Bethel, of course, so this second point would be suggestive of Elisha learning how things are to be done in the house of God, learning by the way he acted there in Elijah's presence. We know from the book of Revelation that the Lord walks in the midst of the seven golden lamps; He comes to the localities in which the saints are and we have to learn how to act in our localities by what we see of the Lord in them.
J.W.D. How does He come?
J.T. It is a spiritual matter now, of course. @John 14 says, "I am coming to you". Chapter 20 tells us that He came to where the disciples were, they were in an upper room in Jerusalem and they would learn from Him. Luke gives us more as to what He did when He came in: He ate before them, He would teach us how to eat. They did not know how to eat the Lord's supper in Corinth. This is a very important detail, to know how to eat in localities. Their conduct was disgraceful at Corinth. If you apprehend the Lord as coming in you know what to do.
A.A.T. Is it right to think of the Lord's movements in the assembly in the same way in which we are thinking of Elijah in his movements?
J.T. That is what the lesson is, we are to know how Elijah acts. It is a well-known matter in heaven that he is going up there, and going in a certain way, too -- by a whirlwind. The Lord did not go up in a whirlwind, there is nothing about the wind there, so
{365}
that there is a difference in the dispensations; but the principle is that Elijah is going up and heaven knows it and is prepared for it. There are some places Elijah has in his mind to visit first and that is to bring out the heavenly way. Elisha is to remain here, and he is to know how to behave in these places.
J.T.Jr. Would the apostle in a sense take us to Colosse and show us how the saints behaved themselves there, what the condition was, their faith and love in the Spirit, in order that we might be affected?
J.T. Quite so. Paul says to them, "rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ" (@Colossians 2:5). That is what marked the Colossians, but still he has something to write to them in the way of adjustment. But he also writes a letter to Laodicea, and that letter was to be read at Colosse, and the one to the Colossians was to be read at Laodicea; as if the Lord would say, The behaviour I am looking for in Laodicea I am looking for among you. "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies", Paul says (@1 Corinthians 7:17); the conduct must agree. We are not to be congregationalists. This doing as we like in localities is not to be considered -- the heavenly way is to be universal, in all the assemblies.
F.C. Linked with knowing how to behave oneself in the house of God is "the mystery of piety" (@1 Timothy 3:16). Does that enter into this matter of mystery?
J.T. Quite so; we had that previously, the mystery that enters into the history of the heavenly saints. We have a record of those that have gone up there. For instance, there were those that arose and entered into the heavenly city after the Lord arose. You might have met them on the street, but they would not be looking in the shop windows, not spending much time there; nor would Phoebe take notice of the great stores in Rome. She was there in relation to the saints. As to these that entered into the holy city and appeared to many, if any one of us
{366}
had met them we should have seen that they were real men, but there would be a mystery about them. What happened has not been told us, but we can easily learn from other facts that they were taken up to heaven in some sense. They lodged there. This is a mysterious thing; they were not disembodied, they were in their bodies, they were risen. The blind man in @John 9 was sent to Siloam. How did he find the way if blind? Well, it is mysterious, but he found his way to the washing place. You could have met these persons in their bodies. What a sight it would have been! It was said of Lazarus that many came and believed on the Lord Jesus because of him, but he was raised in his flesh-and-blood condition. These persons were not in their bodies of flesh and blood; they were saints in the bodies in which they were raised out of their tombs, and they entered into the holy city and appeared unto many. What would you have seen in them if you had been in fellowship in Jerusalem? Who are these, you would have said, what is their conduct? I believe that is the way to get at these things. Elisha is to know from Elijah how to be in Bethel.
A.E.H. Is there any sense in which a visit to these places suggests the development of the knowledge of God that we would get in intimacy with Christ, and in His attractiveness to us? If Christ is attractive to us and we are near to Him we get the unfoldings of the knowledge of God from Him; we learn from Him and the full glory of the dispensation opens out to our souls.
J.T. Yes; it is learning how to be in any locality.
J.B. The last chapter of Luke speaks of the Lord leading the disciples out as far as Bethany. Would that be that they might know the conditions there?
J.T. The allusion is to *the place of love*. The Lord would honour Bethany, He had been there in the days of His flesh; it was the village of Mary, Martha,
{367}
and Lazarus. The Lord led the disciples there as He was about to ascend to heaven. We are to learn how to be in these places from Him. In @John 12 it says that "Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead". People would come then to see Lazarus, but now in @Luke 24 it is Christ Himself. He leads the disciples out as far as Bethany. I believe the love that had been in Bethany is what is in mind.
A.B.P. Would you say Paul discerned the way in which the Lord was Himself judicially among the saints at Corinth? He says, "On this account many are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep". He also says he will be in spirit with them in their assembly meeting for discipline (@1 Corinthians 5:4).
J.T. Quite so. The Lord appeared to Paul in Corinth. It is remarkable the details we have as to the work in Corinth, and surely the apostle was to be fortified for this work. The Lord appeared to him there and said. "Fear not ... I have much people in this city"; so that Paul would have that in his mind. The great thing was to find the people in the place. There is not much success in that now; there are many Christians in the cities around us, but the great point is to find them -- that they should be gathered together.
R.W.S. It would appear that Elisha is acquiring personality after the very first locality visited. In verse 4 his name is spoken by Elijah: he said to him, "Elisha, abide here".
J.T. It is the first time you get that. I think it is to bring out the idea of mutual feeling. The Lord would love to impart mutual feeling, to call us by name. Elijah says, "Elisha, abide here". One would like to have heard the Lord address a loved one by name; how He would speak to John, for
{368}
instance, calling him by name. We ought to learn to call one another by name, "Greet the friends by name" John says (@3 John 14). Of course we say Mr. So-and-so, but the names mean much spiritually, and no doubt Elisha would remember this and call to mind every detail of his loved master. He would not forget that he called him Elisha. He did not call him Elisha at the start, he just cast his mantle on him, a matter of influence and power; but now he calls him by name. The Lord "calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out" (@John 10:3).
A.B. It is very beautiful to think of Elisha entering into this whole matter. The sons of the prophets say. "Dost, thou know that Jehovah will take away thy master from over they head today?" He is not now 'master' to Elisha, he says, "My father, my father!" A great relationship is established there.
J.T. Quite so, and that is carried down in a later day; Joash uses the same words in chapter 13, applying them to Elisha himself. These terms of affectionate respect come down and apply in Christianity and we are to use them. It is a question of the inheritance. Now we have touched on the points visited and how Elisha was to learn in what he saw there; and then in verse 6 it says, "And Elijah said to him, Abide here, I pray thee; for Jehovah has sent me to the Jordan. And he said, As Jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee! And they two went on". It is worth while to notice that, not only the idea of mutual liberty and feeling, but how we go on. They two went on. We have it again in verse 8, "they two went over on dry ground". We have here a beautiful example of two; it is not mentioned at Jericho or Bethel, but when the Jordan comes into view we have the idea of the two going over on dry ground, that is, going over into resurrection. You might say the suggestion is that we are
{369}
raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies, learning to move together, to go up together.
A.B.P. Is that reached in the end of Luke, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise"?
J.T. Just so. The Lord went first.
A.B.P. I was thinking of the crossing of Jordan; although they did not cross together, it is the idea of being with Him. Is there something equivalent in casting the mantle on Elisha to anoint him? The mantle is very prominent in this section.
J.T. Quite so, that is another thing. But this thought of the two is most interesting, "And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither; and they two went over on dry ground". The mantle is seen here and it is seen later in the hands of Elisha; it is seen earlier in the hands of Elijah when he cast it on Elisha. It must be an allusion to an outer garment, a characteristic garment; but that garment is expressive of power, the power of God seen externally.
J.T.Jr. Is that side of things continued in the present dispensation, the side of power as here in the mantle?
J.T. That is the idea. It says, "Then he took hold of his own garments and rent them in two pieces. And he took up the mantle of Elijah which fell from him, and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan; and he took the mantle of Elijah which had fallen from him, and smote the waters, ... and they parted hither and thither, and Elisha went over". It would be a suggestion of a continuance of the power of Christ, as Paul said, "that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me" (@2 Corinthians 12:9). That power of Christ is used by the believer. Elijah uses the process of wrapping the mantle together, which would suggest
{370}
handling it as an instrument or the like. It is something that can be used against death.
Rem. It does not say that Elisha wrapped the mantle; it says that of Elijah.
J.T. Yes, Elijah used it divinely, as you might say. It is an external garment, a characteristic garment, but now used in a peculiar way so as to have force in it. It is a condensed idea and in this sense corresponds with the Jordan itself. It is an instrument evidently that faith, especially in Elisha, lays hold of and connects with God.
Ques. Would it allow for the distinctiveness of Christ in the way Elijah used it, the way he goes through the Jordan?
J.T. I think that is the thought, how he did it, how he went through; and Elisha was with him. Then there is the idea of displacement in Elisha's action, that I have not recourse to any power in myself to use in the service. He rends his own garment in two pieces and takes this one; and he uses it saying, "Where is Jehovah, the God of Elijah?"
A.E.H. Is it instructive that Elisha does not really ask for Elijah's mantle? He asks for a double portion of his spirit, but he gets the mantle also.
J.T. To have a double portion of Elijah's spirit was his own idea, so to speak. He learned by observation, his desire for this was the outcome of observation. He had seen how Elijah acted; as he poured water on his hands he had learned the spirit of Elijah, and he would see what there was to be dealt with that was contrary. So @Philippians 1:19 speaks of "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ"; it is a supply, the idea of quantity. I think Elisha learned to value it and would have the idea of quantity; the supply would be involved in the "double portion".
A.E.H. It is not that he desires to wield special
{371}
power, but the supreme desire is in relation to Christ. I should like to be like Him. And added to that is the power of the mantle. I wonder if that is the way it works out?
J.T. That is just the way it works out. He needed the power. Death was still there, but he had this garment. One does not rely on just anything -- "Then he took hold of his own garments and rent them in two pieces". I suppose he did not patch them up again, they were done with, as was the jawbone of the ass wielded by Samson. It was discarded. Here it was the giving up of a thing he had used for the sake of another thing, and this other thing was the mantle that he had seen used by Elisha.
A.B.P. He would be wholly "in the spirit and power of Elias".
J.T. That is the thought, he would not look for new instruments, he just took up what there was. He saw how the spirit of Elijah wrought, what success accompanied it in these different places. Now the Jordan has to be faced; it seems impossible, but it is not. Hence we have to notice the process, how the mantle was used; it is an instrument that can be used and it is used successfully on the return journey.
J.T.Jr. Does it enter in to the exercise of gift, for instance, into the way a brother serves in the gospel?
J.T. Yes. We learn from Christ and even from the brethren. Timothy learned from Paul and the Corinthians were to learn from Timothy; Paul says, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ", (@1 Corinthians 4:17). So the heritage that has come down from Christ having gone into heaven and the Spirit being here is immense, and I believe we have to connect it with the inheritance of Naboth. Jezebel took it away by murder, but still it is restored to us
{372}
by the truth of the Spirit, who is the earnest of the inheritance. We must not give up the inheritance that has come down to us.
A.B. The coming to light of Elisha is connected with the twelve yoke of oxen; in principle he learns @Matthew 11, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me". He was yoked with Elijah here, going through with him. I wondered if the movement side was involved in the places visited, but the spiritual side was connected with the mantle.
J.T. It is Elijah going up that is stressed in the introduction to 2 Kings, the idea of ascension, of going up to heaven. It is what is seen going up and the intentness that is required so that it shall be understood, and as understood it becomes a double portion. Elisha goes back over the Jordan on the principle on which Elijah went over, and then he visits some of the same places. How is it to be done? It is simply Elijah over again, Elisha and Elijah. So that Christianity takes on all these thoughts of impersonation. Surely it is morally and spiritually right to learn from the brethren; in due time we shall perhaps be original, we are not too wise to attempt to be original before we have learned the principle of action. It is just as well to learn from others.
H.B. Paul says, "have we not walked in the same spirit? Have we not in the same steps?" (@2 Corinthians 12:18).
J.T. Just so.
L.C.R. "Remember your leaders" (@Hebrews 13:7).
J.T. That is just what it is. It is not a matter of physically following, but morally you follow their ways. Paul said to the Corinthians, Learn from Timothy, "my ways as they are in Christ" (@1 Corinthians 4:17).
A.B. The mantle does not go up. Is there something important in that?
J.T. I think it is Christ as He was down here. According to John's epistle it is His spirit and ways
{373}
worked out down here. This matter of the power of Christ in death seems to be a great point reached on the road to heaven, how to acquire this power so that death is ours, as it were. "And the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho on the opposite side saw him, and they said, The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha". So the thing is established now; it is fixed. It is the idea of resurrection being reached in view of Christianity set up down here according to Colossians: "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ, seek the things which are above". Now we have the heavenly man observed; the sons of the prophets saw him and they knew enough to say, "The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha. And they came to meet him and bowed themselves to the ground before him, and said to him, Behold now, there are with thy servants fifty valiant men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master, lest perhaps the Spirit of Jehovah have taken him up, and cast him upon some mountain, or into some ravine". This "upon some mountain, or into some ravine" -- what a medley of darkness in these sons of the prophets! And yet they are able to say that Elisha has the spirit of Elijah. This is what we have to meet. These are sons of the prophets and they are said to be valiant men, too, fifty of them.
J.T.Jr. The sons of the prophets seem to be in every place except Gilgal.
J.T. Quite so, they did not start there. They are valiant men, mighty men, well read, no doubt, they can tell you of many things, but they have darkening influence and the sorrowful fact is that even the prophet Elisha comes under their influence. That is a sad thing; the most spiritual of us may come under their darkening influence.
A.B.P. "But seeing the boldness of Peter and John, and perceiving that they were unlettered and uninstructed men, they wondered; and they recognised
{374}
them that they were with Jesus" (@Acts 4:13). Would that be the same thought?
J.T. Well, I would say so, in general. They were with Jesus. Whether "with Jesus" there would have its full meaning in the ordinary mind is a question; I would think it was more outward. They would recognise that historically they had been with Jesus in the days of His flesh.
A.Ph. "And Joshua the son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him" (@Deuteronomy 34:9). Would that be something like the mantle?
J.T. Quite so. That is a formula that runs through Scripture, the laying on of hands. It is a question of identification, power communicated by that means, by complete identification. So Paul says to Timothy that he had received certain gifts by the laying on of his hands and of the hands of the presbytery. That the idea of physical touch enters into Christianity is a remarkable thing.
R.W.S. These sons of the prophets seem insistent: "And they pressed him till he was ashamed, and he said, Send". Is there something like that generally in the testimony today in connection with what is heavenly, even among those in fellowship? Would these sons of the prophets be nominally in fellowship?
J.T. I would say that, but they had a darkening influence and even the prophet himself comes under it. They are fifty valiant men but they have to use the word 'some', "some mountain ... some ravine". How like modern so-called science that is! Where is the truth of Christianity in such language? So the prophet has to say humbly, "Did I not say to you, Go not?" He should have been more definite. Surely there is something to learn there as to definiteness. If suggestions are offered that are not based on right principles, let us be more definite in rejecting them.
{375}
C.N. Would you say a word about this new cruse and the salt in connection with the healing of the waters?
J.T. That is the last point we have before us now. The expression 'new cruse' implies that it is not something already in use or repaired; it is a wholly new thing and it points to Christianity. So as to our own times, the principles must be right, in keeping with the *beginning*. The men of the city say, "Behold now, the situation of the city is good". Here it is not the sons of the prophets but the men of the city. They are a different set and perhaps commanding more respect -- local brethren, as we might say. They are likely to be good ones too, as beginning in this way: "the situation of the city is good, as my lord sees; but the water is bad, and the land is barren. And he said. Bring me a new cruse, and put salt in it. And they brought it to him. And he went forth to the source of the waters, and cast the salt in there, and said, Thus saith Jehovah: I have healed these waters: there shall not be from thence any more death or barrenness. And the waters were healed to this day, according to the saying of Elisha which he spoke". This seems a good opportunity to finish our series of readings with the suggestion of what is new, fresh, a new vessel. The salt is not new but the vessel in which it is contained is new. Much is made of the idea of vessels in this section. Here it is a new cruse with salt in it, and the salt is cast into the waters. We are reminded of what happened to the Lord; then of what happened to Jonah, he was cast into the sea; and the wood was cast into the Jordan; and here the salt is cast into the waters. It is the action on us of another, we are to be amenable for use. I think that is what may be learned, it is what happens to us by the will or judgment of *another*.
A.E.H. If ministry comes from any with an unjudged, disgruntled, irritated spirit, it means that
{376}
the water is bad and the land will be barren. So there is an essential need for all ministry to flow from a personally self-judged condition of things.
J.T. Quite so; and that you and I shall be available in this sense of casting things. The mantle is cast on Elisha: "And Elijah ... cast his mantle on him" (@1 King 19:19). That is, we are amenable to being treated in a certain way, with violence in a sense. It must be done and you must be amenable. You must not always be asserting your own will or always think you are right; you must admit of things being done that may irritate you.
J.T.Jr. The administration of this city would no doubt be called into question for having such water. You would have to get to the source of the trouble and that is what the prophet does; he goes to the *source* of the trouble.
J.T. It is imperative. The water is not good; there is no room for argument by anyone as to this fact. It is by universal consent that the water is not good; something must be done and done at once. We do not ask leave, so to speak. The men of the city could not do it; Elisha did it. If there is an Elisha, let him do it and we shall have results.
R.W.S. Is this city Jericho?
J.T. It would look so.
R.W.S. If that is so, and remembering that it was under a curse, the end now is that the waters are healed.
J.T. Or if we suppose that it is typically Jerusalem at the beginning of our dispensation, how beautiful it was in the eyes of the Jews! But what kind of water had they? What reading matter? What did the schools teach? What of the table talk? The truth is that the moral conditions were bad and it required violence to deal with them. Of course, what is in mind is local positions, that is what is in the section -- local positions. Christianity is set up in localities
{377}
represented in the seven assemblies which are in Asia. These seven assemblies need to be dealt with and the Lord is severe in some cases. So here severity is needed -- the salt is *cast* into the waters.
J.R.H. I have been impressed with the matter of holiness. Would that be salt?
J.T. Salt is more than that, it is what preserves or purifies. The truth that the Lord Jesus brought in would not stand without this principle in us -- having salt in ourselves and being at peace with one another. Of course, it can only be by the Spirit. Jerusalem is set up again, according to Galatians, as having more children than she that has a husband.
G.McP. Would you suggest that the salt is a living condition among the saints supplied by the ministry?
J.T. I think so; the only real preservative is life. Corruption can only be stayed by life.
Ques. Have we here an example of local judgment as referred to this morning? They discerned that this was the man who could meet the situation and help them.
J.T. Quite so, and how skilfully and perfectly it was done! It is a very fine passage to finish with. Let us begin over again, as it were. The Lord has been saying rather rough things to us and no one is exempt. There is something in it as to whether we are giving up the old garment and learning the way of love -- "a way of more surpassing excellence" (@1 Corinthians 12:31). I believe the Lord has been trying to show us this way of love.
{378}
THE KINGDOM MEETING PRESENT CONDITIONS
@Revelation 1:4 - 6; @Judges 15:17 - 20
I have in mind the thought of kingdom and I turned to Revelation because it speaks of the saints as made a kingdom, and I began to read with the fourth verse of this chapter because in it John addresses the seven assemblies. In his address he tells us that Christ has made us a kingdom and priests unto His God and Father. You will observe that John in his addresses to the seven assemblies speaks of Christ as having loved us. There is not a great deal said in this book of Revelation of Christ's love for us but it is spoken of in this paragraph, the first mark as to it that the Lord Jesus has washed us from our sins in His own blood and that He has loved us. It is a limited thought, that is, the persons involved are those addressed as the assemblies. The assembly is in mind, those who form it. The assembly itself is treated more accurately and pointedly and fully in the apostolic epistles, especially Paul's, and there he tells us that Christ loved the assembly and gave Himself for it. This statement in @Revelation 1 is not so full, not so feeling, not so suggestive of His own relation with the assembly, His own special relation with it. It is rather the saints as we are now in this very place and universally viewed as loved by the Lord, loved in divided conditions, alas, loved in defiling conditions, loved, we may say, in incongruous conditions, but nevertheless loved to the extent that we are washed from our sins and made a kingdom. These are two most important facts relative to us in these present circumstances, that is to say, as loved by Christ, washed from our sins in His own blood and then made a kingdom and then made priests to His God and Father.
{379}
Now we might have thought that if the prophet John were to touch on anything the Lord made, if he were speaking of the assembly he would speak of it as made by Him, or rather in His own language as built by Him. But here John is not saying that. Nevertheless, he is speaking to the assemblies what he has in mind and surely he has not forgotten that the assembly was built by Christ. The building of it stands in other relations than that of washing from our sins. It is in relation to revelation, not such as is seen in this book, the name of which is Revelation, but revelation by the Father to Peter. It is in that setting that it is built. That is to say, it is a final and primal matter. The assembly as in @Matthew 16 is a primary matter, one issuing forth in relation to the Father's revelation spoken of by Christ in that setting. It is a final matter, it is an eternal matter; and it is said to be Christ's assembly. It is God's, too, of course, but it is there said to be Christ's assembly. "My assembly", the Lord says. Now that is not mentioned here. This setting is not equal to it. Truths are seen in their own settings, an important thought in the Scriptures -- the settings in which things are found. The assembly is not viewed as built by Christ in this passage. Instead of that we have the statement that the Lord has made us something, not the final or permanent thought but the provisional one. You are needed on account of emergencies in the history of the assembly. There are many things attributed to the Lord in this provisional dispensation presented to us as each is peculiarly arising from His own thoughts and forethoughts, arising from His own wisdom. They are just provisional, but nevertheless they are provisions of love. What may last a year or a century of this kind will do its work, but it then comes to an end. There are many such things in the Scriptures. Samson's jawbone is not presented to us as anything
{380}
made exactly, but it was found and Samson's needy hand found it -- a jawbone, a fresh one. That is what the word signifies. It is a fresh jawbone but it was intended to be used, placed so a hand could take it and use it, but it is cast away. It is clear enough that it is not to be used again, but nevertheless it has done a wonderful work and has a place in spiritual poetry.
Now there are many such things that the Lord takes on. He is at the right hand of God, not yet on His own throne but on the Father's throne, and the Father's throne is a wide one, a great one, a divine one, but occupied provisionally. It was not made for the Son. It is the Father's throne, but it is serving a wonderful purpose just now. One's heart expands as one thinks of the Lord on such a throne. How far-reaching His activities are! How resultful! How He can go over seas, mountains, and rivers and do what He will but in His provisional position in which the Father's hand is seen. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3:35). It is a position of great, infinite latitude. Well, now He acts to meet emergencies. I do not speak exactly of improvised things but of provisional things, and I referred to the kingdom here and that it is made by us. At least we compose it. The Lord has made us a kingdom. Those that deal particularly with dispensations treat of divine plans, long-thought-out plans, spoken of old; and the Lord coming on the scene, we might say, not provisionally but officially. The gospels present Christ coming in officially. Hence Matthew is "the generation of Jesus Christ", not exactly that He was born of a certain family, but it is the generation of Jesus Christ. As Adam had a generation so has Christ. The gospels are on those lines, all on a wide, divine scheme, long-thought-out. Hence we have the kingdom of the heavens, the kingdom of God, the kingdom of the Father, but here
{381}
we have the Lord through John speaking of saints, ourselves, those who form the seven assemblies which means those who are in responsible bodies on earth and that they are made a kingdom.
I hope I make clear, dear brethren, what is in mind and how even if it be an improvised thing, which I do not call it, it is One meeting an emergency. I do not conceive that the Lord has made us a kingdom with a view to our eternal condition. It is a provisional thing and arising from conditions, so that wherever the brethren are abstractly they have means of meeting lawlessness in themselves. They have means of putting things in order, of naming things, and placing each in its place. So the Lord Himself is operating in the midst of the brethren; He is not operating here in the kingdom, not viewing them as a kingdom, but themselves. He is seen in this chapter in the midst of the seven golden lamps. Now John is introduced to us in this first chapter, and we have to follow what he has to say. He will lead us in the way of the Apocalypse. He is not the apostle John here, but the prophet John, and he has all the features of a prophet. He is not in hairy garments or a leather girdle although they are features of a prophet. John is without these features. He is, however, here as the one that the Lord selected to bring into the secret of the Apocalypse, "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place; and he signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John, who testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw". That is to say, John comes into this as a reliable, loved man. The existence of the Apocalypse would be an impossibility morally without love, not only love in Christ but love in John. There was love in John and John was loved so that the Apocalypse has become a possibility, a great instrument for the illumination of
{382}
the saints, indeed, in view of the last days and in view of the coming days in which, as we have already seen, Elijah will have his part, and also the ministry of a man like John the baptist. Persons impersonating him will be active in the days contemplated in the Apocalypse. The word is 'revelation' really, but it is an unveiling of things that have been hidden, that no human skill or ability or research can meet. It is something that is divinely hidden and what is divinely hidden cannot be exposed. The Apocalypse is something unveiled and John is in the very midst of the thing, in the very forefront, on the title page, one who was loved by the Lord Jesus Christ and who immediately tells us of the Lord Jesus as our great Lover. It is not an Ephesian feature, but He has washed us from our sins in His own blood and consequent on that made us provisionally a kingdom; as if He were to say to us at any given place or any given time: I know you have the fundamentals, I know you have the principles, I know you have the Scriptures, and I know you read them. I know you have the Bible readings, the ministry meetings, but what you are lacking in is that you have not got the kingdom. You are not a kingdom, and things are not attended to. Lawlessness has become more or less rampant. The Lord would say that to us, and in order to meet this He is setting you up authoritatively as a kingdom. How long it will last is not stated, but the thing is existing. It is constituted as a provisional thing to meet an emergency. The Lord is saying to us at the very outset, I am giving you My bondman John whom I have long known and loved, whom the Spirit has called or designated "the disciple whom Jesus loved". I have called him into this. I have not given up the great platform on which I began the great official features of My ministry in the gospels. I have employed him to write the gospel, but I am introducing him here. There is
{383}
no gospel like it. I have employed Mark to write a gospel; I have employed Luke and Matthew -- all these great books have in mind My official state, duties, and functions, but in the meantime things have not gone well. That is what stands on the title page really of this book called the "Revelation of Jesus Christ". It was a revelation to Him. You say a revelation to Jesus? Yes. Of course, Jesus reveals Himself. He is divine; He is God; but He is also a servant. "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him". It is as if the Father is thoroughly with the Son in all His operations of love; "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". The Father is with the Son. In fact, He has translated all the loved ones into the kingdom of the Son of His love. That is a wonderful kingdom. I would say that is one of the things that stand. It is a love matter, a great matter, but a love matter in the sense of being a kingdom.
Now the Lord would speak in this way at any given time from the beginning of the failure of the assembly. He would say things are not just going right. There is much lawlessness; indeed, in this very Apocalypse he tells us in his message to Thyatira, "These things says the Son of God, he that has his eyes as a flame of fire" (@Revelation 2:18). He has good things to say to Thyatira. It is one of the seven assemblies in Asia. You say, why should Asia be singled out? It is not all the great continent of Asia, but a province of Asia. It is a question of sovereign selection. The Lord had gone far afield from Palestine. I have referred already to seas, rivers, mountains, and oceans. The Lord can go across them. He does it in love to visit the brethren, but He also has in mind the geographical position of the assemblies. I might say that that could be easily defined. The position of the assembly is pretty well limited; to go to China to find anything corresponding to it is very questionable. The Lord has not gone
{384}
into that area to lay His foundation plans, His beautifying, architectural plans. He has made His own selection. I am only touching on that to see the position that is in Asia. The assembly of Thyatira was in it and the Lord says to that assembly after saying all He could in favour of it, "I have against thee that thou permittest the woman Jezebel". Well, that opens up a wide history, and the Lord has His own way of opening up wide veins of history. He brings in Elijah. Elijah had to do with Jezebel, and Christ had to do with Jezebel, and so should we today. Jezebel hated Elijah and would have destroyed him from the earth, but God has raised up barriers against her. The word 'woman' in @Revelation 2:20 is really wife; that is to say, the wifely element in the local assembly. The woman having acquired the place of a wife really alludes to Ahab, Jezebel being his wife. The Lord is not saying anything to Ahab, not bringing so much against him. He had to do with Ahab as Jehovah. One remarkable thing in the history is that in spite of his wickedness and Jezebel's wickedness Jehovah used Ahab to give Him great military triumphs for the sake of Israel. But He did not use Jezebel. Never would He use Jezebel. So He says, "I have against thee that thou permittest the woman Jezebel", and then He tells them why. I am bringing all that in because of this matter of kingdom, that it requires the power of kingdom to deal with Jezebel and that power of kingdom was put in the hands of Jehu who did well in using it.
So, dear brethren, if this emergency has arisen, if there are any lawless activities in a universal sense or in a local sense, the Lord would say I will improvise something to meet this evil condition that has arisen. But He will use you. He will make you meet the thing; you do not have to invoke the authorities. He will put it into your own hands, and He will make
{385}
it official. @Matthew 18 may be introduced in this respect. The Lord contemplates a man who trespassed against his brother. He has to add the fifth part according to the law of Leviticus, but this new kingdom the Lord has improvised, so to speak, will not bring in a new law. It will use the old laws. They are not abnegated, not one jot or tittle, they will stand. But it is a question of where they stand. It is a question of who can handle them or enforce them, or have we to go by the board? Is there no power of enforcement? Certainly. The Lord says, I do not ask you to move into the Father's kingdom, or the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love, but what I am improvising now is as authoritative and effective as the first one, the kingdom of God, the kingdom of the heavens, the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love. And so we see @Matthew 18. You say, I am going to tear it out of the book. No, the book must stand. This whole book of the Apocalypse must stand. No one must tear any verse out of it. Woe be to any who does! His part will be taken out of the tree of life. So @Matthew 18 is inviolate. All the power of the kingdom is just put behind @Matthew 18 to meet this trespasser, to deal with him or how many there may be of them.
That trespasser may be a sister. I am not now bringing in the word 'Jezebel', but it is remarkable that it comes in in Thyatira and she is there as a wife. Single sisters are not intended to be dominant in the assembly. It was never in the divine intent that they should be dominant. There should be single sisters, of course, and the best of them are single, at least as far as my observation goes. The very best women that one has known have been single, and yet they are not all to be single. In fact, they are enjoined to marry under certain circumstances. I am now speaking of the possibility of trespass and how it is to be met where you have, maybe, single sisters.
{386}
I am only using the word 'sisters'. Paul uses it and he speaks to young men, too, in view of marriage. They are to marry sisters, not women, but sisters. No others. That is to say, they are to function as sisters first, to learn chastity, to be chaste virgins to Christ. That is all that is in mind as to the marital matter. The first point as to a sister is how she has been in her sisterhood, whether she can get on singly and function in that way. The husbands will come for such, that is, if they are divinely ordered and directed by God. If they are divinely ordered and controlled, they will come that way as they did of old. The family of Abraham went a long way to get a wife, but they went under divine direction. The result was satisfactory according to God. We need the part of the chapter that deals with trespass. The chapter includes, in the phraseology of it, severity. The man is going to be dealt with. Trespass is not going to be trifled with whether it be a brother or a sister but where there is trespass in this sense it will arise from persons, from sisters who have distinguished husbands. The more distinguished my husband is, if I am unspiritual, the more likely I am to say things that I have no licence to say at all. I am sheltering under the distinction of my husband, under the place he has. That is the reason I brought in Thyatira. Lydia came from there. How different she is from Jezebel. Jezebel is said to be there, too. Would she have anything to do with her? No, I am certain she would not. Lydia was one whose heart the Lord opened. He had the means of opening her heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul. So we have a wonderful sister, and presently a wonderful brother in Philippi. I will place Philippi over against Thyatira. Lydia was in Thyatira, but she is now in Philippi and she had a house. There is no reference to a husband at all with her, but she had a house. It does not say she had a family; it is a house, and
{387}
she opened that house to the apostle Paul and his company.
Now these occasions that we are in tonight include a sort of youthful department. That department functions or operates after dark, so to speak. It is a young people's department and I am not so sure there is much in it. I am afraid of it. The older sisters and older brothers are not essential to it in the eyes and judgment of the leaders of it. What there is of God nominally to which experience is not essential is to be watched. Now I am moving from place to place without making any effort to regularity, but it is a question of putting the truth before the brethren. Lydia was no trespasser, but she was a householder. Nor was there any idea of her house being open especially to young people. It is open to Paul and his company, those who were working with him.
Now coming back to Thyatira and to verse 6 of our chapter, "made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father", the Lord would say I have constituted you. I am referring now to any opposition of the Lord coming into a local position with His eyes as a flame of fire or maybe with dove's eyes, but He is coming in anyway as with liberty to come. He may come in with eyes as a flame of fire, and He would say I am not going to stay. Although He is on His Father's throne, He is not on His own throne, nor has He judged the world yet, nor bringing in everlasting righteousness yet, but He is doing much and among them are dealings with trespasses that require law and require us. These great things are still ahead. They are still pending, but He is doing much and among them are the dealings with trespasses. They require law and a court-house and a police force. That is @Matthew 18. So the Lord says, I am here today. It may come out in the ministry meeting, the Bible reading, address, or the gospel. The Lord may say, things are not just as I wish them and I
{388}
am going to give you authority, to constitute you officially to deal with things that are not right. He has made us a kingdom, but not only that, He has made us priests; if we attempt to exercise kingdom without the power of a priest we will make a mess of it and judgment will fall to the ground. That is why I read in Judges. I brought Samson in because he accomplished a great victory with a jawbone of an ass, but the jawbone is cast away. You do not find it is future armoury; it is cast away. When he finished speaking, he began to be thirsty. If I sit on the bench thirsty, I will not render right judgment. I will put the laws in the wrong places, and so it is said that Samson asked God about the thirst. He said I am going to die. He had a true judgment of his state in spite of his great victory -- a thousand men slain with the jawbone of an ass. God stood by His servant, and He will in these critical times where judgment and eldership is necessary. God would stand by us. God would say to elders, if there are any in a gathering and I hope there are, you will get thirsty. You may accomplish great things, give good addresses, take long meetings, get good recommendations, but then you may be thirsty and your successes will stop. They will come to an end. You do not go to any more ministry meetings or give any more addresses until your thirst is slackened. God is God and will never forsake His servants. He clave the hollow place that is in Lehi and the water came forth for Samson. It does not say he smote it. We have the smiting of the rock in Exodus by divine direction, by the rod of Aaron, a most solemn and official matter; God Himself is there to see it done. He says I will be there with you when the rock is smitten, but now God clave the rock in Lehi and the water was there. It was God providing for the thirst that had arisen in his victorious servant. Victory would soon die without the water, and so I close with the question
{389}
of the Spirit. I have touched on many points, but the necessary touch is to make the address have a point to it, and the water is necessary to constitute the servant to do something needed again. There are no more thousands of Philistines to be slain; there are, but it is not now given to do that. He is going to do it later in another way, but what is needed is the great thing that God had invested Samson with -- twenty years of judgment. He judged Israel twenty years. That is brought in twice in the history, and it is brought in in this chapter where he was thirsty and is given drink by God. What an affecting thing that God did it! How did He cleave the rock of Lehi? It is said to be hollow and you might say that is easier than a solid. Nevertheless, it had to be done and God did it, and the water was just there as it was in @Exodus 17. God did it. You may say it was easier than what Moses did; it had to be done but God did it, not only to meet this difficulty, but that His servant might continue to judge. That is what is needed -- to judge things in our houses that are not right, and God will be with us and enable us to do it so that it is a finished matter. The people of Israel cannot say just what they like. God is against that. So it is that God has provided for the thirst and we have a judge from that time on. He judged Israel for twenty years. In a certain sense I would say it was greater than the slaying of the thousand men to have a man day in and day out judging Israel, and whatever he finds wrong in his house he will say it is wrong and deal with it. So it is in a thousand things that have happened. The Lord has inaugurated in a locality, in a man's house, the idea of kingdom. It is operative, and so judgment goes on for twenty years or however many years remained of the twenty after this matter of Lehi.
So it is that I have connected Judges with the passage in Revelation. The Lord brings in such
{390}
conditions so that things are not allowed to go on unsettled, unfinished, so that we shall never hear of them again. Finished matters -- that is Christianity. The Lord says, "I have completed the work which thou gavest me that I should do it" (@John 17:4). Matters have to be not only settled but finished. They will come out in the millennium and the eternal state of things. Things will not only be settled but finished for ever. May God bless the word.
{391}
*Pages* 391 - 470 -- "*Righteousness*". *Readings at Minneapolis*, 1943. (Volume 161).
RIGHTEOUSNESS (1)
@Genesis 4:3 - 11; @1 John 3:11,12
J.T. I am thinking of *righteousness* as set out in Abel, Noah and Abraham. We might look at Abel this morning. The thoughts of righteousness and unrighteousness appearing so early, not formally between God and men but between two brethren, open up a wide range of enquiry. It is found throughout the Scriptures and so has a great place among the people of God, especially in John's first epistle. I thought that we might perhaps look into this subject on two occasions as linked with Abel, and then look at Noah for the third, and at Abraham for the two following ones. These three men are seen outstandingly in relation to this subject.
Ques. With the three men mentioned would the outstanding points be: with Abel, his *works* were righteous; with Noah, he was a *preacher* of righteousness; and with Abraham he is viewed as the *righteous one*?
J.T. That is what is in mind. In Abraham we get righteousness by *faith*, which we shall come to as we proceed. With Abel and Noah, it is practical righteousness. Noah, as we have noted, preached righteousness.
H.H. How would you define the word 'righteousness'?
J.T. It is a question of what is *right*, whether on God's side or man's side or between brother and brother. The word is, of course, derived from the word 'right'. With God there are sovereign rights -- we have no such rights. Men have not and, of course,
{392}
they did not apply to Abel. But his *works* were righteous; he was practically righteous.
Ques. Does "in process of time" suggest a period of exercise with these two brothers?
J.T. Yes, "in process of time"; we cannot say just how long the time was. We cannot say how old Adam was when these two were born, though we do know how old he was when Seth was born. It is a considerable time clearly. It brought out something in Cain: "And in process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering to Jehovah. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of their fat". Well, the enquiry in mind is, What was the motive in Cain's movement? Why did the movement to bring something to God start with Cain? Evidently it did start with him. But John's comment by the Spirit would show that the movement was not right.
A.E.J.A. Would you say that both of these brothers seemed to have the sense in their souls that it was right to bring something to God?
J.T. Yes, but Cain was not governed by available light; whereas Abel was governed by the light God afforded. "At the end of days" -- as the note reads -- means that he was here for a purpose. It is the same idea with Enoch, he was kept down here for a purpose. He was the seventh from Adam and lived for a period necessary for a purpose, and that purpose was that he should become educated in the ways of God. Here the idea would be similar -- "the end of days" suggesting a period of time necessary for this development. Notice John's comment when he begins to speak about Cain; note the use of the word 'message': "For this is the message which ye have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another: not as Cain was of the wicked one, and slew his brother; and on account of what slew he him? because his works were wicked, and those of his
{393}
brother righteous" (@1 John 3:11,12). All this would mean that there is a history behind the actual incident of bringing the fruit of the ground; it is the idea of works and that they were wicked. It says Cain was wicked, he was of the wicked one: "not as Cain was of the wicked one, and slew his brother". "Of" would infer a development from the wicked one.
L.E.S. Would this verse in John link with the previous verse which speaks of the children of the devil? They are not righteous, they are "of the devil".
J.T. Yes. The idea of righteousness comes in in verse 7, "Children, let no man lead you astray; he that practises righteousness is righteous, even as *he* is righteous". The "he" there is John's way of using the pronoun without indicating whether the reference is to God as such or to Christ.
H.H. The thought of the end of days would suggest the exercises of such days in connection with divine interests on earth.
J.T. We might work it out that way. The result in the one man is the fruits of unrighteousness. Referring again to @1 John 3:7. "he that practises righteousness is righteous"; and in verse 4, "Every one that practices sin practices also lawlessness; and sin is lawlessness". The Authorised Version reads, "Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law; for sin is the transgression of the law". That is not the truth. It is not the transgression of *the* law, but sin *is lawlessness*.
H.H. 'Practise' is the positive idea -- you are *doing* it -- practising righteousness.
J.T. So that "Every one that practises sin practises also lawlessness; and sin is lawlessness". Then to go back to @1 John 2:29, "If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him". That is progenitive -- what comes from God, begotten of God;
{394}
the "he" there is clearly God, whereas the "he" in verse 7 may be Christ or God. It is well to look at these passages, they show what sides these men were on. What side was Cain on? The question of righteousness was already working in the world as also the question of unrighteousness and lawlessness. Cain was attached to the lawless. John says, "not as Cain was of the wicked one, and slew his brother". We get the key to the whole matter by John's remarks that Cain was of the wicked one. So the thing is traced to its source.
Ques. Would Abel be the positive line linked with God's dispensation which is in faith and with those who have not gone in the way of Cain?
J.T. All this works out regarding what is current. It is a challenging thought. Wickedness, as David says, proceeds from the wicked, it has its origin; whereas Abel was of the righteous, which John's epistle develops as a characteristic idea.
D.R. Verse 10 brings in the thought of generation: "In this are manifest the children of God and the children of the devil. Whoever does not practise righteousness is not of God, and he who does not love his brother".
J.T. That is the way it works out from @1 John 2:29: "every one who practices righteousness is begotten of him"; and then in chapter 3:4, "Every one that practises sin practises also lawlessness; and sin is lawlessness". That is, we cannot escape. No one can escape who is sinful. But we also have this word: "Whoever has been begotten of God does not practise sin, because his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God" (verse 9). We have to accept that too. But then, "Whoever does not practise righteousness is not of God, and he who does not love his brother"; and then there is this "message" bringing in Cain and Abel.
L.E.S. The footnote is helpful in this connection
{395}
regarding verse 4; it reads, "To translate this 'sin is the transgression of the law', as in A.V., is wrong, and gives a false definition of sin, for sin was in the world and death as a consequence, before the giving of *the* law: see @Romans 5:13; chapter 7:13. The Greek reads 'sin is lawlessness', that is, the absence of the *principle* of law (not *the* law) or, in other words, of the control of God over the soul. I ought to have no will of my own, but be in obedience. The statement is reciprocal, and may be read 'lawlessness is sin'".
J.T. We get it in our subject. Cain was of the devil, of the lawless one; and then in contrast we have the children of God, which Christians are characteristically. They are born of God and do not sin. This has to be understood for it is an abstract thought.
Ques. Was Abel constituted righteous? @Romans 5:19 says, "For as indeed by the disobedience of the one man the many have been constituted sinners, so also by the obedience of the one the many will be constituted righteous".
J.T. Yes. We need a little patience to get the needed passages rightly as the basis of our subject. @Romans 5:12 - 19 says, "For this cause, even as by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death; and thus death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: (for until law sin was in the world; but sin is not put to account when there is no law; but death reigned from Adam until Moses, even upon those who had not sinned in the likeness of Adam's transgression, who is the figure of him to come. But shall not the act of favour be as the offence? For if by the offence of one the many have died, much rather has the grace of God, and the free gift in grace, which is by the one man Jesus Christ, abounded unto the many ... For if by the offence of the one death reigned by the one, much rather shall those who
{396}
receive the abundance of grace, and of the free gift of righteousness, reign in life by the one Jesus Christ:) so then as it was by one offence towards all men to condemnation, so by one righteousness towards all men for justification of life. For as indeed by the disobedience of the one man the many have been constituted sinners, so also by the obedience of the one the many will be constituted righteous". This is not sin as traced to the devil exactly; it is in Adam, the one sin of Adam affecting all that follow. Whereas John is saying that Cain was *of* the wicked one, not tracing the guilt back to his father but to the devil, showing that the devil had got in. So that it is not simply the government of God on Adam, but the thing called 'sin' is working out in unrighteousness in one who is *of* the devil.
Ques. Would it be right to say that the righteousness of @Romans 5 is on a judicial basis whereas that of John's first epistle is on the line of generation?
J.T. Exactly. Cain is spoken of in John as *of* the wicked one, the devil; not as 'son of Adam', but "*of* the wicked one". All this shows what the present situation is -- what sin is. Sin is lawlessness beginning with the devil.
H.H. There was sin in Satan before the garden of Eden, but "by one man sin entered into the world".
J.T. That is the difference -- that "one man" was Adam. But John makes it something anterior to Adam. This terrible thing we have to deal with is of the devil, of the wicked one.
L.E.S. In @Revelation 20:2 the devil is referred to under four names: "And he laid hold of the dragon, the ancient serpent who is the devil and Satan".
J.T. Yes, he is called "the ancient serpent" there. The names 'Satan' and 'devil' are attached to him later in the history of the truth. He is just the serpent here in Genesis -- one of the animals. And John calls him "the wicked one". John is reserved by the Lord
{397}
to work out certain moral things that we have to do with. He shows in his epistle how these things work out in ourselves.
Ques. I was wondering about this process of time, whether Cain did not learn from Abel what was required. Abel knew what to offer and probably Cain copied at least the idea of offering.
J.T. Cain is mentioned first. There was ample opportunity for him to get the divine thought; "In process of time" implies this. He assumed that *his* product would do for God. *We* have to deal with these matters; God is saying to us that this record is for us, that it is for us to have the whole knowledge of it. God put these things on record through Moses for us to look into, and to weigh over what transpired between these two brothers. Christendom is the terrible development of what we have here in Cain, and we have to do with it. Much blood is being shed. Abel's was the first blood shed and it is righteous blood. It *speaks*.
L.E.S. Have you in mind in pressing these matters home to us that we might go beneath the surface and get to the roots, to the true judgment of the matter?
J.T. That is what John tells us. He says (@1 John 2:18), "Little children, it is the last hour". It is a good thing to classify ourselves, "Little children" is ground most of us can take. "Little children, it is the last hour, and, according as ye have heard that antichrist comes" -- antichrist is what is *against Christ*; the devil against the spirit of Christ in Christians -- "even now there have come many antichrists, whence we know that it is the last hour. They went out from among us, but they were not of us". That is Christendom as it is. They went out to have a free hand. They showed themselves before the apostles were taken away -- "for if they had been of us, they would have surely remained with us, but that they might be made manifest that none are of
{398}
us. And *ye* have the unction from the holy one, and ye know all things" (verses 18 - 20). Notice there the Holy Spirit, especially as helping our *minds*. We have "the unction from the holy one", He arms us, as it were, to contend with all this. Then to go to verse 24: "As for *you* let that which ye have heard from the beginning abide in you: if what ye have heard from the beginning abides in you, *ye* also shall abide in the Son and in the Father. And this is the promise which *he* has promised us, life eternal. These things have I written to you concerning those who lead you astray: and *yourselves*, the unction which ye have received from him abides in you, and ye have not need that any one should teach you; but as the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true and is not a lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him" (verses 24 - 27). These are the weapons or armour that we have. The battle is on, so to speak, but it is against the children of the devil. The little children in verse 18, the third gradation of the family, are not to lose interest; they have the unction that they may understand. The young especially must look into these matters.
A.E.H. Chapter 4 speaks of the spirits. We are told to prove them.
J.T. To *prove* them -- that is what one thought. We are in the last days, it is the last hour. Christianity involves the last hour, which is a critical idea. It is not a year or a century. I think it involves a crisis.
H.H. What we are considering goes right through from Genesis to Revelation: good and evil are there -- righteousness and unrighteousness.
Rem. We get the wickedness of Cain with Joab; he slew a man more righteous than himself.
J.T. In the history of David you would expect to find Genesis working out. We have five books of Moses and we also have five books of the Psalms. You get the working out of righteousness in those five
{399}
books of Psalms written or collected by David; you get in this way things put to the test in David.
Rem. We get righteousness in Solomon's reign in that way.
J.T. It is the administration of it, but David had gone over the matter, he had judged it all. He says, Wickedness proceeds from the wicked. In his own family, in Absalom and Adonijah, wickedness manifested itself.
H.H. Have we not to face the question of righteousness in self-judgment in a practical and moral sense?
J.T. Yes. That is why David is allowed to become a model for us in practical righteousness and self-judgment, seen not so much in the chronological and historical books as in the Psalms. The testimony to righteousness is seen throughout the Scriptures.
H.H. David was a king set up by God Himself -- a man after His own heart, but this man broke down and as a consequence repentance is set out in him in a marked way. I have to judge myself so as to preclude unrighteousness.
J.T. So in the Psalms David works out practically what you get in Genesis -- the *roots* are thus laid bare. What is recorded is that we might learn, like David, to judge ourselves. Take the incident which is recorded in @2 Samuel 12: in the Psalms we get the real root of that.
L.E.S. The moral working out of the thing in David's soul provides a basis for peace. "But the fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for them that make peace", (@James 3:18).
J.T. Yes. Peace is worked out in Solomon. God kept Solomon right so that the full fruit of David administratively might be seen by us.
H.H. The working out of peace is seen in Solomon, the son of the man who judged himself of every evil thing.
J.T. In measure the truth seen in the first five
{400}
books of Moses is worked out in the five books of the Psalms in David; they are in a sense *his* contribution. @Psalm 51 is in the second book.
H.H. In @Psalm 51 God is waiting for the confession of the murder of the true Urijah; that is the ground on which Jerusalem will be saved. And the principle remains now -- self-judgment marks the righteousness expressed in the assembly.
J.T. That is why righteousness comes into Matthew's gospel so much. It is the assembly gospel, things are judged in the assembly. If a brother fails to hear the assembly there is no hope. This is the only way of peace when a troubler appears, the assembly requires that we deal with a brother who trespasses.
Ques. Why does David leave certain things to Solomon and tell him that he can deal with them as he is a wise man?
J.T. He knew that God would be with Solomon, who was a *sequence to himself*, as the assembly is the sequence to Christ. He was the righteous One down here and the assembly is righteous characteristically. In Matthew's gospel great prominence is given to righteousness.
Rem. In @Matthew 5 we get those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, and in @Matthew 3 the Lord says, "thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". Notice, *all* righteousness.
A.E.J.A. You mentioned that David's experiences were set down that we might get help. In @Psalm 51:13 he says, "I will teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall return unto thee".
J.T. He also says in that psalm, "My tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness". So @James 5:20 tells us, "he that brings back a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death and shall cover a multitude of sins". It is the business of the assembly to follow up sin and deal with it, because
{401}
we are in the last days and as remarked the assembly is, in a sense, to Christ what Solomon was to David.
D.R. In what is before us the Lord is tracing sin to its source; the blood of Abel is speaking to the present generation.
J.T. We get that also in @Luke 11:51, "From the blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharias"; and again in @Hebrews 11:4, "and by it, having died, he yet speaks". Well, have we knowledge of that speaking? It is the voice of Abel. It has, however, a second place, it is not so great a voice as Christ's blood. Christ's blood speaks *better* things. Nevertheless Abel's blood speaks; it speaks of judgment but Christ's blood speaks of forgiveness.
A.E.J.A. Is the thought here that there was light meted to these two brothers, Cain and Abel, and that it was not answered to in Cain, but it was in Abel? "By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained testimony of being righteous".
J.T. Yes. The righteousness of God is set out on the principle of faith to faith: "as God has dealt to each a measure of faith", (@Romans 12:3). This speaks of Christians. Cain is never viewed as having had faith.
A.E.J.A. Every true believer has *some*  measure of faith.
J.T. Yes. But it is not given to all. Faith comes by hearing and hearing by a report. Apparently Cain never gained that at all, he was of the wicked one. We have to accept this statement which John makes, "Not as Cain was of the wicked one", he *was* of him.
D.R. What bearing would the meaning of Abel's name have on all this?
J.T. Abel means breath, or vanity. This is obscure, but it may indicate growth in the knowledge of the parents. As to Seth it says, "and she bore a son, and called his name Seth". His name was given intelligently: it means appointed.
{402}
Rem. In the last words of David we have reference to the everlasting covenant, and he says his house is not so before God.
J.T. I think you see what is subjectively wrought out there. "Although my house be not so before God", he admits that, but for all that he himself holds the truth; it is held at least objectively. You cannot rely on your own works or on those of your family, but you can have the truth in your soul. @2 Samuel 22 is the same as @Psalm 18 only that David begins the psalm: "I will love thee, O Jehovah, my strength". Then @2 Samuel 23 begins, "Now these are the last words of David: David the son of Jesse saith, And the man who was raised up on high, The anointed of the God of Jacob, And the sweet psalmist of Israel saith" -- it is a pronouncement, like Balaam's prophetic pronouncements -- "The Spirit of Jehovah spoke by me, And his word was on my tongue ... The ruler among men shall be just, Ruling in the fear of God; And he shall be as the light of the morning, like the rising of the sun, A morning without clouds; When, from the sunshine after rain, The green grass springeth from the earth". Then, though a sad note, it is the note of a righteous man: "Although my house be not so before God, Yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, Ordered in every way and sure; For this is all my salvation, and every desire, Although he make it not to grow". Now I think that is what may be called objective truth that is strenuously held. The Spirit of God represents David's view of things at the same time that his house was not right before God; God's covenant is certain and sure although he had to wait for it. Although there may be nothing in my house which is witness to it, yet faith knows it is sure.
A.E.H. In assembly exercises we should work things out so that we may understand and be able to say what is so and what is not so.
{403}
J.T. We can say what *is* so even though we may have to own that it is *not* so with *my* house; but it *is* so with *me*. As regards my own soul I can say it is so. That is what David is saying, and I believe he got special honour in the testimony because of it.
H.H. Things are to be measured by what is in the sanctuary, what is in Christ. We need to know the nature of the situation without and what is going on.
J.T. John's epistle works that out. There are abstract thoughts expressed such as, "every one begotten of God does not sin"; but then the apostle also says, "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness" (@1 John 1:8,9). So John's epistle has the character of the Psalms. The remnant will work out their redemption in Christ. Therefore what God is saying to us is that we should be transparent and simple and, if necessary, make confession and not keep anything back. The more you confess and the more transparent you are about everything, the freer you are in your soul. So David can say, "Yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, Ordered in every way and sure".
H.H. I do not believe there is a more testing point than that.
J.T. The child of God is over against antichrist. John's epistle works that out.
Rem. The second epistle speaks of the deceiver and the antichrist and over against that there should be transparency among us.
J.T. David is a model as working it out; he in measure works out the books of Moses in the Psalms. So we have the record of his failure in @2 Samuel 12 but David works it out, he goes into the matter himself in his own history, in @Psalm 51. He is a model for us as dealing with evil. I must never lower the standard,
{404}
even if I am guilty. Let me go to the depths of the thing with God, and see that God has His rights; see that Christ too has His rights and that His people have their rights. David is fully recovered, for he has gone to the root of the matter and God has gone to the root of the matter with David. God acted for him in answer to his confession and prayer.
L.E.S. Coming back to @Genesis 4, what is meant by verse 7, "If thou doest well, will not thy countenance look up with confidence? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door"?
J.T. God is now fortifying Cain against the wicked one. God has to say to him as He has to say to Christendom through the gospel. He wills not that any perish, even a Cain, and so Jehovah says, "Why art thou angry?" What grace! Beautiful that God should consider him so, knowing what was going to happen! And that is our business -- to keep on preaching the gospel day and night, as it were. God is doing it here: "Why art thou angry, and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou doest well, will not thy countenance look up with confidence? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door; and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him". It is something like the epistle to the Hebrews. What God is saying to the Jews should be connected with the epistle of James, which bears on the whole twelve tribes; it is *grace*, and we are entitled to carry the ministry of grace today to Christendom. Cain was yet formally in relation to God.
H.H. Hebrews enhances the last days -- God is speaking "in Son".
J.T. Is it not beautiful to see Jehovah noticing Cain's countenance? "Why is thy countenance fallen? If thou doest well, will not thy countenance look up with confidence? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door". God is speaking to Cain as if He would save him; God is not willing that any
{405}
should perish, but Cain is going to perish, he is going to slay his brother.
D.R. God is reasoning with Cain, pointing to the door, but Cain refuses and slays his brother.
J.T. Hebrews warns the Jewish professors against apostasy for which there is no forgiveness. The writer is urging them to mix the word with faith: "To-day if ye will hear his voice!" That is the appeal in Hebrews.
L.E.S. "Behold then the goodness and severity of God: upon them who have fallen, severity; upon thee goodness of God, if thou shalt abide in goodness, since otherwise *thou* also wilt be cut away" (@Romans 11:22).
J.T. So God comes down to this man standing at the crossroad, fully aware that he is an intended murderer but preaching grace to him. The sin-offering is at the very door: "If thou doest well, will not thy countenance look up with confidence? and if thou doest not well, sin (or, 'a sin-offering' ) lieth at the door; and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him". I believe that refers to Abel. Cain has not done the murder yet, Abel is still alive. Do not kill him, God would say, he will be subject to you. @James 5:6 says, "ye have condemned, ye have killed the just; he does not resist you". Abel will not resist. God is opening the door to Cain, saying, so to speak, You can get through Cain, your brother will be subject to you. He is a righteous man. A righteous man is a very easy man to live with either as a husband, father or brother. God is saying to Cain that his brother will be subject to him. The spirit of Christ will not resist, it is subject; and that is the testimony of God at the present time. So the persons preaching the gospel are like Abel -- righteous men -- and righteous men will not be quarrelsome. It is a question of what the man is. God can say this of Abel, that he is subject, "not as Cain
{406}
was of the wicked one"; the gospel is not on that line, but on the line of the Spirit of Christ.
A.E.J.A. This place is taken on by faith; Hebrews refers to the leader and completer of faith -- Jesus.
J.T. "Looking steadfastly on Jesus". I have been very much impressed with the grace of God in coming down to lawless people. He is giving Cain great scope for recovery; He would say, 'Your brother is easy to get along with, do not murder him'. James says, "Ye have condemned, ye have killed the just; he does not resist you". It is the testimony at the present time in having to do with lawless people.
L.E.S. It would appear in the younger brethren coming before tribunals.
J.T. You mean what spirit they are of?
A.E.J.A. No spirit of self-vindication or of murder is in them.
J.T. No; the preaching and the preacher would contend that he is easy to get along with. A righteous man is not hard to get along with, but evidently it is with Cain toward his brother as it was with Esau towards Jacob, he could not endure him. God says to Cain, You can endure him, he will be subject, as a true Christian will always be.
{407}
RIGHTEOUSNESS (2)
J.T. It is thought that we should continue our consideration of Abel, linking it with Noah. I hope we shall have a further reading on Noah and then two readings on Abraham, all on the same subject -- righteousness. It is the thought now that we should see the line of faith in the matter. What the preceding history is, we had this morning; there is in it a basis for faith. It is said in @1 John 3 that "Cain was of the wicked one", not of Adam in that way. The Spirit is considering sin in its origin in John's epistle and Adam was not the origin of it; it came into this world through him, but it had a history before and that history enters into Cain's guilt. But from the standpoint of God's work through Eve, it is said in @Genesis 3:20, "And Man called his wife's name Eve; because she is the mother of all living". So Abel is of Adam, in the sense that he is righteous as divinely clothed and that he recognised God's word in regard of Eve. He calls her name Eve because she is the mother of all living. That was light in his soul, and gives him a place in relation to Abel, for Abel is of faith, not of the wicked one. And then further there would be light in Adam's soul arising from the fact that Jehovah Elohim makes coats of skin and with them clothes him and his wife.
D.R. In @Genesis 2 Adam calls her name Woman; now he calls her name Eve. Would Woman be a greater idea as before sin came in? The name Eve stands related to the work of God in Adam as having sinned.
J.T. I think that is important to bring in here. The word 'Woman' -- 'Ishshah' -- points to the purpose of God, the assembly viewed as sinless, having
{408}
been in the divine purpose before and apart from sin. And so the tree of life in chapter 3 is guarded, also a thought in divine purpose. It is held in abeyance, kept guarded by the cherubim until it can be brought forward again; but it is a primary thought of God which goes through, as Ishshah also is. Faith must be linked up with Adam's statement, taking on what God had said as to the seed of the woman. Faith must have been in Adam in taking up what God had said and thus conforming with what God was doing in clothing him and his wife. Adam is thus connected with Abel as *righteous*. Abel was not only of Adam as having faith, but in that his *works* were righteous. In @Hebrews 11:4 his sacrifice is said to be excellent: "By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain", and by the sacrifice he obtained testimony of being righteous, God thus bearing testimony to his gift. We have the idea of sacrifice in this section and also that of gifts and both are excellent. It is by his faith expressed in his offering that he, having died, yet speaks. We have a group of items in that verse that demand our consideration; they are jewels entering into the history of Abel as presented in @Genesis 4.
L.E.S. The faith of Abel is connected with what transpired before. Jehovah Elohim would have killed some creature to clothe Adam and Eve with skins; would Abel get the thought of sacrifice there?
J.T. The faith of Abel must include that history. Faith had a history, it did not begin with Abel. In @Hebrews 11 he is mentioned as doing something by faith, but faith began earlier.
A.E.H. Although Adam is left out in @Hebrews 11, would the clothes that God made for him and his wife suggest the thought of righteousness? That is, the clothes were not the full thought, the full thought was developed in Abel.
{409}
J.T. Yes. As we had this morning, there is a history involving faith before Abel.
L.E.S. "Faith cometh by hearing" (@Romans 10:17).
J.T. Having that in mind enables us to connect what preceded Abel with his faith. The Spirit of God in recording Adam's naming of his wife in @Genesis 3 gives the meaning of the name, implying that Adam *understood* what God had said of the seed of the woman. The name Eve is clearly connected with what Jehovah Elohim said to Satan in verse 15, "I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; he shall crush thy head, and thou shalt crush his heel". The word 'seed' there is very important, it is light for us and victory, too, the woman's seed over against the serpent's seed.
H.B. What Adam said in verse 20 is the more striking because in the previous verse he has been told, "For dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return".
J.T. It is remarkable and should be especially noted; and attention, too, should be paid to the seemliness of Adam's name being omitted in the line of faith in @Hebrews 11, as Deborah's name is omitted in the reference to the overthrow of Sisera. It is Barak's name that is mentioned, as is seemly, in the line of faith, Barak being the appointed leader although actually the initiative was with Deborah. Scripture mentions Barak. And so here -- the fact that Adam was the vessel of sin coming in does not fit with the idea of faith being in him; but nevertheless faith is in him according to what he says and it is witnessed in his son.
L.E.S. Referring to the thought of 'seed', are you linking it with the children of God in 1 John?
J.T. Yes, and the subject runs right through into chapter 5. It is a matter of what is more excellent and it comes before us in @Hebrews 11 as entering into what is current today -- the children of God and the
{410}
children of the devil -- that the children of God have good things, that their gifts and sacrifices are excellent, and God bears testimony to them.
A.E.H. Say a little more about the righteousness of Adam here. Is it what we have in Romans, the idea of imputed righteousness, while the righteousness of Abel is more what is constitutional?
J.T. Yes; as connected with faith it was from God; it was in Adam but in Adam only as he took up Jehovah Elohim's *word*. He evidently took up what was said to the devil about Eve, for he says, "she *is* the mother of all living". Abstractly it points to what she actually was -- the character of things involved in the word 'seed'. The 'seed' would be living -- it is over against the devil. It is very real today: you have the works of the devil, and the works of the children of God are against them. God looks for that -- that we are against the devil, against his seed.
L.E.S. Does this thought of 'seed' as being living come in in relation to the sacrifice?
J.T. Yes; the idea of 'seed' runs through. Abel was of that seed; John works it out.
H.H. It is said of the woman in @Revelation 12:17, "And the dragon was angry with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed who keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus". The seed in that way refers to the saints. They are of God.
J.T. In that chapter we have first the "male son", and then the assembly comes in because it is of Christ, and it goes to heaven with Him -- the Male Son. Then this passage would also refer to the repentant Jews in a coming day, the dragon makes war with them. But the Male Son brought forth by Israel will do everything, you might say. He is also the seed of the woman seen in @Genesis 3.
H.H. @Hebrews 11 seems to point out another
{411}
world and those who are approved for it -- "the world to come".
J.T. Quite so. One is exercised about the children as linked with the seed of the woman. The seed in @Genesis 3 points particularly to Christ, and what he does. But He is in relation to humanity, and He bruises the serpent's head. The saints do not do that. God bruises Satan under the feet of the saints and they do a great deal against the devil; every saint should have some experience of that kind.
D.R. "But the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly" (@Romans 16:20).
A.E.J.A. "Resist the devil, and he will flee from you" (@James 4:7).
J.T. That is a great victory -- the devil fleeing from one saint. You get in type that sort of thing in the men of David. But then, someone fleeing from you is not the same as your bruising his head. David annulled Satan in cutting off the head of Goliath and killing him "completely".
H.B. John's "young men" are overcomers.
Ques. Why is not Eve called the mother of all dying? Abel dies, but Adam says she is the mother of all *living*.
J.T. Well, so that is it. By one dying God clothes Adam and his wife, that is, a creature had to be slain so that skins should be available. It justifies the great history of faith from this point. @Hebrews 11 is a record of worthies, men who by faith had experience.
H.H. In this section there is light in the skins God used to clothe Adam and Eve.
J.T. Quite so. You may be sure the creature used would convey something of Christ. Adam himself names the creatures and no doubt God would make use of one of them according to its name, so that there would be something specifically pointing to Christ. Whatever the name was God would observe it. It is
{412}
a question of God, and of what creature He is using to provide a skin to clothe Adam and Eve.
L.E.S. The word to the woman, "and to thy husband shall be thy desire, and he shall rule over thee", seems to be in contrast to Cain.
J.T. She is to be connected with Abel in some way there -- she is "subjected". "The assembly is subjected to the Christ" (@Ephesians 5:24). Cain did not have anything to fear from Abel. Jehovah said to Cain that the desire of his brother should be towards him and that he should rule over him, as if Cain had nothing to fear from Abel. Cain was the elder brother and it is orderly for the younger to be subject to the elder, that is the point God mentions in speaking to Cain. He has nothing to fear from Abel; Abel would be subject. And today governments have nothing to fear from the children of God. Christians are not characteristically rebellious people. That is what Abel represents. It is for us to go on in this way as over against the current principles of disregard of authority vested in government. We might follow the line in this way as bearing on the children of God at the present time; from them there is nothing to fear. "Ye have condemned, ye have killed the just; he does not resist you" (@James 5:6). That testimony is universal as the young men are brought into the forces. They are unresisting.
Ques. As the young men are brought up as unresisting, it is not a question of weakness, is it?
J.T. No, it is a question of power. The Spirit of Christ is not weakness; but in the saints it recognises authority in ordered government, as He did.
Ques. Is it implied in the excellency of Abel's sacrifice?
J.T. Yes, that enters into it. The sacrifice takes character from the person who gives it. There must have been much exercise entering into just what kind of offering Abel would bring to Jehovah. "And in
{413}
process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering to Jehovah"; there was no intelligence in that. Paul says, "I speak as unto intelligent persons" (@1 Corinthians 10:15) -- in view of drawing near to serve God. Cain brought what *he thought* should be presented to God -- an offering of the fruit of the ground; "And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of their fat". Undoubtedly in bringing his offering he paid attention to what Adam had called the creatures; he brought of his firstlings and their fat -- we do not know how many. Did he not pay attention to what Adam had called them? Was there not light in the names that Adam gave them? Can we not dig behind these verses to see what was going on in Abel's soul? He brings this offering to Jehovah; we do not know the names of the creatures, but we do know that he chose them with care. They were well-fed because fat is mentioned as also offered. All this enters into the matter of righteousness in what Abel was; the word 'excellent' is mentioned in Hebrews as connected with it.
Ques. Is there some thought in what Cain brings that he would put himself forward?
J.T. In Cain's offering there was no recognition of sin; the fruit of the ground could not meet this. Abel's offerings implied death, for their *fat* is spoken of separately. There was nothing of the Spirit of Christ in Cain and there can be no meat-offering without it; the meat-offering refers to what comes out of the ground, but without death in an accompanying offering it could not be accepted according to the requirements of Leviticus. The tenth part of an ephah of fine flour accepted as a sin-offering in @Leviticus 5:11 is an expression of God's grace toward one weak, because ignorant, in the faith, but *sincere in his self-judgment*. It is a genuine acknowledgment of sin for it is a sin-offering. The offerer's poverty is noted in the fact that no oil or frankincense is put on
{414}
it, but *faith* is in his exercises and hence the offerer has a place with God.
J.C. Jehovah *looked* upon Abel.
J.T. Yes. "And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of their fat. And Jehovah looked upon Abel, and on his offering; and upon Cain, and on his offering, he did not look". It is important to note that what is behind the offering is the offerer. Jehovah looked on Abel but not on Cain; it was first a question of the man. "Upon Cain, and on his offering, he did not look".
Rem. In @1 John 4:2,3 the same idea is referred to, as regards the humanity of Christ: "Every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God".
J.T. Quite so. God is not looking on such. What a number of persons there are who are like that! God does not look on them. They may be addressed as Reverend Sir, or some other title, but they are classified in the divine vocabulary as those to be condemned, refused and turned away from. The spirit of Christ is not with them.
H.H. Here God takes time to speak to Cain about his fallen countenance before he killed his brother. This commands our attention.
J.T. We are now in the time of naming things -- naming apostasy. The epistle to the Hebrews brings in the point of naming apostasy or wilful sin. The writer says there, "For where we sin wilfully after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains any sacrifice for sins", (chapter 10:26). Chapter 6 says it is impossible to renew again such to repentance. Persons who have accepted and shared in the light and blessings of Christianity and turn away from it are regarded in that epistle as apostates and the sure judgment of God awaits them.
{415}
H.H. Those drawing back to perdition -- the case with them is hopeless.
J.T. It is important to have that in our minds so that we appraise things rightly and what God's way is at the present time. "For where we sin wilfully after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains any sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and heat of fire about to devour the adversaries. Any one that has disregarded Moses¬ law dies without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses; of how much worse punishment, think ye, shall he be judged worthy who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and esteemed the blood of the covenant, whereby he has been sanctified, common, and has insulted the Spirit of grace? For we know him that said, To me belongs vengeance; I will recompense, saith the Lord: and again, The Lord shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing falling into the hands of the living God" (@Hebrews 10:26 - 31). We may regard this as current history, as corresponding with the Jews in apostolic times. After the letter to the Hebrews was circulated among them anyone who had embraced the gospel and formally turned away from it, returning to Judaism, had only judgment to expect.
A.E.H. The idea of Abel's blood calling from the ground enters into present history, and the "better things" spoken of in @Hebrews 12 are only for those on the line of faith.
J.T. The "better things" are not for those who fall away. We must remember when we preach the gospel that some are *not* to be saved. We cannot name them but we know they exist and we must make allowance for that in the preaching. Paul says, "if also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost" (@2 Corinthians 4:3).
S.P. God looked on Abel. He must have been a lovable man.
{416}
J.T. Abel looked after livestock. Joseph instructed his brethren as they were to appear before Pharaoh to say they were livestock men. But, they might have said, the Egyptians look upon that as an abomination. Well, he would say, let us suffer the reproach! But when the time comes and Joseph's five brethren say to Pharaoh that they are livestock men, the king says to Joseph, I have livestock -- set your brethren as overseers over my livestock. We may count on that sort of thing -- there is someone who is *not* against us. It is very touching as the young brethren have to do with the authorities and there is one man there who is sympathetic with them. Pharaoh says, 'They are livestock men; put them as overseers over my livestock'. He is dignifying them.
S.P. In type that shows the confidence that true Christianity promotes.
J.T. You would look for the spirit of Christ coming in in that way.
H.H. The young men in camps thus find favour.
J.T. We hear much in the way of testimony in that sense both here and in Great Britain, also in Australasia.
D.R. Paul's testimony before Agrippa led the king to say he had done nothing worthy of death or bonds.
J.T. That is largely how the history of faith comes out. It comes down through the children of God, and Abel is representative of the children of God. He did not resist; he *died*. But nevertheless he is still speaking, he has been speaking through thousands of years; "having died, he yet speaks". When compared with that of Christ the speaking is inferior, but still it is speaking as from God. Abel's blood is speaking although the blood of the new covenant speaks "better things". The blood of Abel speaks of judgment; it was righteous blood wickedly shed. The blood of the new covenant speaks better
{417}
things but it does not detract from Abel's blood; Abel's blood is righteous blood. Matthew speaks of all the righteous blood from that of Abel to the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias. We are designated children of God in John's epistle and children of God are righteous; everyone that practises righteousness is born of God. Abel, who represents them as we have seen, brings excellent gifts to God; even material gifts are pleasing to God, according to @Hebrews 13; those that go into the box at the Lord's supper are on this line. @Hebrews 13 contemplates offerers: "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle; for of those beasts whose blood is carried as sacrifices for sin into the holy of holies by the high priest, of these the bodies are burned outside the camp. Wherefore also Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate: therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach: for we have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing his name". That is the *high* note! But it goes on, "But of doing good and communicating of your substance be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased" (@Hebrews 13:10 - 16). These refer to material things, but all relate to the service of God. There are gifts from hearts and lips; and then gifts from our pockets -- not to be despised. Are we niggardly in our giving? God bore testimony to Abel's gifts: "By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained testimony of being righteous, God bearing testimony to his gifts". Well, does God bear testimony to our gifts? It is worth while considering what we offer, whether materially, which is of lesser value, or the offering of our lips giving thanks. Let us work out this matter, contemplating ourselves as children of
{418}
God and that the way of righteousness means that God can bear testimony to our gifts. All this enters into whether we are equal to the service of God. Think of the Lord looking on the treasury and seeing how the crowd gave! God is looking on what *we* are giving. And then what is done in a spiritual way also comes under review; Abel's service enters into all that. The types in Leviticus govern these things: "The true tabernacle" is brought in here by way of contrast. "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle". The sacrifice on the great day of atonement in Leviticus corresponds to our Lord Jesus Christ as suffering without the gate, and those who do not go out of the gate do not belong to the true divine system because Christ suffered without the gate. So the very acme of wickedness is Jerusalem itself. But here the thought is carried down to our day, "therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach". And then the gifts are listed -- whatever is necessary for the service of God. God will look on them and look on us for He "loves a cheerful giver" (@2 Corinthians 9:7).
Ques. Does the matter of praise to God take on a more exalted character as we are conscious that our affections Godward are patterned after the same character as those He received from Christ in His holy manhood?
J.T. Yes; we have in @2 Corinthians 2:15, "For we are a sweet odour of Christ to God". In this second epistle we have, among other things, the working out of the idea of what God is looking at. God loves a cheerful giver, and in this Paul is an example for us, God through the apostle himself testifying to his sacrifices. Let each of us challenge himself -- What am I giving? Of course, the greatest gift is Christ, whom God gave for us. My material wealth may not be much, but it may express the giving of love. God takes account of that, He loves a cheerful giver.
{419}
L.E.S. Do we not get the two ideas -- the material and the spiritual giving -- carried through into the Acts? During the famine the disciples among the Gentiles are prepared to contribute to Judaea where there was need so that the apostle says: "but now I go to Jerusalem, ministering to the saints; for Macedonia and Achaia have been well pleased to make a certain contribution for the poor of the saints who are in Jerusalem. They have been well pleased indeed, and they are their debtors; for if the nations have participated in their spiritual things, they ought also in fleshly to minister to them" (@Romans 15:25 - 27).
J.T. Quite so. All that we are speaking of comes out in Antioch where the disciples are ministering to the Lord. However, gifts for the needy at Jerusalem sent from them were not a 'general collection' but from persons who were "well off" (@Acts 11:29). It was in answer to a prophetic communication -- quite unusual.
H.H. We need more of that now. One notices in going around that the stereotyped dollar bill still finds its way into the box. The brethren now are making far more than they used to -- why not turn the excess over to the Lord's interests?
J.T. When there is an increase in salary there is need for an increase in spirituality. God looks at the *person*. He was not looking on Cain but on Abel and his offering. It was Abel really, the gift was the outcome of what the man was. God does not mind if the salary is doubled or tripled provided the gifts increase in proportion; He looks on the gifts but He also looks on the giver, and God loves a cheerful giver, as we have often quoted.
A.B.M. That is abstractly a question of righteousness -- if our salaries are increased our gifts should be.
J.T. It is indeed. Righteousness marks the true giver.
{420}
A.E.J.A. Some are more anxious about business prosperity than soul prosperity.
J.T. Well, God looks on such as the Lord did in @Mark 12:41, but we cannot say He has pleasure in looking on them. The soul prosperity is what God takes account of. Normally gifts are the outcome of that. The gifts themselves do not mean much; God would say to those who are on the line of material wealth, "If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof" (@Psalm 50:12).
Ques. Would gifts also be given in affection for the house of God?
J.T. Yes; in this David is the model for us. He gave, he says, "in my affection for the house of my God" (@1 Chronicles 29:3). He gave a hundred thousand talents of gold, but this amount is not spoken of as dedicated in his affection; that was a matter of his wars -- a big affair. His army entered into that. But when it comes to his affection for the house it is evidently the *best* gold, not a very big amount compared with the first; and *refined* silver. God looked at, or valued David for that. It is a question of how pleasurable he was to God at that moment. Of course God valued the larger gift also, but it stood related to his official place, whereas the other gift was personal.
Rem. Think of the affection of the widow throwing in the two mites -- *all her living*!
J.T. Quite so. The Lord says, She has given more than all. It is not the amount but the *person* who gives, so that this matter of excellent gifts and excellent sacrifices and God bearing testimony to them is most important. "By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained testimony of being righteous, God bearing testimony to his gifts, and by it, having died, he yet speaks". Each group of things in that verse is for our contemplation -- what there was for God in Abel
{421}
in his own day. Well, Abel died, but his blood speaks loudly to us about gifts -- the quality of our gifts, and that God *Himself* appraises them.
Ques. Does the word 'it' in verse 4 refer to his faith?
J.T. Yes.
H.H. The thought now is, if we want God's pleasure to rest upon us we must give liberally to the basket. The widow's two mites speak to us -- she gave all. Abel's blood still speaks to us, Abel's righteous sacrifice yet speaks to us. If we want God's pleasure upon us we shall maintain these things for God amongst us.
J.T. Quite so. Luke's record of Abel, confirming Matthew's account, is "that the blood of all the prophets which has been poured out from the foundation of the world may be required of this generation, from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharias". That is, Luke is valuing them on that level; not distinguishing any, he is speaking of that class of persons -- the prophets. Luke is thinking of the number of persons whose blood was shed; it is blood poured out from the foundation of the world until that very hour; their blood was shed, they were martyrs for the truth, Abel among the others. Luke is pointing to the persons, he is dealing with the many persons whose blood was of value to heaven, Abel among them; whereas Matthew calls to attention that his blood was *righteous* blood. The same idea is in all the persons whose blood was poured out.
S.P. The idea of pouring out would be that it was under the eye of God, something He would look at.
H.B. @Revelation 18:24 says of *Babylon* that "in her was found the blood of prophets and saints, and of all the slain upon the earth".
J.T. Showing that our sufferings as they happen are all under the eye of God.
{422}
L.E.S. Does the blood of Zacharias who perished between the altar and the house bear witness to the development of wickedness? Zechariah says, "This is Wickedness".
J.T. It would be the same. We may look at Noah in the next meeting. The point now is the offerers -- the excellency of the gifts and the sacrifices of those who have faith -- how God appraises them.
A.E.J.A. Speaking of 'seed' and 'generations', they continue as seen in the children of God; and those of the wicked one are marked also -- seen in their actions, so that the Lord says of the Jews, "Ye are of your father the devil". That is the seed Judas belonged to; he complained of what was poured out upon Jesus as being "waste".
J.T. That is a good comparison -- Judas over against Mary of Bethany. Jesus says, "Suffer her to have kept this for the day of my preparation for burial". It was of great price, it was weighed -- it was one pound. The preciousness of it is noted; the odour filled the house.
H.H. In Mark the box is broken, showing that what is done is without recall. It is the way for young people to commit themselves to Christ.
J.T. The box was to preserve the ointment, but the Spirit of God in John calls attention to Mary as one who could keep herself pure and in that way there was no need for the box. She had learned to keep things in incorruptibility; she had no confidence in the flesh. One pound -- full measure: it was kept for a purpose, an intelligent end.
S.P. The ministry of the last few years would help us in our offerings; help us in taking in a very large scope. We are learning to minister to countries far distant from us. The gifts these days cover a very wide sphere.
J.T. Very much more than we have formerly covered. As sending gifts to the British Isles and to
{423}
Australia, etc., we receive letters from them which are read at the prayer meetings, promoting affections and prayers. The question is, Are the gifts increasing "more and more"? The need is great. The value of the gifts is in the givers. Will the giving be increased? The needs are increasing. It is a question of circulatory love.
L.E.S. I often wonder what the censors think as they read these letters acknowledging gifts!
J.T. I am sure it is a testimony to them, they would think about it. God has, no doubt, a design in it in that way.
H.B. God bears testimony to the gifts of His people.
J.T. Yes. With such sacrifices, that is, material gifts, God is well pleased. He has pleasure in them.
{424}
RIGHTEOUSNESS (3)
@Genesis 7:1; @Hebrews 11:7; @2 Peter 2:4,5; @Ezekiel 14:12 - 20
J.T. This verse in @Genesis 7 is included with the other passages read because it is important as being connected with the immediate history of Noah. The verse in Hebrews is most important in our subject as referring to an oracular communication which moved Noah to prepare an ark for the saving of his house. Then in @Ezekiel 14 righteousness is stressed as in Noah, Daniel and Job. Noah's house would be included in the covenant made with him by Jehovah, and thus righteousness becomes of great importance to us in household government and baptism. Finally Peter tells us that Noah was a preacher of righteousness -- as if his personal importance was in mind. He says, "For if God spared not the angels who had sinned, but having cast them down to the deepest pit of gloom has delivered them to chains of darkness to be kept for judgment; and spared not the old world, but preserved Noe, the eighth, a preacher of righteousness ..." Thus his importance and value is noted in Peter: he is seen as a preacher of righteousness. The importance of the preaching is linked up with him. Furthermore Noah's inclusion in our subject is noteworthy in that he is viewed as having a 'history', including birth or origin; and it is said that he was "perfect amongst his generations", that is, the circle in which he moved. And Noah was a just man and walked with God. He lived at the end of a dispensation as we do, and he points to the importance of taking on responsibility, not shirking it. The whole world was about to be judged; he faced the matter with God and found support. We are drawing near to the end of a dispensation involving
{425}
universal judgment; God would lay it upon us to face difficulties, to go through them according to our measure and the strength divinely given, to walk with God in them. @Genesis 6:9 points to a man of great integrity and ability, a man who *does* things, who takes them on and succeeds.
S.P. Does the thought of his walk with God suggest his secret history, and then the three sons suggest the perpetuation of what is for God publicly?
J.T. Yes, his three sons were blessed with him. They were carried through in relation to Noah to start another world. The whole position seen in these chapters is of striking magnitude, it enlarges and strengthens the mind of faith. Peter says God "spared not the old world;" Noah did not intercede for it as Abraham did for Sodom. As remarked, the magnitude of the position is enormous. Noah faced the destruction of a whole world in his own time, and in anticipation of it was preparing an ark for many years -- evidently one hundred and twenty; and while in faith building the ark he was condemning the world. At the end of the period including the deluge he had so learned God that he built an altar to God and offered burnt-offerings thereon. Abel did not have an altar, but Noah had one.
Ques. What bearing had the first four verses of chapter 6 on Noah? We have the description of the sons of God, who would be heavenly beings, I suppose, and yet verse 5 says, "And Jehovah saw that the wickedness of Man was great on the earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart only evil continually". What is the bearing of the sons of God being on the earth?
J.T. Peter in dealing with the government of God seen in this section says, "God ... spared not the old world". But he also says, "For if God spared not the angels who had sinned, but having cast them down to the deepest pit of gloom has delivered them
{426}
to chains of darkness to be kept for judgment ..." Noah had nothing to do with that, another order of being was involved and God dealt with it directly. Reference is made to certain angels being cast down to "the deepest pit of gloom": that would undoubtedly allude to those @Genesis 6 calls "the sons of God"; they have that status. Evidently great intelligence entered into the scene and into the form sin would take, as if Satan employed beings *called* sons of God, which would be a link with the book of Job. They are beings who had that status -- sons of God; they had it outwardly at least, as unreal Christians have it today. Christianity has enlightened men but the effect of the light aids them in corruption. Then those beings link themselves with the daughters of men and their progeny become heroes; and Jehovah says, "My Spirit shall not always plead with Man; for he indeed is flesh; but his days shall be a hundred and twenty years". As already noted, the Spirit goes on to point out that "In those days were the giants on the earth, and also afterwards, when the sons of God had come in to the daughters of men, and they had borne children to them; these were the heroes, who of old were men of renown. And Jehovah saw that the wickedness of Man was great on the earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart only evil continually. And Jehovah repented that he had made Man on the earth, and it grieved him in his heart". God attaches the responsibility to man, not exactly to the sons of God. There is constant reference to "man". "And Jehovah said, I will destroy Man, whom I have created, from the earth -- from man to cattle, to creeping things, and to fowl of the heavens; for I repent that I have made them. But Noah found favour in the eyes of Jehovah". That is how the matter stands -- an account of very great activities -- but activities which are only to be engulfed in the judgment of God. For God has in mind *another* world.
{427}
L.E.S. So the thought is carried through into Ezekiel where the family side is brought in -- the sons and daughters.
J.T. Well, we see that the family of Noah -- his sons and daughters -- were evidently apart from what was going on around, although no one is accredited with anything in this section but Noah -- neither his wife nor his sons and daughters. We must wait until we come to chapter 9 to see how God takes them on, discriminating between them, but in this section Noah is everything.
H.H. Jehovah says to Noah, for *thee* "have I seen righteous before me in this generation" (chapter 7:1).
J.T. It shows that God is not attaching anything to his wife or children so far; He is making everything of Noah. He is preserving him, however, according to Peter, as one of eight. Whatever virtue there was in them is in abeyance, although the type as a whole implies that they were "in Noah", saved as his house. So the challenge is to each one, are we able to take on responsibility and go through with it?
A.E.H. Say a little as to the idea of *begetting*; here it stands over against the thought of *bearing*, the daughters of men bore children. Is the peculiar delight which Jehovah had in Noah in some way hidden in the word 'beget'? Does it stand in relation to the testimony?
J.T. Yes. His sons are his own and they come into chapter 5, that is, the life line. The narrative regards them in this setting and hence apart from the corruption of the antediluvian world. The four wives are included in Noah's house and hence saved in the ark; the others God destroys. As the Lord Jesus says, "For as they were in the days which were before the flood, eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day on which Noe entered into the ark, and they knew not till the flood came and took all away" (@Matthew 24:38,39). But one man
{428}
and his house numbering seven are carried through.
A.E.H. The way the idea of righteousness is linked with the preparing of the ark to save his house is striking. There is no record so far of practical righteousness in his house.
J.T. No, it comes out in Noah. Nothing is said of his wife, sons or daughters until later chapters. Of course the antitype requires us to accept that they were subjects of God's work. The history results in the bringing out of Shem, a man of value in the ways of God; God takes the place of being *his* God. But that does not enter into this section. What we have here is a man who takes on responsibility and *does* things for God. Think of this man! Think of him as preaching to a world about to be destroyed and the preaching having no result! The taking in of this would enable us to face things as they are.
H.H. It was only God's support that could carry him through. That is true now, we can only go through by the support of the Spirit.
J.T. And God is assuring us that our labour is not in vain. God would establish us in our exercises, encourage us with His promises; the prophetic word makes things plain, and we are affected by it. Noah prepared an ark to save all his house.
A.E.H. What a sense of holy joy must have filled Noah's soul when Jehovah said to him, "thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation".
J.T. God would fortify His servant. Noah certainly needed it. In chapter 6 God is ministering encouragement to him, even saying, "with thee will I establish my covenant".
Rem. Everything is obedient to Noah -- all the creatures mentioned *go* into the ark.
J.T. "And Jehovah said to Noah ... Of all clean beasts thou shalt take to thee by sevens, a male and its female; but of the beasts that are not clean two, a male and its female. Also of the fowl of the heavens
{429}
by sevens, male and female; to keep seed alive on the face of all the earth". And then we are told, "Noah did according to all that Jehovah had commanded him". Further we are told, "In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month ... went Noah, and Shem and Ham and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark; they, and every beast after its kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creeps on the earth after its kind, and all fowl after its kind -- every bird of every wing. And they went to Noah, into the ark, two and two of all flesh, in which was the breath of life. And they that came, came male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him". It would seem as though his house and the cattle and the creatures generally are under divine control -- God has part with him; it would be impossible for Noah to accomplish this unless God worked with him. But with God Noah did accomplish it; he went into the ark and the others with him. It would point to the work of God in him without which none can succeed. In any commission that anyone may have he will succeed if God moves with him. Without God we cannot succeed.
H.H. There is potentiality in the ark: only eight people but potential material, looking on to what God is going to do in the new world. Wonderful to think of! When Noah came out of the ark there was no man on the earth outside of his own family.
A.E.J.A. So God says to Noah, "Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth" (@Genesis 9:1).
J.T. Yes. It is a new world really, represented in its head; so that it begins with Noah. It begins with a man who built an altar: "And Noah built an altar to Jehovah; and took of every clean animal, and of all clean fowl, and offered up burnt-offerings on the
{430}
altar" (@Genesis 8:20), all showing that Noah went through, God has His man. Now God is more to him and he is to be for God, so it says, "And Jehovah smelled the sweet odour. And Jehovah said in his heart, I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man, for the thought of Man's heart is evil from his youth; and I will no more smite every living thing, as I have done". That is what God said in His heart. There is the mystery already suggested. The present things are the outcome of that -- God is not publishing that -- it is in His heart. However, what is public is the altar and the clean animals that Noah used for sacrifice; it is his service to God, and God's pleasure is in it, and the new world is the continuation of that man. God is not going to destroy the earth again. God is not publishing that but history will bring it out. We know it now because it is recorded by divine commandment through Moses. So that is the position. I think we have the idea of mystery in relation to the new world, we become initiated into *what is in the heart of God* -- what He says in His heart.
H.H. It is interesting that before we have the new world Abel's history has come in and the sin question is disposed of. Enoch has also been translated and in Noah the judgment question has been solved, so that the new world is in evidence after all this.
J.T. All this was in the heart of God, it is not published. We are entering into a new world in which is mystery, but history will bring it out. We have to wait for the development of what is in the heart of God, beginning with God smelling a sweet savour: "Henceforth", He says, "all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease" (@Genesis 8:22). We cannot say how many years or centuries are involved, but it is while the earth remains, "all the days of the earth", however long
{431}
that may be. God purposed it in His heart but in due time it came to light and we count upon it now.
H.H. In the beginning of @Hebrews 11 we are told that "faith is the substantiating of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen".
J.T. Noah was oracularly warned concerning things not yet seen. Think of the history of that hundred and twenty years! Noah's faith is understood by what is stated, that he was warned of God in regard of things not seen, and that he was moved by that warning to prepare an ark for the saving of his house; and that by so doing he condemned the world and became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith. This chapter is a record of the leading exploits of faith, and Noah is among the persons who are in it. He did great things! As we have noted, he built to save his house and in so doing *he* condemned the world. This is a great matter -- the world is condemned by his testimony. Enoch had the testimony that he pleased God, but Noah's testimony affects the whole world. You marvel at the accomplishments of this man. God is justified in the judgment He executed because one man warned the world through his service! That is how the matter stands at the present moment; thus the question may again be asked, Are we prepared to take on responsibility divinely placed, and to go through with it?
L.E.S. His was a baptised house. Would that stand over against the corrupting principles of this world?
J.T. Noah's house stands over against the corruption which was in the world, just one house against a whole world! The greatness of this is wonderful. We are reminded of what one man can do as directed and helped by God. How many are there now ready to face divine requirements and fulfil them? "having accomplished all things, to stand", as it says;
{432}
(@Ephesians 6:13). J.N.D.¬s note to that verse reads, "It is to 'carry through and put in execution all that is purposed and called for, in spite of opposition'".
D.R. Peter calls our attention to the corruption and encourages us to go through in spite of it.
J.T. Quite so. It is a sink of corruption, it exists today in all directions, but we are to carry the things of God through. Noah was only promised his own house and he took it upon himself to save it. God warned him and he prepared an ark to the saving of his house.
H.H. Noah got through by water. It is different nowadays, people go through baptism and do not live up to it in their families afterwards.
J.T. This house was saved by water. They came through the thing. The ark must exclude all the damaging influences which the devil has brought into the world; the ark prepared by Noah would be a preventive of all the devil would bring in. No light reading would be allowed there! The bearing of water is cleansing as well as destructive.
A.E.H. The oracular warning would suggest the idea of ministry -- it points out the traits of the world and also forms us inwardly. All that God presented to Noah would be formative.
J.T. Clearly, as he received the divine communications they would form him and he was affected by them. He *feared*, and hence built the ark for the saving of his house. The divine warning causing him to fear would also cause him to judge the wickedness around him.
J.K. As moving with fear, there was evidence in him of inward dealings with God, and there would be corresponding results in his family.
J.T. Yes; the sequel indicates a result in Shem, of whom Jehovah says that He is his God (chapter 9:26), as He was Noah's God, and as He will be our God as amongst similar conditions. The measurements
{433}
God gives Noah -- the length, breadth and height of the ark -- the window in it, too, would assure him of capability. The window really means noonday light, suggesting what we have in which to walk.
A.E.J.A. The light will help us as to the destructive heresies that are around us in this day. We need to be moved with fear in relation to our houses and families that they may be saved. We must, therefore, prepare for their salvation.
J.T. The word 'prepare' in this connection is very important, and as we have seen, the preparation condemns the world, because the idea is, *What is it for*? It is to save from the judgment of God about to come on the world of the ungodly. The means of salvation obviously condemns those who remain in what causes the judgment.
H.B. Is it similar to "labouring together in the same conflict with the faith of the glad tidings; and not frightened in anything by the opposers, which is to them a demonstration of destruction, but of your salvation, and that from God" (@Philippians 1:27,28)?
J.T. Quite so. We are to work out our own salvation, "for it is God who works in you both the willing and the working according to his good pleasure" (@Philippians 2:13). This passage enters into our section in Genesis. And then we are to appear as lights in the world; so as the world looked on it beheld the structure Noah was building.
S.P. Referring to the window of the ark, there is danger of looking on the ministry as a book of rules which would govern every detail; but we have the light from above to help us to understand. There is that suggestion in Paul's ministry -- pointing to something above the brightness of the noonday sun, the light as to the Man in heaven and the saints here as connected with Him.
J.T. Quite so; and by the aid of the light as
{434}
given of God we are able to cope with this wickedness and bring up our families. All Noah's family, his wife, his sons, and their wives *went* into the ark; evidently God is working with them. On the other hand the antediluvian world became apostate and went on to destruction. God is not touching them, He is just leaving them. The point is that what God is doing is carrying a family through. As we today set our faces in the right direction God will help us. He is supporting the Christian and his household.
S.P. "Noah found favour in the eyes of Jehovah": what is the point in "the eyes of Jehovah"? Would it mean that no matter what was going on, it was not going on unobserved? The eyes of Jehovah see the apostasy and contemporary with that they see Noah.
J.T. Quite so. As you look at the corruption you feel it is not possible to get a family through; but God says, I am going to deal with the corruption, but meantime I am telling you who have faith that I have you and your family before me and I am working to save you all, all are going into the ark; and not only your family, but the living creatures which I have designated are also going into the ark.
H.J. There were no children in the ark.
J.T. No, everything was mature. Noah had oracular communications from God and hence had intelligence as to what he should do; besides, God was working with him. Thus he was enabled to carry his family through.
H.H. Today we are going on to what God has in view, through the knowledge of the Son of God, to "the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" (@Ephesians 4:13). There were no children in the ark and there are no children in @Ephesians 4.
J.T. There is what is going through and there is what is not going through: we have come to the dividing point -- the parting of the ways in the history of the testimony. It is a very acute situation, for
{435}
God is not going on with apostasy. He is against it. In @Genesis 6 He tells us of the apostasy existing then and He shows that He has judged it and is about to destroy it. But He is going on in His own way, that is, with Noah and his family, and He is going to carry through in the ark with Noah and his family the living creatures which He has designated so as to inaugurate another world. @Genesis 6 makes the position exceedingly clear and definite; and the position today is equally clear and definite.
H.H. This dark day that the saints have to face has already been foreseen by God and provided for.
J.T. In the scripture before us God has completely taken account of the corruption and He is giving the antediluvians a hundred and twenty years to repent. But He is carrying His thoughts through in Noah; He is saying to him that he has found favour with Him. God is looking at him, and "Noah found favour in the eyes of Jehovah. This is the history of Noah. Noah was a just man, perfect amongst his generations: Noah walked with God". And God found rest in Noah -- his name means *rest*. God has rest in this man in view of the accomplishment of His purposes.
L.E.S. The Lord says, "Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out: and I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (@John 12:31,32). And He goes on, "Walk while ye have the light, that darkness may not overtake you. And he who walks in the darkness does not know where he goes. While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light" (verses 35,36).
J.T. That is a very helpful suggestion. There is movement towards Noah. There is movement towards him in relation to his wife and children and the living creatures, too: "And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons¬ wives with him, into the
{436}
ark, because of the waters of the flood. Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowl, and of everything that creeps on the ground, there came two and two unto Noah into the ark, male and female, as God had commanded Noah" (@Genesis 7:7 - 9). So there is now movement towards Christ. The Lord says, "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me". That is, another world is in view. It is God presenting Christ as the centre for men's eyes and hearts.
A.B.M. All speaking of how God is bearing testimony to this Man.
J.T. Quite so. And so in Genesis He is directing our eyes to this remarkable man -- Noah, who is just and a preacher of righteousness. The Spirit of God says that he found favour with God, and God tells us that he was perfect amongst his generations. That is the Lord Jesus in John's gospel. Who is He? "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". Three times in John's gospel He is spoken of as lifted up: "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me". The 'all' would not include wicked people, but those whom God has selected; Christ is the centre of attraction and God is bearing testimony to that. The creatures all came to Noah and came to him in relation to his divinely given position and to his household with him.
D.R. The apostle left Titus in Crete to set right what remained.
J.T. The idea was to make them self-supporting. In the early days they were to ordain elders in every city and every assembly; these two ideas are seen at the beginning of Christianity. Every local assembly must have elders -- it is the principle underlying the position. If there are not in some sense elders, there is no administrative support -- things die out. There is nobody to look after them. Sometimes we hear of
{437}
brethren slipping off to special meetings and the local position is left greatly reduced: it tends to weakness and exposure. A true elder will not do that. So Titus is left in Crete. The apostle tells him what the Cretans were: "liars, evil wild beasts, lazy gluttons", not people to be relied upon. Well, what are we to do? Count on God to make them, as converted, reliable? Yes, but there is our responsibility. Paul tells Titus to ordain elders in each city, that is, provide for stability in the midst of corruption. In this country the position is very precarious because of the lack of eldership. It is not a question of gift, but of eldership -- those to look after the saints, caring with genuine feeling how they get on.
Ques. Is eldership seen in Paul?
J.T. To understand the apostle's mind we must go to @Philippians 1: "Paul and Timotheus, bondmen of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with the overseers and ministers". It is how the assembly stood in his mind -- "overseers and ministers", those who would care for the saints in that city. You cannot have stability without them. The apostles Paul and Barnabas ordained elders in every assembly. That is what is needed for stability; persons who will care for the local companies.
A.E.H. The lack of the qualifications for eldership has been the hindrance to many of us. Sometimes, although we know of the need, we do not try to exercise the *qualities* of eldership.
J.T. Qualifications are needed, but at the same time whatever our hand finds to do we are to do with our might. One sometimes feels disqualified because of certain conditions which are outside of oneself. But let not that stop us; whatever we can do let us do it in a humble way. Why should I not do it as well as I can? And God would be with us on those lines.
S.P. Would you say that in Crete it was gross sin,
{438}
in Colosse philosophy and in Corinth worldliness -- but that eldership covers all this in the assemblies?
J.T. Yes. At Corinth Paul himself was there for eighteen months but they had not followed up his teaching; they failed because of not taking on responsibility and carrying it out according to right principles. They were not taking things on, nor doing them. Paul sent Timothy to them as a model. Let us take on responsibility in the things of God and we can depend upon God to support us; God says in effect, 'I see what you are aiming at and I am with you in your efforts'.
L.E.S. It is in love and self-judgment that one acquires the moral title to take on eldership.
J.T. I think so. As you accept the conditions God is with you. As you face things as they are and take on responsibility as to them God is with you and something for Him will result. As these creatures came to Noah there would be encouragement to him that God was working with him. Our labour is not in vain in the Lord.
D.R. Is that why time is mentioned in connection with Noah, the six hundredth year of his life?
J.T. Well, his history and personality were in the mind of God. The years of his life are precious under the eye of God, he is taken on by God as qualified and he is successful.
L.E.S. Say a word now about the scripture in Ezekiel.
J.T. It is important to keep before us, and also the preaching of Noah, the preaching of righteousness. Are we in accordance with the things we preach? In @Ezekiel 14 we are told of men such as Noah, Daniel and Job -- three remarkable men -- that even their families would not be delivered by their known righteousness under certain conditions. There are four kinds of judgment from which even these men can deliver only themselves, a most solemn thing for
{439}
the children. Under certain governmental conditions their parents cannot help them; they must accept that.
J.K. Does it put the children on their own responsibility?
J.T. Yes. It is most solemn. The first judgment God brings in is to break the staff of bread and cause famine. In that the parents cannot help, the children there get no help from their parents. "Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, should be in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord Jehovah". The second judgment is evil beasts passing through the land, and the third is a sword upon the land, God through it cutting off man and beast; the fourth is pestilence, also cutting off man and beast. It is a terrible outlook for the sons and daughters; the time is past for help from their parents, a most solemn thought. This is one of the most solemn things you can get in the Scriptures regarding families. The opposite is that parents who hold their children and bring them up for the Lord have God with them for their salvation, as in Noah's case.
{440}
RIGHTEOUSNESS (4)
@Genesis 15:1 - 6; @Romans 4:9 - 25
J.T. The part of our subject now before us is righteousness by faith. Noah became heir of the righteousness which is by faith, but that righteousness came in through Abraham. It is worked out in Romans and it covers the present time of the gospel period. The position of Abraham, who was heir of the world, stands related to it as being the father of all who believe, whether they are of the circumcision or whether they are not. So the matter opens up a wide sphere including ourselves as Abraham's children who are justified by faith without the deeds of the law. It is very remarkable that in @Genesis 15 we get introduced for the first time in Scripture the formal idea of the word of God. It points to the position of Christ as the Word as John presents Him, that is, it is the title He has taken on as unfolding the mind of God. It is through Him in this character that the mind of God is unfolded. And the idea as coming in here in Genesis points to this present dispensation. The gospel is announced on the principle of righteousness by faith; it is a question of the word, or the mind of God.
A.E.H. What is the difference between the two thoughts: "Jehovah had *said* to Abram" (@Genesis 12:1), and "the *word* of Jehovah came to Abram" (@Genesis 15:1)?
J.T. The first reference is a formal communication, but in chapter 15 it is, "After these things the word of Jehovah came to Abram". This is not simply formal, it is more, it is the *word* of Jehovah. It marks the position in this chapter. Again in verse 4, "And behold, the word of Jehovah came to him". There is more in the *word* than is formally stated.
{441}
A.E.H. It involves the difference between the Scriptures and what Christ is.
J.T. Well, that is a good suggestion. Scripture is sometimes designated the Word of God, but it is that only in a limited way. It is what is *written*. You cannot say that all the mind of God is formally written; there is the idea of the word of God as received currently in the power of the Spirit. The ministry of the apostles is spoken of as the word of God in @Acts 6:2. The unfolding of it by the Spirit may take place at any time. In Hebrews it is called "living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do" (@Hebrews 4:12,13), showing that the idea of the 'word' involves God Himself.
L.E.S. @Luke 1:2 speaks of "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word".
J.T. Yes the title 'Word' is in Luke and in John. Luke speaks of Christ under that name as well-known, it is a designation evidently known when He was here in the flesh. It was a title current amongst the saints then, for Luke makes no formal explanation of it, he simply mentions the Lord as such in his narrative to Theophilus: "Forasmuch as many have undertaken to draw up a relation concerning the matters fully believed among us, as those who from the beginning were eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word have delivered them to us" (@Luke 1:1,2). Luke would no doubt have explained the use of this designation to Theophilus had it not been well known. John uses the same term to designate the Lord personally: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" (John 1:1).
{442}
A.E.H. That is very important. I may read the Scriptures but unless the word of God comes into my soul there will be no light. The word of God is God morally set out in Christ, would you say?
J.T. Not only what is expressed, but what may be there though not expressed.
A.E.J.A. There is a distinction then between Jehovah speaking to Abram of certain happenings and the word coming to him?
J.T. Yes. It says, "After these things the word of Jehovah came to Abram". Now it is conveying His *mind* to Abram; it comes directly to the person in a vision. @Hebrews 1:1,2 says, "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son". The Word is implied, God is addressing Himself to His people in a certain Person, namely the Son. It is the Word in John's and Luke's gospel; and here the word of Jehovah comes to Abram. It would imply more than simply what is stated to him verbally. Many details enter into it which would be the enlargement of the general thought of the word.
J.C. Would it be right to say that in chapter 15 Jehovah is telling Abram what He is going to be to him, whereas in chapter 12 He is telling him what He is going to do?
J.T. Yes; chapter 15 is a great advance on chapter 12. There is nothing said about the word coming to Abram in chapter 12; it merely says, "Jehovah had said to Abram", which is a verbal communication when he was in the land of Mesopotamia. Chapter 15 expresses God's *mind*; there are details, of course, but Abram is being brought into touch with the divine mind: "the word of Jehovah came to Abram in a vision". It is extensive in its bearing, because Abram is the heir of the world and he is the father of many nations, and it is clear that
{443}
God's mind must enter into that. A great and wide thought comes in here. In this chapter we have the first mention of "the word of Jehovah" and of a vision.
D.R. If the word is God's mind, what did Paul mean when he said it was given to him to complete the word of God?
J.T. Well, that would be in the sense of the *scope* of it: it was filled out or completed by the truth of the mystery. The assembly was the completion of the word of God; what was hidden throughout the ages is now disclosed. Many phases of it had already been dealt with, and this matter here is really the beginning of them. Abraham is heir of the world; this is not said of Noah but of Abram; Noah was heir of righteousness, Abram the heir of *the* world itself. That requires a great deal of unfolding of the mind of God, and His *word* covers it. It is completed in the truth of the assembly -- unfolded by Paul. Here God has a person entirely under His control in what He has to say; there is no disturbance, Abram is taken aside by God in a vision. The primary writing of Scripture must have had that character, God taking persons aside, drawing them aside from disturbing elements so that there might be divine accuracy.
S.P. "The Spirit of Jehovah spoke by me, And his word was on my tongue. The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spoke to me" (@2 Samuel 23:2,3).
J.T. That alludes to an oracular communication. Noah had one of those, apparently. The oracular communication tells of things about to be done but covers only that particular matter. What was said to Balaam was oracular, and there are things that take that character with us, covering just local matters. But here the word of God characteristically is in mind. In Hebrews it runs on to God Himself, "And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes,
{444}
with whom we have to do". It runs into what God is; nothing is hidden from Him with whom we have to do. That is God. It gives the idea of the word of God a great place: "penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart". You cannot limit that to a mere communication covering one item. It is the great general thought as to what God is, and it all enables us to understand @John 1, that the Lord Jesus Christ is designated in that way. It is what is in the mind of God and what is expressed; not only what is expressed, but what is in it. The Lord Jesus brings all that out.
A.E.J.A. When the word of the Lord comes in a vision it is much more important than when He just speaks.
J.T. I think that it is. God has a vessel that He is about to speak to, and which He intends to use wholly for Himself without any possibility of intrusion or distraction. I believe that is in mind here. So Peter went to the house-top and there an ecstasy came upon him and he saw the vessel descending.
A.D. Would the revelation of the word here to Abram be the result of what he says to the king of Sodom in verse 22 of the previous chapter? "And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lifted up my hand to Jehovah, the Most High God, possessor of heavens and earth". Would that give a moral basis for the word coming to him?
J.T. Quite so. It is worked out in that way so that we have the phrase here, "After these things". It is as though Abram has now reached the time for Jehovah to thus approach him. "After these things" points to chapter 14.
L.E.S. @Psalm 105:19 says, "Until the time when what he said came about: the word of Jehovah tried him".
J.T. That helps in what we are saying. The
{445}
allusion is to the mind of God being disclosed in some way during Joseph's affliction. It was "until the time when what he said came about", showing how servants are tested in order to be fitted for what God intends them to do.
H.H. Would the Hymn, 'Thou art the blest incarnate Word', have the thought of what is current as referring to Christ where He is now?
J.T. It is taken from @John 1, the writer believing that He was the Word, and necessarily incarnate. That hymn was written by one who *had been* a Unitarian and was converted, and as it stresses @John 1 it shows how thoroughly he was converted. "Thou art the blest incarnate Word, The Father's only Son". (`11:1)
H.H. Would you say that the Lord Jesus can be regarded in glory as the Word now?
J.T. Certainly. All that comes out now by the Spirit must be attributed to Him. All the ministry must have that character, for the apostle says to the Corinthians, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" (@1 Corinthians 3:16). What proceeded from the temple would be on the same principle as what came out in Christ personally. What comes out now from the temple, which is the saints, has the same character as what came out in Him as Man here, for He was the temple of God; (@John 2:19 - 21).
L.E.S. Would @Revelation 19:11 - 13 confirm what you have said? "And I saw the heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and one sitting on it, called Faithful and True, and he judges and makes war in righteousness. And his eyes are a flame of fire, and upon his head many diadems, having a name written which no one knows but himself; and he is clothed with a garment dipped in blood; and his name is called The Word of God".
J.T. That helps. He has a name written that no
{446}
one knows but Himself. But this designation is known, His name is called The Word of God. It covers Christianity and all the ministry that comes out; all depends on the position of Christ as the Word. The Holy Spirit is the medium down here.
A.E.H. What is the force of the word to the Philadelphian assembly, "and hast kept my word" (@Revelation 3:8)?
J.T. It is the character of Christ's word there. Whatever it was, they worked it out there. The keeping of the word is the application of the thing. It is workable.
Rem. John was on Patmos for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus.
J.T. Just so. He was there on that ground. So that in a sense there are always new or fresh thoughts; not new principles, for Paul completed the word of God in that sense -- there are no new principles, but there is the opening up of the truth and the application of it to meet current needs, and that divine things should become intelligible to us. We read, "accept with meekness the implanted word, which is able to save your souls" (@James 1:21). It is to be received into our souls.
S.P. Does that constitute righteousness in the case of Abram?
J.T. Yes. He believed Jehovah and that was counted unto him for righteousness.
A.E.J.A. The Lord brought Abram out to view the heavens -- to count the stars, and assured him that his seed should be like that. Would that be the 'vision' that he saw?
J.T. Verse 6 is the great thought of the chapter, that "he believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness". God is bringing a great thing into the world, and Abram as being affected by it has the *word* of it; the purpose of God in Abram is to be effected. It is established by a sure covenant. The
{447}
*mind* of God, as we have seen, enters into this chapter. In the second half of the chapter Abram raises the question, "Lord Jehovah, how shall I know that I shall possess it?" That is, the mind or purpose of God is coming into his soul, but how is he to *know* that he shall possess the promised land? In what follows Jehovah shows him.
S.P. There is no doubt in Abram's mind.
J.T. No, for God answers him showing him *how* he should know.
A.E.J.A. Faith will get abundant assurance of what is coming to pass.
J.T. Yes, it is knowledge by faith; Abram asked for it and Jehovah instructed him. Peter says, "in your faith have also virtue" (@2 Peter 1:5). Faith is the great starting point -- that I believe God, and believing is reckoned to Abram for righteousness.
D.R. Why is it that in this chapter the reception of the word is reckoned as righteousness? In chapter 13 God shows Abram the north, south, east and west and promises to make his seed as the dust of the earth and he immediately moves on to Hebron; but this great thought of righteousness does not come out till chapter 15. In chapter 13 it is the dust of the earth, but in chapter 15 it is the stars of the heaven.
J.T. This shows the higher ground here. God is referring to great matters in the vision; it is "After these things" -- the time has come for the communication of God to Abram in this way.
H.H. Does the thought of the heir involve sonship?
J.T. Righteousness is stressed here. @Romans 4:13 says, "For it was not by law that the promise was to Abraham, or to his seed, that he should be heir of the world, but by righteousness of faith". Faith enters into all these things. The word coming to Abram here is on the line of faith, righteousness by
{448}
faith. So that the position is impregnable; Abram's heirship is assured on the principle of faith. A world is here set up in faith, righteousness by faith. There is the evidence of life in it. Life is through faith; realisation and confirmation are by the Spirit.
H.H. The heir implies sonship in some way. It concerns God's promise to Abram.
J.T. Heirship in one coming from himself is included in what he is to believe. "And Abram said, Lord Jehovah, what wilt thou give me? seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus. And Abram said, Lo, to me thou hast given no seed, and behold, a son of my house will be mine heir". Then "the word" comes to him: "And behold, the word of Jehovah came to him, saying, This shall not be thine heir, but he that will come forth out of thy body shall be thine heir". All that enters into the heirship of the world, but really Christ is in mind. It is in the one that is to be born -- Isaac -- that heirship lies. "And he believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness".
S.P. Is it suggestive that Abram afterwards speaks of a "child" whereas Jehovah speaks of a "son"? @Genesis 17:17 says, "Shall a child be born to him that is a hundred years old?" But in verse 19 God says, "Sarah thy wife shall indeed bear thee a son", suggesting that son is a greater thought than child in that way.
J.T. Yes; it is the seed -- it is Isaac -- really Christ. The stars refer to a great number. @Galatians 3:16 confines the truth at first to Isaac, but then it is Christ "And to thy seed; which is Christ". The heirship of Abram comes out to us through Christ. So that the blessing of Abraham arrives on the nations and we receive the promise of the Spirit on the principle of faith; because Christ is the real seed that is in mind in this chapter. It is the ground Galatians takes, so that the blessing reaches us
{449}
through the seed. The large number is worked out there, for Jerusalem has now more children than when she had a husband. So this great principle of righteousness is extended out to the nations and Abraham becomes our father through it; and a great number of persons are accredited to Jerusalem who now has no husband. Galatians works that out. We all belong to Jerusalem in that sense, God accredits us to her. It is worked out from Abraham; Abraham is the father of all the faithful.
A.E.H. Would there be any relation between the two thoughts of eternal life and sonship?
J.T. I think eternal life is involved in the blessing of Abraham. Preceding, there is the reduction of the span of human life. Abraham himself lived only one hundred and seventy-five years, which was far less than the antediluvian men, and even much less than Shem and his immediate descendants. Isaac lives one hundred and eighty years, Jacob one hundred and forty-seven years, Joseph one hundred and ten years, and Moses one hundred and twenty years. All this makes way for and accentuates the blessing of Abraham which involves eternal life. Everlasting life is an immense thought as over against the smallness of human life, for Moses says in @Psalm 90:10, "The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if, by reason of strength, they be fourscore years, yet their pride is labour and vanity, for it is soon cut off, and we fly away". We may as well form a true estimate of that life and make room for the full thought of eternal life: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal" (@John 3:16). Faith is addressed throughout -- it is believing in God. Abraham is the great example of it, righteousness was reckoned to him on that principle.
L.E.S. What is faith?
J.T. Well, it comes by hearing. It is "by a report,
{450}
but the report by God's word". There is a strong link between faith in man and the mind of God. The mind of God is expressed in His word. There is instruction in comparing and linking the word of God with faith in Abram as seen in @Genesis 15; the word of God came to him and he believed. The report comes to me -- do I believe?
H.H. Faith and righteousness are not one and the same thing.
J.T. No, faith is on man's side, but reckoned by God as righteousness to him who has it. Look at @Romans 4: it is not only that I say that I believe a statement of Scripture, but what is the state of my soul? God is dealing with my state. What is said of Abraham here? "(According as it is written, I have made thee father of many nations,) before the God whom he believed, who quickens the dead, and calls the things which be not as being; who against hope believed in hope to his becoming father of many nations". Believing in hope is faith. The point is, the state of the soul was hope; hope was in his soul as believing. God is dealing with man as the subject of His work. "Against hope" he "believed in hope", that was the state of soul. And so he becomes the father of many nations.
L.E.S. I think that is helpful. So many have a hazy idea of faith.
J.T. The apostle goes on to link faith with the mind of God: the *reckoning* is in the mind of God. The word of God comes to Abram -- faith cometh by hearing and hearing by report -- but the report is by God's word, that is, it is linked with the mind of God.
A.E.H. It would not be possible for us to go through the experience of @Romans 7 unless this transaction between Himself and our souls came first. Would that link with Abram's experience in chapter 15?
J.T. It is a question of *how*. Christianity is the
{451}
great *how*. How are things worked out in our souls? The report is to you and how are you affected by it? Where you come in is on the line of hope. With reference to this matter of the heirship of the world, Abram says, How? "Lord Jehovah, how shall I know that I shall possess it?" And God says to him, "Take me a heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle dove, and a young pigeon". Notice the sex -- it is a heifer of three years; then the second is the same sex, a she-goat; and the third a ram of three years. These are matters involving knowledge and Abraham is accredited with having some knowledge. It requires knowledge to know rams and heifers. God reckons on what the believer knows. He was to take these three creatures and besides them a turtle dove and a pigeon. It was a test as to his knowledge. Abram is to secure these animals, how long did it take him? He has to go to the flock and to tax the knowledge he has to aid him in securing them. Then there is the second part -- he divides them. He is not told to do this, but it was needed. "And he took all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid the half of each opposite its fellow; but the birds he did not divide". God does not say anything more after He lets His mind be known as to the creatures, Abram does the rest; and he makes no mistake or omission, he does what the occasion required. He is a man of knowledge and God counts on this. He does the needed things, he divides the animals in the midst and rightly places the pieces; he had knowledge enough for all that. But what he does brings out the opposition of the devil. This will surely come, the devil will always seek to resist what is done for God, especially as done according to His mind. But he must be kept out. In the assembly we are fortified with knowledge to deal with him; Paul says, "we are not ignorant of
{452}
his devices". There is also power for this protection. There may not be instruction in detail, but divinely-given intelligence knows what to do. Christians are addressed as "intelligent persons". Verse 12 says, "and Abram scared them away. And as the sun was just going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and behold, a horror, a great darkness, fell upon him". This is an *experience*, God is putting him through this experience corresponding with @Romans 7; note, it is a *horror*. This experience is preceded by the exercise of power against the enemy. The birds of prey are scared away; we must not give place to the devil.
S.P. Is that why James says of Abraham, "Ye see that a man is justified on the principle of works, and not on the principle of faith only" (@James 2:24)?
J.T. Yes. That refers to what Abram is doing corresponding with the righteousness which he had by faith. He knew how to keep the enemy out. The *how* as to all this is in Romans. In chapter 7 the person sees what is in himself -- deep down in himself -- the horror of the working of sin in the flesh, and he cries, "O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me?" So God brings us through this experience to make real men and women out of us; to make us realise in ourselves what it is to deal with evil.
L.E.S. We are told to resist the devil and he will flee from us.
J.T. Paul says, "We are not ignorant of his devices". Abram was not ignorant here, he knew what to do, whereas Pharaoh's baker allowed the birds to come down and eat what he had prepared for the king. What is prepared for God by Christians will, unless guarded, be taken by the devil or his emissaries.
A.E.J.A. Is it as we become righteous that we are constituted believers such as God can use? We should do things according to divine instructions.
{453}
J.T. We are obligated to *know* what to do. As we are divinely taught, God leaves things with us; sonship implies this. He would tell us to use the knowledge we have. In Romans circumcision is introduced into the matter of justification by faith: "Does this blessedness then rest on the circumcision, or also on the uncircumcision? For we say that faith has been reckoned to Abraham as righteousness. How then has it been reckoned?" Notice the word 'how'. Then the Spirit of God brings in @Genesis 17. But Abram is righteous in chapter 15, before circumcision is introduced; why does circumcision come in then? It says that "he received the sign of circumcision as seal of the righteous of faith which he had being in uncircumcision". Circumcision as the seal of righteousness involved @Romans 7; it is the negation of the flesh. But the truth of circumcision belongs more to Colossians than to Romans. Those who are justified are not going to allow sin. James says that he would prove faith by works: "What is the profit, my brethren, if any one say he have faith, but have not works? can faith save him? Now if a brother or a sister is naked and destitute of daily food, and one from amongst you say to them, Go in peace, be warmed and filled; but give not to them the needful things for the body, what is the profit? So also faith, if it have not works, is dead by itself" (@James 2:14 - 17). Circumcision as a spiritual thought involves the Spirit, as @Philippians 3:3 shows. So James goes on to say, "But some one will say, *Thou* hast faith and *I* have works. Shew me thy faith without works, and *I* from my works will shew thee my faith" (verse 18). That is the great point: faith is attested by works. James is as much part of the word of God as Romans is. James is showing how circumcision comes in, it implies the Spirit; it is through Him, as received by the believer, that the gospel is accredited. James is opening that out. "*Thou* believest that God is
{454}
one. Thou doest well. The demons even believe, and tremble" (verse 19). How remarkable that is! But it corresponds with the power Christians have in the Spirit. We can link it on with @Genesis 15, the birds of prey are kept away by Abram. He "scared them away"; there is power in the believer to scare the devil away. So the mind of God goes through.
A.E.H. What you were saying about the need of circumcision and the complete acceptance of the cutting off of the flesh, involves power in me.
J.T. That is @Romans 8:4, "The righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". @Romans 8 is the idea of the seal of righteousness; a man sets to his seal that God is true -- circumcision implies that.
H.H. "Circumcision, of the heart, in spirit, not in letter", (@Romans 2:29). That is the proper Jew.
J.T. Quite so. The epistle works it out. Chapter 7, as to our *state*, is the 'how' -- a crucial matter for us.
H.H. Abram is reckoned righteous before circumcision, but then the righteousness is sealed afterwards.
J.T. The seal of righteousness is circumcision.
{455}
RIGHTEOUSNESS (5)
@Genesis 18:16 - 33
J.T. With reference to what we had this morning, it will be remembered what Abram was directed to provide in chapter 15. We should therefore look a little more into @Romans 4 so as to see more clearly the relation of circumcision to righteousness. The truth works out in that chapter into the thought of life which God gives to those who have faith. We saw that the creatures mentioned are: a heifer of three years old, a she-goat of three years old and a ram of three years old. All these were to be procured in order to have an answer to what Abram desired to know. He said, "how shall I know?" and Jehovah answered him in directing him to take these creatures; and then we are told that he did secure them and divided them in the midst, "and laid the half of each opposite its fellow, but the birds he did not divide". The latter represent *whole* ideas. Then we are told that the birds of prey came down on the carcases, and Abram scared them away. All this enters into the teaching of the chapter, because it enters into the answer by God as to how Abram was to know. The creatures are two females and one male, which allude to certain thoughts called objective and subjective. The female alludes to the working out of affection, and these are mature creatures, three years old. The male would point to what is progenitive. God is going on the great principle of increase and all this enters into the matter of knowledge -- how we should know. Abram desired to know and Jehovah showed him the way. This involves @Romans 7. @Genesis 15 is a processing time in the history of Abram and @Romans 7 has this same character. Romans indicates the processing time for the Christian -- showing how
{456}
he is to know. @Romans 12 speaks about "intelligent service", and linked with that is the word of the apostle, "I speak as to intelligent persons" (@1 Corinthians 10:15). The saints are expected to know what they are to do and how to do it. We are to be marked by intelligence.
S.P. Would you say that the writer in @Romans 7 saying, "I delight in the law of God according to the inward man", would be coming through Abram's experience here as looking at these creatures, which suggest the excellencies of Christ coming into evidence?
J.T. That is clearly how the truth stands in @Romans 7; the apostle through introspection reached that result. He went through the experience until he came to "I myself", that is the crisis. He is now determined that with his mind he will serve God's law. That is not specifically the ten commandments but God's law *characteristically*, and chapter 8 shows the power that is available for that, the power of the Spirit, "that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit" (verse 4). The law there would be the law of Moses; "who do no walk according to flesh but according to Spirit", would suggest that one has taken on that *character*. The chapter then goes on to develop much more than that, as we all know, but it gives great place to the Spirit of God. The Spirit is mentioned fourteen times in the first half of the chapter.
A.E.J.A. Is that in relation to the resolution by the spiritual mind to serve God's law?
J.T. Yes. The spiritual mind is developed in the chapter: "for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God" (verse 14).
A.E.J.A. It is not a mind subject to the flesh but a mind subject to the Spirit. In Galatians the works of the flesh are seen in contrast to the fruits of the Spirit.
{457}
J.T. In Romans the writer resolves that with the mind he will serve God's law -- the flesh can only serve sin's law.
D.R. Abram's knowledge affected him inwardly.
J.T. Romans contemplates all that, the accumulation of knowledge in the believer in this way. God tells Abram what to bring and leaves him to decide what to do with them. "And he took all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid the half of each opposite its fellow; but the birds he did not divide". Through what he does knowledge is developed. He scares away the birds, which are, in type, the devil's activities. Then the sun is going down -- the end of the order of things he had been in, and "a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and behold, a horror, a great darkness, fell upon him". It is a terrible experience. But then verse 13 says, "And he said to Abram, Know assuredly". This is what he desired to know -- "Know assuredly that thy seed will be a sojourner in a land that is not theirs, and they shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years. But also that nation which they shall serve I will judge; and afterwards they shall come out with great property. And thou shalt go to they fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age. And in the fourth generation they shall come hither again; for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full". Well now, that is the first part of the instruction, but it goes on: "And it came to pass when the sun had gone down, and it was dark, that behold, there was a smoking furnace, and a flame of fire which passed between those pieces". This is the second thing by which he is to know, and it shows that Abram acted with instinctive intelligence in placing the pieces in the positions stated. God recognised their order as the passage shows: "there was a smoking furnace, and a flame of fire which passed between those pieces". That is, God takes on the elements of knowledge found
{458}
in His servant, which here point to the death of Christ. The smoking furnace and the flame of fire passed between the pieces. And then the passage goes on, "On the same day Jehovah made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed I give this land". The process has been gone through and finished so that Abram may know that his seed should possess the promised land. Typically, it involves that what God has engaged Himself to is reached in the soul of the believer; it is the working out of divine counsels.
Ques. Does it involve what is found in @Romans 8, "the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord"?
J.T. Well, the first thought in that connection is in @Romans 5:5, "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us". And then nothing can separate us from the love of God: "For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord" (chapter 8:38,39). That is one of the great features reached in @Romans 8. The process of knowledge is plain, and the result is plain, that God reaches His thought, the complete deliverance of His people and their being set up in their own land.
L.E.S. There is a reference in @Hosea 4:6 which fits in well with these two chapters: "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; for thou hast rejected knowledge, and I will reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me; seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God". And then "Come and let us return unto Jehovah: for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us; on the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live before his face; and we shall know -- we shall follow on to
{459}
know Jehovah: his going forth is assured as the morning dawn; and he will come unto us as the rain, as the latter rain which watereth the earth" (@Hosea 6:1 - 3).
J.T. Yes, that is all involved in what we are saying. No true believer would exclude himself from knowledge of this kind. The service of God requires knowledge; we are to *know*. The apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons" (@1 Corinthians 10:15); "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ?" "Is it not?" That is for *you* to say. What is your judgment of it? Regarding the elements of the death of Christ, what is the judgment of each of us?
S.P. In @1 Corinthians 6:19 the apostle says, "Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you?" Do ye not *know*? The apostle is not concerned about their lack of knowledge exactly, but that they were not recognising it.
J.T. That is the point raised here. They had the knowledge but it was nullified by the bad state amongst them.
J.C. In connection with the fire passing between the pieces, would that be divine approval?
J.T. Yes. Abram's intelligence is owned in it. *Power* is seen there -- the smoking furnace and the flame of fire pass between the pieces. It confirms the knowledge Abram evidenced in setting the pieces thus. The concern of the apostle in his letters to the Corinthians and the Romans is largely in respect of knowledge.
H.H. It involved their appreciation of the death of Christ.
J.T. Two things are put together -- the deep sleep and the horror of great darkness. And then there is the smoking furnace and the flame of fire passing between the pieces; Abram has put the pieces there
{460}
and God moves in relation to what he has done. The same thing is seen in Revelation. God moves in relation to the judgment of the saints: "Rejoice over her, heaven, and ye saints and apostles and prophets; for God has judged your judgment upon her" (@Revelation 18:20). God comes in in relation to what the saints have arrived at.
H.H. In regard to the present war -- the saints are going to come out of that with more substance than ever. God is waiting for the prayers of the saints so He can deal with things according to their prayers, as He will deal with Babylon according to their judgment. Are we exercised about the matter? I have been - as to whether our prayers in regard of the present conflict are on a spiritual level.
J.T. God is suggesting to us that we come out of it "with great property", spiritual property. Are we ready to help in our prayers or whatever way we can to secure this property? God would instruct us as to what is involved. How is the result to be brought about? The war is universal, the names of countries, seas and rivers are becoming more familiar to us. This is in the general design -- in view of the future. The earth is the Lord's, all these seas and countries are the Lord's, and He is going to take them on. But how are they to be taken on? The present people who are in them are not worthy of them, but God has heirship in mind. Abram is heir of the world.
A.H. Abram would be an overcomer.
J.T. Clearly he is. "On the same day Jehovah made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed I give this land". But, as you may say, he is going to die. But faith has a long outlook! In this sense the death of a saint is but an incident in his history; he will be raised up in the *last day*. The overcomers will rule the earth. The word to Thyatira is: "And he that overcomes, and he that keeps unto the end
{461}
my works, to him will I give authority over the nations, and he shall shepherd them with an iron rod; as vessels of pottery are they broken in pieces, as I also have received from my Father; and I will give to him the morning star" (@Revelation 2:26 - 28). God is preparing persons to take charge under Christ. The heavenly city will come down, having the glory of God, and it will be the centre of government.
S.P. The widest circulation possible should be given in our localities to any information received from brethren in various parts of the world.
J.T. That is happening today. Now is the processing time -- the making time. God is preparing inhabitants for heaven. The earth will be suitably peopled, too, and the knowledge of God will cover it as the waters cover the sea.
L.E.S. The character of instruction seen in this chapter will work out for great wealth in the assembly in relation to the coming day.
J.T. It will. @Genesis 15 should be read in the light of what we considered in @Romans 4 as to Abraham's faith: "And he received the sign of circumcision as seal of the righteousness of faith which he had". That again links with @Romans 7 -- the serving of God's law and knowing how, at the same time, to keep the flesh in its place, which is by the Spirit in the believer. God has not literally destroyed it, but He gives the believer power to control it. To rule the earth you have to learn to control sin in yourself. Am I able to control myself? Self-control is a fruit of the Spirit, according to @Galatians 5:23. Flesh can only serve the law of sin.
A.E.H. In @Genesis 18 we read that God said of Abraham, "For I know him that he will command his children and his household after him". Is there any link with the smoking furnace and the flame of fire in that God is taking up what Abraham does? The knowledge of God works out in substance, as
{462}
we have seen, and this is in accord with his government of his house.
J.T. Yes. He is said to be the friend of God. We have spoken of Abel and Noah, and now we have the heir of the world as part of our subject. God is not ashamed of him, He is not ashamed to be called his God. And it is said in @Romans 4 that he believed God "in hope to his becoming father of many nations". It was through the power of God, not of the flesh; morally through the circumstances seen in @Genesis 18, in which chapter the question of the disposition of the world comes into view. The history of Sodom would suggest how God is dealing with the world, and we as of Abraham are one with Him in it. He makes His mind known to Abraham, for Abraham is His friend; according to chapter 15, made intelligent. He is concerned about the righteous, and God is concerned about them; this is what is coming before us. We must keep in mind who Abraham is and what relations he has with God. Jehovah came to him in company with three men; they communed with him but Abraham was not the primary objective of their journey. God is on the way to look after a great matter -- the judgment of the world. He has stopped to speak to Abraham on the way. God expresses confidence in Abraham.
S.P. In verse 23 Abraham says to God, "Wilt thou also cause the righteous to perish with the wicked?" suggesting the appreciation in Abraham's soul of the righteous.
J.T. All that comes out. The first paragraph in the chapter ends with verse 5, the second with verse 8, and then Sarah comes in; she is to be a mother. Then there is the matter of the judgment of Sodom, and Abraham's intercession for it. You can see all the way through that God is honouring Abraham; He says, "I know him".
D.R. Stephen says of Abraham that Jehovah
{463}
"gave to him the covenant of circumcision; and thus he begat Isaac and circumcised him the eighth day" (@Acts 7:8). There is circumcision again.
J.T. There is no provision for the flesh at all, but for the Spirit.
D.R. It fits in here exactly because immediately after this covenant Abraham takes his whole household and circumcises it.
J.T. We were speaking of the divine journey seen here. It is very touching; God is on His way and He calls on Abraham, His friend. Abraham is the friend of God and with God in all that He is doing, and God talks over this transaction with him. He is going to Sodom. It looks on to the present time: God is on the way to deal with the world, but He is lingering in the gospel -- still carrying it on. Wrath is revealed, but not yet executed. In the meantime God is with His people, supporting them in their service and testimony.
H.H. In @John 15:14 we are called friends; the Lord says, "*Ye* are my friends".
J.T. Very beautiful! So James says, "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness, and he was called Friend of God" (chapter 2:23). Would not every one of us like to be so near to God that He can talk with him, take counsel with him? It is very touching!
H.H. Hushai was David's friend. "Is this thy kindness to thy friend?" Absalom says (@2 Samuel 16:17).
A.E.J.A. That is why we wait in patience in what God is doing now with the nations until the wickedness of the Amorites is full; until apostasy is fully developed.
J.T. It is according to the knowledge suggested in chapter 15. Christians know of the government of God, what He is doing in this sense; He is disclosing His mind to us. The Lord comes to us, according to
{464}
@John 14:18; in the sense spoken of there the divine visits are continuous.
S.P. As we feel for the brethren the result is that the feelings manifest in Abraham mark us. He says, "There are perhaps fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not forgive the place for the sake of the fifty righteous that are therein?" He is concerned about the righteous and he also has right feelings regarding men in a general sense.
J.T. Quite so. Look at his conversation! Abraham's concern is the righteous, he is not telling of the evil in Sodom. Sodom is condemned, as the sequel showed; there is no need to say anything about that.
D.R. Why does Peter mention Lot?
J.T. Well, Peter and John make the most of what there is of God. If there is a Christian in this town and a brother knows him, he will make the most of him. If he is a righteous man we must make the most of him. God does not say *in Genesis* that Lot is a righteous man, He leaves it to Peter to tell us.
D.R. Lot was to his household as one that jested, but Abraham commanded his children and his household after him. I was wondering if all this might enter into the prayer meetings for the gospel -- that the righteous might be saved.
J.T. Indeed it would. We see the compassion of Jehovah for Lot. We have to wait until hundreds of years afterwards to learn certain things about him, and we may be encouraged to regard him as more valuable than we had thought. Peter says that God "having reduced the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, setting them as an example to those that should afterwards live an ungodly life; and saved righteous Lot" (@2 Peter 2:6,7). It is remarkable that it is a man who specially writes of the government of God that tells us this. And thus he suggests to us to make the most
{465}
of real Christians wherever we see them, of course hating the garment spotted by the flesh (@Jude 23).
A.E.H. I have wondered if there is not sometimes a danger of our spending too much time on this kind of person. You would go to the fullest extent to serve them but you would guard against falling into the snare in which they may be held.
J.T. Yes. You would go a good distance, but do not lose time on them. The angels hurried Lot out. Those with whom we are free to walk should have the *first* place in our thoughts.
A.E.J.A. You would have an intelligent spiritual appraisal of persons claiming your attention.
J.T. This passage helps in that. Abraham is delightful to God. "And Jehovah said, Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing? Since Abraham shall indeed become a great and mighty nation; and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him. For I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him". That is God's commendation of His servant. And then Jehovah says, "Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great and their sin is very grievous, I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come to me; and if not, I will know it". But why did Jehovah say this? God is stating the case. He has His man, His friend; He is communing with him. And then, "the men turned thence, and went towards Sodom"; it is their business to go on. But Abraham remains standing before Jehovah. The two went on, but could not God recall them if Abraham succeeds? So Abraham is having much liberty to intercede in this matter. This is our position today; God is moving in this
{466}
day. Are we of interest to heaven? Abraham is. What is he aiming at? We preach the gospel in our day; what is to be said? What is God giving in our day? In the past hundred and twenty years much light has been brought in. Abraham is interceding and God is harkening to him. Look at his attitude -- it is the spirit of Christ, and that is what pleases God. "Abraham remained yet standing before Jehovah". He is standing, pleading with God: "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father" (@Ephesians 2:18). So the prayer meetings take on an exalted character, affording God's priests opportunities to plead with Him for all men, especially for His people.
A.E.H. That is all very interesting. In regard to this matter of prayer, one notices in the prayers, without any reflection, that there is a great deal of carelessness in the way the Lord's name is used; no reference in some cases in the end of our prayers to the name of the Lord Jesus. We should be careful to realise that our prayers are made through Christ.
J.T. Yes. And then we are to address the Father. The Father is the first Person in the economy and generally our prayers should be directed to Him through Christ. "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father". One has often noticed the paucity of our prayers to the Father. The Lord encourages us to address our prayers to the Father through Christ by the Spirit. Philadelphia is the phase of the assembly representatively today. Ephesus has had its day; Smyrna, Pergamos and Thyatira respectively have had their days; as to historical fact Laodicea is now present, running on to the end, and is parallel with Philadelphia. What is the Lord's comment about Philadelphia? He says, "And to the angel of the assembly in Philadelphia write: These things saith the holy, the true; he that has the key of David, he who opens and no one shall
{467}
shut, and shuts and no one shall open: I know thy works" (@Revelation 3:7,8). Its character comes out in what it does. God is taking account of it. "Behold, I have set before thee an opened door, which no one can shut, because thou hast a little power, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name. Behold, I make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, *I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. I come quickly: hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown" (@Revelation 3:8 - 11). I think that is one of the most interesting passages that we could consider and carry away with us: what Philadelphia is in its day, which is the present day. What a place we have with God at the present time! The Lord can say about us, "I have loved thee", and he is going to make it known openly. There is that on earth *now* which He loves.
L.E.S. In addressing God or the Father in prayer would you bring in the name of the Lord Jesus?
J.T. Well, the word is, "giving thanks at all times for all things to him who is God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@Ephesians 5:20). And we have in @Colossians 3:17, "And everything, whatever ye may do in word or in deed, do all things in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him".
L.E.S. I have been exercised as to whether it is always necessary to bring in the name of the Lord Jesus.
J.T. The question is, what is told us to do? I would look for it especially in the public service of God, things done in the name of the Lord Jesus and
{468}
asked for in the name of the Lord Jesus. Of course undue repetitions should be avoided.
A.E.J.A. In speaking to the Father in our day can we go on what the Lord says in @John 16:23, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give you"?
J.T. We ask everything in His name. Now in the chapter before us we find that Abraham comes down to ten persons. He does not go any lower. Whether there were more than one is questionable; we cannot say there was a righteous person in that city except Lot. Abraham comes down to ten righteous persons: "Perhaps there may be ten found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the ten's sake". So at the present time, because of certain conditions, there may be an extending of the dispensation. In a sense the time has come for the man of sin; but what influence have the saints in relation to that? Is their influence respected in heaven so that the development of sin may be checked? There is a way being made for the people of God. Is it the outcome of the prayers and general influence of the saints of God? I would say that God has shown us the man of sin; He has caused him to appear in certain of his features. As in @Genesis 18, God has already moved in view of judgment. Here Abraham is seeking to hold Him back. While the assembly is here *in character* judgment in its full effect is held back. In @Genesis 18 Abraham pleads for ten, and Jehovah says He will not destroy Sodom for the ten's sake. What a suggestion as to judgment that is today! Think of what went on between Jehovah and Abraham! "And Jehovah went away when he had ended speaking to Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place". How much there is here for contemplation! I do not think God has finished speaking to *us* yet. Wrath from heaven is still pending -- affected by God speaking to those of the assembly and they speaking
{469}
to Him. I believe much rests with the saints. The long suffering of God and the prayers of His people are of peculiar importance today.
A.E.J.A. Why does Abraham start at fifty and go down to ten?
J.T. It shows his zeal for the preservation of the righteous, especially Lot and his family, and it indicates also the *liberty* he had with Jehovah. Jehovah replies to His servant, having regard for his right feelings; there is no reproof. Abraham is full of the thought of the righteous and God values that. *He* values them still more than Abraham. For ten He will not destroy Sodom, wicked as it was, and this is His attitude today.
L.E.S. In @Zechariah 8:23 Jehovah says, "In those days shall ten men take hold, out of all languages of the nations, shall even take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you; for we have heard that God is with you". Does that enhance the value of righteous men with God?
J.T. Well, there are ten, the number Jehovah will spare the city for. There is a link there. As they are identifying themselves with God's people they would, in principle, be righteous.
S.P. In principle there is still the continuation of Abraham. God is going on and Abraham returns to his place in patience.
J.T. The next chapter in regard of Abraham is instructive: "And Abraham rose early in the morning and went to the place where he had stood before Jehovah; and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and lo, a smoke went up from the land as the smoke of a furnace" (chapter 19:27,28). That means that his prayer was not answered, because there was no just ground for it. But today God is clearly going on a little longer. Let us all take up the question, What is there here and continuing for the pleasure of
{470}
God? Judging by general characteristics, the time has come for the finishing of the dispensation. It is therefore a question as to why it is continuing. "Antichrist comes", but we know what hinders his actual presence; with other elements, it is what God has pleasure in.
L.E.S. Would that explain what was remarked earlier -- God "going on a little longer"?
J.T. Yes. The dispensation characteristically, however reduced, is continuing, God is going on with it. But of course we do not know how quickly things may change.
L.E.S. During the waiting period the great point for the saints is to be with God.
A.E.H. In the address to Philadelphia there is the testimony to certain ones that Christ has loved them. I suppose, for those who have eyes to see it, that is the thing now. It is not that we love Christ exactly, but that *He* loves us.
J.T. And He is with us because of that. "Behold, I make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee" (@Revelation 3:9). He will do that. So the point is to be lovable.
