{1}
*Pages 1 - 258 -- "Features of the Truth Bearing on the Last Days", Meetings in Canada and U.S.A., 1940 - 44. (Volume. 164 - Old Series)*.
FEATURES OF THE TRUTH BEARING ON THE LAST DAYS (1)
@John 18: 28 - 40; @John 19: 1 - 11
J.T. There are certain features of the truth that bear especially on the last days, and they are exemplified in certain persons. It is thought that these persons should be considered at this time. Of course the whole truth is presented in Christ, who is the truth, and hence in the first reading we shall consider Him in relation to what is specially in mind. The features refer to the position of the authorities, "the powers that be", in the last days. It is thought that the Lord Himself should be looked at first, as to His presence before Pilate seen in @John 18 and 19; then Paul before Agrippa and Festus, then Peter in certain connections, John in Revelation, and finally Timothy.
What is to be noted first is the conversation between the Lord and Pilate, which we may say is peculiar to John, and it is thought it would bear particularly on the last days. The government as appointed by God has been greatly accentuated by events that have arisen during recent times, extending back about thirty years, and it has come into contact with the Spirit of Christ in His people. The Lord has been helping the saints to say what is right to them, as He Himself did, and to act accordingly in other things. At the outset of the origination of the gentile monarchies great events occurred. The history of Nebuchadnezzar is outstanding. God gave him to be "king of kings", and great wars were carried on by him. Nebuchadnezzar and his successors came into contact with God's people in Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego these
{2}
and many others were enabled of God to act becomingly and to bear testimony. And God acted in the monarchs, too, so as to enhance the testimony that was rendered in that time. The bearing of it has come right down to us. The Romans, of course, were marked by great things, as indeed were all the four monarchies, but the Romans particularly. During the period of their domination the Lord Himself appeared. And now great events are taking place, and the Spirit of Christ is again active in relation to the governing powers. God is acting in them governmentally, too, so as to give effect to the testimony that is being rendered by one and another of His people. The Lord's own remarks in the two chapters read in John should have peculiar force with us in view of the end. The Lord asserts that His kingdom is not of this world. "Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought that I might not be delivered up to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not from hence", @John 18: 36. This is the most important passage of all that was in mind to be specially brought before the brethren at this time.
A.E.H. It is noteworthy in connection with the Lord going into the situation that, while generally in John He is moving of Himself, this passage that you have suggested starts with, "They lead therefore Jesus from Caiaphas".
J.T. He is now apprehended, not yet by the Romans but by the religious element in Jerusalem. He had gone into a garden, we are told in the beginning of the chapter. It is said, "Judas also, who delivered him up, knew the place, because Jesus was often there, in company with his disciples. Judas therefore, having got the band, and officers of the chief priests and Pharisees, comes there with lanterns and torches and weapons" (verses 2, 3). That is, He is pursued. He is still, in the beginning of the
{3}
chapter, acting of Himself, and goes to a place which had often been visited by Himself and His disciples, so that He is still free, acting as is customary with Him; but now He is pursued by the traitor who comes in a militant fashion with the officers of the chief priests and Pharisees. They have come to arrest Him, which they do, but He shows that His power remains with Him. They could not do anything save as He permitted them. He asked whom they sought (verse 4) and they said, "Jesus the Nazaraean. Jesus says to them, I am he. And Judas also, who delivered him up, stood with them. When therefore he said to them, I am he, they went away backward and fell to the ground". That is, He shows that they could not take His liberty away from Him save as He would permit them. This is in keeping with John¬ line. A divine Person was there and they could not do anything save as He permitted them. Therefore He again demands, after they went backward and fell to the ground, "Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus the Nazaraean. Jesus answered, I told you that I am he; if therefore ye seek me, let these go away; that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke, As to those whom thou hast given me, I have not lost one of them" (verses 7 - 9). These verses are of great importance in view of what is before us: a divine Person is there, and although those who would be His captors are armed with torches and lanterns and weapons, they could not do anything. As He said, "I am he", they went backward and fell to the ground. He is asserting His deity, so that the position is clear, all is at His behest; whatever He wills they may do, but nothing else. That is the position now, a divine Person is here, the Holy Spirit, and in His presence there is liberty; the bearing of this is universal. What is of God is maintained here in the fact that the Spirit of God is here. Nothing can
{4}
happen without God, so that we may allow ourselves to be apprehended if it be God's will. That is the position. It is a victorious position, though it involves suffering as the chapters plainly mark out. But the position in John is different from that in the other three gospels: the Lord shows that He *can* retain His liberty, Pilate could have no power against Him except as given from heaven.
H.B. Would the word as to His life in @John 10: 18 fit: "I have authority to lay it down"? He is in this situation in perfect control.
J.T. That is what comes out. Satan had selected his instruments, it was a satanic matter; Judas had come under his power and the devil was doing his utmost, but his emissaries were powerless. He himself was powerless. Then the Lord says, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away". He *could* retain His liberty, but He is going to allow them to take Him. He provides however for the disciples, they are to be let go.
J.W.D. Paul, when he called himself "the prisoner of Christ Jesus", and "the prisoner of the Lord", would move into that thought, would he not?
J.T. Quite so. The history of the voyage from Caesarea to Malta brings out that he had retained his liberty *inwardly*. "An angel of ... God ... stood by me", he says, @Acts 27: 23. Even outwardly he is, in a sense, in charge of the position; and as he reaches Rome, although still a prisoner, he retains liberty to carry on his service; and from there we have the greatest things from him in written ministry.
A.N.W. When he secured certain liberty by claiming to be a Roman, what of that?
J.T. That was, of course, failure. The Lord suffered before the high priest, and said, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil". This was, as ever with Him, absolutely right, in contrast to Paul's giving way in pressure. He used his Roman citizenship
{5}
to relieve himself, which was a descent from the level of faith he was on; but the Lord graciously considered for him so that it did not interfere with the general position and testimony of the apostle. The Lord said to him immediately after, "For as thou hast testified the things concerning me at Jerusalem, so thou must bear witness at Rome also".
R.W.S. After the Lord's enemies fell backward, Peter uses the sword (@John 18: 10): he missed the import at the moment of who the Person was.
J.T. He was falsifying the position. The Lord said to him, "Put the sword into the sheath; the cup which the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?"
A.E.H. Would the Lord's saying, "Let these go away", suggest that meeting the authorities in the proper way, and the consciousness of power, would help the brethren in carrying on; that there would be more liberty afforded them?
J.T. Yes. The Lord stands in the breach. He says, "I told you that I am he: if therefore ye seek me, let these go away". An important principle comes in there: that is, the Lord says things in His ministry in view of future occurrences; He says things prophetically, so that faith might be fortified. When the application time came, those who had faith would know what to do. So in verse 9 it is, "that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke, As to those whom thou hast given me, I have not lost one of them". He had spoken that prophetically in chapter 17. It was not simply historical at that time, but that that principle should go forward -- the Lord preserving His people that they should not be lost. But Peter, as far as his action goes, negatives that thought; his act is against what the Lord is doing, what He had said prophetically in chapter 17. Peter is nullifying that as far as his action goes. It was no doubt corrected, but I think the incident
{6}
shows how we may come in to thwart a prophetic word. We are fortified when some event happens if there has been a prophetic word as to it. Peter's action was nullifying what the Lord had said as to the preservation of the disciples. "Simon Peter *therefore*, having a sword". Is not that the sequence of the natural mind in Peter? It is certainly not a sequence from what the Lord had said, that none of them should be lost. 
Rem. We had a prophetic word in the last war with regard to the authorities.
J.T. The question of conscience came up in a remarkable way. So far as I know, there had been no conscription in Great Britain before, but the Lord allowed conditions to arise which necessitated conscription, that is, manpower conscripted by the authorities. At that time the Spirit of the Lord raised up a standard, and it has stood as a guide for the saints. No one at that time expected this condition to arise so soon afterwards, but that standard has afforded fortification for faith and devotedness to the Lord in the young brothers that are conscripted now. The Lord is making room for them as maintaining a good conscience before Him.
H.G.H. On the same line, does verse 32 confirm the prophetic words of Jesus in relation to Himself?
J.T. Yes, "signifying what death he should die". Prophecy would fortify faith in that way.
A.A.T. How do you apply verse 9 today?
J.T. It is a sheltering principle. John brings it in here, and in view of the extraordinary conditions of the last days it has particular force, for God has revived the truth and recovered His people. It applies to us in the present *recovered* position. I think God is helping the brethren to hold on to it. Instead of divisions amongst us, such as happened earlier and frequently, we have had none since 1908, none worth bringing forward. Sovereign mercy is preserving
{7}
us. It will continue to preserve us as we keep lowly. The promise to the assembly in Philadelphia enters into this: "I also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth".
J.R.H. Does all this mean that the peace and liberty of the brethren has been ensured by those who take the forefront in the matter of declaring their conscience?
J.T. Speaking militarily, they are the spearhead. God has ordered things that way: a certain grade of human life in the brethren is called into the breach, and the Lord is helping them. It is a front line matter for the salvation of all -- the principle that was stressed in the last war.
S.W.P. Would one brother having the sword tend to endanger the position of all?
J.T. That is just the point. Here is one brother acting on his own initiative: "Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it, and smote the bondman of the high priest and cut off his right ear". The damage that he does is not remedied here. The Lord is letting things stand. How far will your action go? If I am disregarding the principle, the damage may not be remedied immediately. Here the Lord did not mend the matter, though in Luke He does.
J.W.D. The Lord says, "Put the sword into the sheath", as if there is hope in doing that.
J.T. The position is that the sword is sheathed and another feature of the kingdom takes its place. The Lord says, "My kingdom is not of this world"; if it were, He says, "my servants had fought". Well, Peter had fought, but the Lord is not charging that. In general that is the position, the brethren are not using the *sword*. That was a defect on Peter's part. The disciples did not take weapons to attack their enemies.
{8}
A.N.W. In using the sword Peter lowered for the moment the level of the Lord's people.
J.T. Yes, and the Lord did not attempt to remedy it according to John's account. If things happen amongst us that should not, if He comes in and remedies them, good and well; but in this case it is not so, and that is to remind us. Some brother enlists, disregarding conscience; hence the position is lost to that extent.
H.B. It seems to be put over against the cup given by the Father.
J.T. The moment involved the *Lord's* death. The sword would be used against Him for atonement -- not against me. The Lord says, "The cup which the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?" The general position of the present dispensation entered into it.
W.R. "He was reckoned with the lawless".
J.T. In view of all this they must fortify themselves. They would for a moment be without the Lord's protection; hence His direction that they should buy swords. But the disciples did not understand, and so the Lord said, "It is enough".
J.W.D. The active agency against the Lord is religious power coupled with political power; it is active before we get to the Roman monarchy restored. Is there something of an analogy today that brings about this crisis?
J.T. I think so -- the traitor emanating from this combination. We are dealing here with the inner circle of evil. Judas emanated from the inner circle. Satan had hired him, and he led the band with weapons, torches and lanterns. Think of that as over against the light that shone in Christ! Judas was the centre of this satanic operation: "Judas also, who delivered him up, stood with them". That is the position. It is an inner circle of evil. There is the mystery of iniquity; it is working out in the last
{9}
days in a more concrete way than it did at the beginning. There has been a betrayal of the position, and those that have been betraying the truth are lending themselves to the devil. The group with Judas here corresponds with what is at work today. The Lord says, "The hand of him that delivers me up is with me on the table".
W.R. If we are not affected by the truth we are likely to betray it.
J.T. "Simon Peter therefore"; what is this "therefore"? The Lord had just said, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away". Whatever it means it cannot be a sequence to the Lord's words. The Lord's words were a fulfilment of the earlier statement He had made, "as to those whom thou hast given me, I have not lost one of them". Thus it is clear that Peter, in using the sword, was out of accord with the Lord's mind. But the Lord does not heal the bondman of the high priest. He does so according to Luke.
C.A.M. Is this not one of the things that impresses you with the fact that John's ministry looks down to the last time? This section is prophetic of the maintenance of the testimony, especially at the end.
J.T. It is. There has been a revival of discipleship in the inner circle. But there has also been the betrayal of the testimony and those who lead in that come back: they know the spot, they know what the brethren hold and where they meet, and they are pretty sure to have their lanterns, and torches and weapons. Peter uses the sword, contrary to the Lord's teaching, but He would adjust Peter. He does not adjust Judas, but He adjusts Peter telling him to put that weapon into its sheath. He does not, however, tell him to destroy it. In effect it belonged to the governing authorities, but it is not a weapon for Christ's disciples. Another thing comes in here, the Lord's heavenly kingdom. Peter would
{10}
learn that he and his fellow disciples must be governed by its principles. They must follow the line of what He has been doing, what He says and does. That is where the testimony of Christ and the salvation of the brethren lie.
S.W.P. Is all this position the Lord takes up one of pattern, first His testimony to Annas, then to Caiaphas, and then to Pilate, all being suggested to bring out some features of Himself in these positions for our guidance and help?
J.T. Yes. This is a first line attack. Satan tries to do what he can; Judas is in his service as leader. Satan intended to do what he could with Judas and his band allied to the religious element. Then we have Peter denying the Lord, and alongside of this his use of the sword to cut off Malchus¬ ear. The "band" (verse 12), is again employed: "The band therefore, and the chiliarch, and the officers of the Jews, took Jesus and bound him: and they led him away to Annas first". Then the Lord is led to Pilate. Now we are in front of the four monarchies, at least of the final one, the Roman.
H.G.H. In verse 29 the authorities seem to be showing a measure of favour towards the religious leaders. What is there in the fact of Pilate's going out instead of their coming in?
J.T. It was the Passover time and they could not, because of Jewish custom, enter the praetorium. They had religious scruples and could not go in there; Pilate has to do as they say, he has to go out to them. That shows the position of the government; religion usually has power there. And so he goes out from the authoritative place to where they are. You can thus see the influence at work even where the rights of God are involved. Pilate is not, however, available to Satan at first; he represents government in the abstract and his mind is right at first. Satan has no power over him until the Jews come in.
{11}
FEATURES OF THE TRUTH BEARING ON THE LAST DAYS (2)
@John 19: 12 - 24
J.T. We scarcely touched on the passages read this morning, but what was said as to the prophetic utterances of the Lord is of importance, because prophetic ministry has acquired a place amongst the brethren, and it helps us to have understanding of the times. What Caiaphas said in @John 18: 14 is on the same line; he "counselled the Jews that it was better that one man should perish for the people". That was a prophetic word from him. We also noted Peter's negation of the light that came out by using a sword, and we should keep that point before us because it really enters into all that is before us at these meetings. The Lord told him to "put the sword into the sheath", adding, "the cup which the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?" (verse 11). There are many who correspond with Peter, notwithstanding that much light has come down from the previous war; there are those who advocate joining in with the claims of the government to the fullest extent. The effect of Peter's use of the sword was not remedied. According to John; and then he went to further extremes in denying the Lord, so that where we give way on one point we are likely to go further. Thus things in our day are going on to the end unremedied, and we are reminded of the danger of leading in error to an error to any extent, not knowing how far it may go.
J.W.D. Do you think we can apply the thought of the cup, which the Father gave Him to drink, in any crisis that might be linked on with governmental difficulties?
J.T. Quite so; the Father's will is the immediate issue. It is "the cup which *the Father* has given"
{12}
here. "The Father" is John's way of presenting God in the economy of grace; the Father's will extends to us throughout the dispensation.
R.W.S. Will you enlarge on that suggestion about the ear not being healed according to John, and Peter's case being left?
J.T. I think it is a solemn matter that the Lord just left these facts. At least, the Spirit of God does not record through John that the ear was healed, and Peter's denial is not pursued to its full sequel as in Luke. I think it is to remind us of the seriousness of any overt acts of sin, however spiritual we may have been. In the government of God they may be left and they may extend beyond anything we might have intended.
A.N.W. The probing at the end of the gospel has some reference to these matters: "Lovest thou me?" three times repeated.
J.T. That comes into our enquiry. What shall I be when I am old? The Lord says to Peter, "When thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and bring thee where thou dost not desire", @John 21: 18. He referred to the death he should die, that he should be a real martyr.
S.J.H. Would you say a word as to why, in John, it is the kinsman of the one whose ear he cut off that raises the issue with Peter in the palace court? "One of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?" -- as if he had become prominent in that way.
J.T. Quite so. It would indicate that, as we have said, wrong things done may stand, and spread too. There is the spreading of the thought in the fact that this kinsman would notice him. The confessions that have been made today in regard to the truth are spreading, people are hearing things they never
{13}
heard before; but then on the other hand, if we fail in the testimony, the right testimony, as Peter did here, that effect will spread. Great damage has been done through certain ones denying the real point at issue in these recent matters. The authorities make much of contradiction among those who are nominally of the same view, the same faith, as they would say. So that Peter's course here points to serious conduct of any kind, especially the denial of anything that has been clearly set out as a principle. In the previous war all this matter of conscience was clearly set out. Never before, so far as I know, was the matter an issue in Great Britain, because there had been no conscription there.
R.A. What is the position of the sword today?
J.T. It is in its sheath. Peter *had* it. The point would be that it will be used again, but the extraordinary circumstances now preclude its use. What Jesus calls His kingdom is a new thing come in as different from other kingdoms, and the sword is precluded from that kingdom. He says "My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom; if my kingdom were of this world my servants had fought that I might not be delivered up to the Jews; but now my kingdom not from hence". I would call it a provisional kingdom, not in keeping with the wars that were waged before Christ, and with wars that will ensue after His second coming. When He comes out to deal with the nations the sword will be used again: but not now. It is a provisional state of things, and the fact that it is such and not accredited as David's kingdom was for instance, makes it difficult for those who confess this kingdom at the present time. It is difficult because men do not understand it. I think that is why John is used of the Spirit of God to record these conversations between the Lord and Pilate. They have an inwardness and a depth that do not appear in the other gospels; and I believe the allusion is to
{14}
what God has brought about in these last days, spiritual conditions wherein these inward things are discerned and held, although others do not understand them.
A.A.T. Would you call Peter an extremist, that is, not well-balanced in regard to the question we have before us?
J.T. I think he must have taken up literally the Lord's words in regard to the sword as spoken in Luke, and therefore used the sword.
A.N.W. Regarding the inability to explain to men the difference between David's kingdom and the Lord's kingdom, would the best explanation be to be prepared to go to the wall?
J.T. That is what we have to do, because our statements are highly objectionable to some; and others who would be more or less favourable cannot see the point that is made, which the Lord brings out here. And that is why spirituality is so essential to this matter. The Spirit of Christ is always a testimony. The Spirit of Christ is seen especially in this section of John's gospel. When the Lord speaks about "My kingdom" and says that His servants would fight if it were of this world, Pilate enquires, "Thou art then a king?"
R.W.S. There are certain imitated features of this, are there not, certain who will not take up arms who know nothing as to this kingdom?
J.T. That is another matter, and it makes a real difficulty. It beclouds the real issue, because these persons are not spiritual and hence do not commend the truth. Quakers -- Friends, as they are called in the United States and England -- have great influence in this matter. Governmentally they have helped, but as to the inwardness and spirituality of the truth involved, they do not understand.
W.R. Would you say in connection with the bondman of the high priest whose ear was cut off
{15}
that Peter could hardly preach the gospel to that man effectively?
J.T. He could not. He had denied the dispensation.
S.J.H. Does it ensue that if anyone belongs to this world he should fight, but if he takes the ground that he does not belong to it, that he is a stranger here, he should not fight?
J.T. Yes. As Christians we have definite principles which we have learned from the Lord, and those who have not got them we just leave, as we seek to make our position clear. They are of this world and the sword belongs to them. We have to suffer, as people do not understand us. That is the attitude we have to take up; that is the attitude the Lord took up here.
J.W.D. "The powers that be" are God's servants in government, and we regard them in that sense and pray for them. That is another matter.
J.T. That is what Pilate represents in this passage. Matthew makes a little more of Pilates official place because he says, "Jesus stood before the governor", @Matthew 27: 11. That is the position. He stood before the governor. Matthew makes much of the governor because government is a point with him, and Pilate represented the empire; he had the official title of "governor". His wife sought to dissuade him from interfering with the Lord: "Have thou nothing to do with that righteous man", she says. @Matthew 27: 19. The nearest person to him, his own wife, *suffered because of Jesus*. We may count on that sort of thing among those in authority; someone may have sympathy with what is right. That is what Matthew presents to us. John is dealing with the more spiritual side of the thing. The Lord reserves this matter of heaven and the authority that Pilate has almost to the end of the conversation, because John is dealing with the inwardness of things, and we
{16}
have just to accept that they do not understand us. It is impossible for them to understand us really, and yet some see that the position is logical. But we must make it a matter of the truth of God; it is not simply that we have that view -- it is a system of teaching inaugurated by the Lord Jesus Christ that had not existed before and will not be in force after He returns. It is a provisional teaching, and the kingdom involved in it is for this dispensation. We must thus enlarge on this dispensation, what it is in relation to all other dispensations.
A.E.H. The Lord seems to turn this occasion into an opportunity to view Pilate, not so much as a governor, but as a man. Do you think that He is dealing with Pilate as to his own soul? He says, "Dost thou say this of thyself, or have others said it to thee concerning me?"
J.T. I think that is right. He says further to him, "He that has delivered me up to thee has the greater sin". The Lord considered for Pilate in a marked way. Pilate abstractly regarded the Lord as righteous, as wholly innocent of the charges against Him and, as far as the passage is concerned, he never lost that view. He wrote a title and put it on the cross: "Jesus the Nazaraean, the King of the Jews. This title therefore many of the Jews read, for the place of the city where Jesus was crucified was near; and it was written in Hebrew, Greek, [and] Latin. The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to Pilate, Do not write, The king of the Jews, but that *he* said, I am king of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written I have written". I believe that he got light in spite of himself by what had passed. Toward the end of the conversations the word came to him that the Lord Jesus said He was the Son of God. Pilate said, "Take him ye and crucify him, for I find no fault in him". Then the Jews say, "We have a law, and according to our law he ought to
{17}
die, because he made himself Son of God. When Pilate therefore heard this word, he was the rather afraid, and went into the praetorium again and says to Jesus, Whence art thou?" Where is this man Pilate in his soul? Is he simply sitting in a seat of authority or is his soul being touched? Is there light current even for Pilate? Is it not so that light is for all? You have that always in mind and so are not afraid to touch the deepest things, things now that relate to the deity of Christ. Pilate feared. There was a struggle in him in favour of Christ, but the sequel does not indicate any permanent result.
A.N.W. Luke tells us the Lord made no answer at all to Herod. Are we confronted with any element like that today?
J.T. I think so. There are such as are given up by God -- apostates. The Lord did not answer Herod. There are persons as to whom the matter is settled. But He spoke to Pilate. The authority of the four monarchies, that is, of the last one, is still existent, and the Lord is bringing that forth here; the representative of that power is being searched in his soul by the Son of God before whom he stood And what am *I* in the presence of those men who represent government? What is any of us who are called to witness before them? Is it the Spirit or Christ that is seen in us? This is no mere special view that I have, but it is a consistent system or teaching that is provisional for the present time and *gives character to our dispensation*.
C.A.M. I suppose that is what Peter would call as a Christian. Would you say a word about the fact that as God's ministers, there are those that use the sword?
J.T. Romans teaches that most plainly. The great initial epistle of Paul asserts in the plainest possible way that the powers that be are ordained of God. He enlarges on that more than the Lord does here
{18}
-- "it is God's minister to thee for good", @Romans 13: 4. That is a very important side to the position; it ought to be made plain in speaking to men of authority. But this inner, spiritual side of the truth that we are looking into in this section of John is of the utmost importance, because it lends body to the whole truth of the dispensation and presents to people something that they cannot overcome.
C.A.M. Men generally quite misunderstand. They would say, Help in the cause, assuming that God is in it as He is in Christianity, not seeing that God as God is governing the world with a view to the preaching of the gospel and maintaining the assembly in it; but that He is doing this providentially and indirectly, whereas He is in the assembly directly.
J.T. They have Christianized their nations largely, simply adding on nominal Christianity, and are doing their best, as the leaders will show in what they say; but what the Lord is speaking of here in John is an inward spiritual thing which is beyond them altogether.
R.W.S. If I am speaking to a man on the street I must be careful what I say about the gospel; I would speak to him about the gospel as to a sinner. But to a man in an official position might I be free to speak about the assembly, as making the general position clear, conveying the idea that we hold nothing back as to the divine system?
J.T. It ought to be made clear that Christianity is a system of teaching. Paul says, "But thou hast fully known my doctrine, my manner of life" @2 Timothy 3: 10. "My doctrine" -- that is a system of teaching. The Lord is presented in John as a Teacher. The first followers of the Lord in John call Him Teacher. The last one in this gospel who calls Him Teacher is Mary Magdalene; she calls Him, "Rabboni", -- 'my Teacher'. You cannot make Christianity
{19}
fit in with man's mind, and that may cause you suffering; Christianity is a mystery, and the Lord is on that line here. The mention of the Son of God causes fear in the heart of Pilate. If you follow the creeds you will make the truth of Christ's Sonship fit into the natural mind. The real truth of the Son of God will not fit in with the creed at all, and therefore it comes into what the Lord has been helping us on, that it is an inward thing, a spiritual thing, and you cannot make it fit in with man's mind. Pilate is before Christ; he is at the divine bar really and he fears. Abstractly he would not crucify the Lord, but another thing comes up: he is a politician and he has to give way. As to his own soul he was convicted, not converted. How solemn it is for a man like that to come face to face with the light of God and not bow to it!
J.R.H. Would you say his inward judgment was nullified by the outside influences?
J.T. Yes, the outside influences were greater than the inner convictions.
J.R.H. He seemed to get on with the Lord talking with Him alone, but each time he goes out he is put to the test again: it happens four times.
J.T. He should have stayed in the praetorium. The proceedings should have been there. The Lord was there apparently until Pilate brought Him out Pilate went out to those who could not go into the praetorium for religious reasons, because he was politician. That is the danger in all such men. They have political importance, so that they give way to the voice of the people.
J.W.D. "He who restrains" -- does that work through spirituality in those who are in the truth?
J.T. We may not think of it at a meeting like this, but there is at all these meetings an influence bearing against apostasy. Thus we ought not to
{20}
shrink from bringing the truth out, in its inwardness, in dealing with people.
Ques. Is that why the kingdom comes in here? Not only are the saints not of this world in a negative way, but being of the kingdom we have something positive to bring before people.
J.T. You notice it is "My kingdom"; that has to be fitted with other references to the kingdom. It is a phase of the kingdom in a general way that is provisional, and those who are in it, the Lord's disciples or servants, are not of this world. They are not governed by the principles of this world and hence do not use the sword.
J.W.D. Luke mentions Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate, and different tetrarchs (@Luke 3: 1), as if in the sphere of the glad tidings these authorities set up by God were to be influenced by it, wicked men though many of them were. Would you go with that?
J.T. Yes. That is characteristic of Luke. For him grace reigns. John's gospel is remarkable, a previous provision especially for the last days. The inwardness of it and the abstract character of it strike you; you get to the roots of things there. Pilate is in the presence of that here. When Pilate heard the truth from the Lord in the praetorium, why did he not stay there? The whole matter is there between himself and Jesus. As for those who would not go in because of religious ideas, let them stay outside. Pilate is in the hall of judgment and he is responsible to judge righteous judgment.
J.R.H. You mean that he would have got divine support if he had stayed in the place of judgment?
J.T. That is the point. The Lord said, "Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above", @John 19: 11. He might have added, You want the support of the Jews. But Pilate is in the presence of the King, and
{21}
he felt it too. The point for us is to keep to the abstract truth: this was placed before Pilate in remarkable clearness.
S.J.H. We need to be governed by inward things; various other things are at work outside. Sometimes we tall into a little trap; I might lose my work, or pay be reduced. Can I carry on? That is all outside.
J.T. Yes. The Lord distinguishes between persons who believed because they saw miracles and persons who were born again. The former the Lord did not trust (@John 2: 23 - 25), and He went on to teach that "except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God" (@John 3: 3 - 6). Christianity implies that those who receive Jesus receive from God a title to take the place of children of God, and that they are born "not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God", @John 1: 13. John in his epistle says "See what love the Father has given to us. That we should be called the children of God" (@1 John 3: 1) a certain class of people "called the children of God". "For this reason the world knows us not, because it knew him not".
S.W.P. Do you think the influence of the three men that have been alluded to, Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, spreads out widely? It says the "The satraps, the prefects. And the governors, and the king's counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men", @Daniel 3: 22.
J.T. Undoubtedly. You notice there the Son of God coming into view. Who was lie? There is a mystery. Nebuchadnezzar and his counsellors could not understand that. There is mystery and yet saving power connected with the Son of God. Pilate, as we have seen, feared as the Name was mentioned.
{22}
G.W. Paul says to Festus, "For this thing was not done in a corner", @Acts 26: 26.
J.T. Quite so; that is Paul's side of the matter, it was not done in a corner. But really he is not thinking of Festus, though he has some thought about Agrippa; and the Lord has some thought about Pilate here. There are men in high places that are capable of being affected by the testimony of God.
A.E.H. Does not the teaching of the Lord provide a basis for the judgment of the apostate system at Jerusalem? The apostasy of the system that has the greater sin would be brought before his mind. There are similar conditions today.
J.T. Inwardly Pilate judged that the Lord was innocent. What he did in delivering Him over was purely due to external influence over him. He was a politician and he was lost in his politics, and I think the same is true of Agrippa: "Almost thou persuadest me", @Acts 26: 28. That is, the persuasion was there; Christianity is great enough for that. It is not a system of sermons, it is the real thing that affects men's souls inwardly. But while Agrippa was convicted mentally, we have to say that there is no evidence of his conversion.
H.B. Why does the Lord not answer Pilate when he says, "Whence art thou?"
J.T. The Lord knew he was convicted. His silence was according to dignity and would gauge Pilate's intelligence and motives. All was in infinite wisdom. See what Pilate does as recorded in @John 19: 1 - 4: "Then Pilate therefore took Jesus and scourged him. And the soldiers having plaited a crown of thorns put it on his head, and put a purple robe on him, and came to him and said, Hail, king of the Jews! and gave him blows on the face. And Pilate went out again and says to them, Lo, I bring him out to you, that ye may know that I find in
{23}
him no fault whatever". That is the kind of thing we have to deal with in politicians.
R.W.S. I wondered if he thought he could make a compromise to satisfy the Jews by scourging Jesus without going so far as having Him crucified.
J.T. That is likely. But it shows what an unconverted man is even though he is convicted, when Christ is in question. I suppose Balaam was convicted too; he says, "I shall behold him, but not nigh". The power of the truth is capable of that, but we cannot rely on the work.
C.A.M. "But as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God, to those that believe on his name", @John 1: 12. That seems to be a great help. Often the persons you are talking to say they are Christians just the same as you are, but this inwardness of which you are speaking makes the difference.
J.T. Yes. John says, "And this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith", @1 John 5: 4. That is the character of his teaching. So we have the things in a systematic way, and we know of what we are speaking. We are speaking logically, so to speak, because of the way the teaching of Christianity is developed in John and in other scriptures, but in John particularly. Our faith, he says, is the victory. They may not understand it, but it is the victory.
A.E.H. As to Pilate's question, "Whence art thou?" which the Lord does not answer: would this indicate that the system of teaching under which we come on such occasions as this is to stand in its own dignity and power?
J.T. Yes; so that Mary of Magdala says, "Rabboni" -- 'my Teacher'. The Lord says to her, "Touch me not; for I have not yet ascended to my Father". That is the inward thing, the heavenly thing. He says, "Go to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and
{24}
your God". She went, and it says she said these things to them. That is, the things were in her, that is the principle; she was representative. She would belong to the teaching. "My Teacher", she says; she has got the truth -- the systematic truth that the Lord Jesus brought into this world. In result it is the victory. It is the heavenly relationship into which we are instructed and by which we are formed; our life is bound up with it. But the teaching of @John 20, although in current ministry for many years, is beyond the understanding of the average believer; but as formed in it and holding it you cannot be overcome.
J.R.H. Is not the great point that all the power of God is behind the witness to the truth?
J.T. Quite so. It is the divine Presence. That is the point in @John 18 when they went backwards and fell to the ground; yet the Lord is asking, "Whom seek ye?".
S.W.P. Do you think the man in chapter 9 of this gospel comes under the benefits of the teaching?
J.T. Yes; there you have the idea of the Lord following up the work. He is watching at a distance as to the progress of the truth in that man's soul until they cast him out. Now he is in a position to get the full thought, and the Lord says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" The Son of God did not cause fear in that man! He enjoyed the thought of it. "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?"
T.L.S. Is the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God resting upon you in that position?
J.T. That is the way it would work out. Stephen's face shone.
S.J.H. Is there any suggestion in the seamlessness of the Lord's body-coat? By analogy, everything
{25}
fits together in all this system of God's teaching.
J.T. "The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified Jesus, took his clothes, and made four parts, to each soldier a part, and the body-coat; but the body-coat was seamless, woven through the whole from the top. They said therefore to one another, Let us not rend it, but let us cast lots for it, whose it shall be; that the scripture might be fulfilled which says, They parted my garments among themselves, and on my vesture they cast lots. The soldiers therefore did these things". That is a subject that requires attention -- as to how it enters into the system of profession abroad, because there is a division into four parts, and then there is the whole garment that someone has. Someone has a whole idea. God has restored the truth, the whole system of truth, as to the Person of Christ. The brethren, by the Spirit of God, have brought it in, and we are kept in it more or less. The point is to get into it more. But then there is a great religious system that professes to have the whole garment; the Roman Catholic system assumes this. They claim all -- and that what others have is spurious, whereas the real ones are those who have the Spirit; such form the body of Christ. It is by the Spirit the good deposit is kept (@2 Timothy 1: 14). No one has the full idea of Christ but by the Spirit.
A.H.P. Over against those that claim the Lord's garments are these persons standing by the cross of Jesus.
J.T. Yes. "And by the cross of Jesus stood his mother, and the sister of his mother, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala. Jesus therefore, seeing his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, says to his mother, Woman, behold thy son. Then he says unto the disciple, Behold thy mother" (verses 25 - 27). You have the beautiful
{26}
thought of the way of the Lord in dealing with matters; He sets up the loved one, that is, John, in family relation with His own mother. She is to be John's mother. He does that at the cross. So that at the extreme point of suffering we can adjust matters amongst the brethren in our relations with one another. But as to this whole garment, -- someone has it. It is stolen, because it really did not belong to them. If the Lord had made disposition of any belongings He had, He would not have left anything to the system of which we have spoken. Yet they have got everything; they regard themselves as Christianity, and all else from their point of view is just tolerated. 
Rem. This body-coat would correspond with what you were saying about the inward side.
J.T. It would remind you of the whole Christ, as it were. Who are worthy of that? The next paragraph is the love circle (verses 25 - 27); the Lord is thinking of them. If He were leaving His belongings, He would leave them with these. It is not said the Lord made a will at all. The idea of a will is your disposition, what your thoughts are about persons in what you give them. Verses 25, 26 and 27 would be the love circle in which the Lord would deposit all that He valued.
What John is doing in his whole gospel is enlarging on the Person of Christ. The Lord says of the Holy Spirit, "He shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you", @John 16: 15. What the Spirit brings down to us from heaven is the whole thought, it is by the Spirit that we keep the good deposit.
A.E.H. Would you think the quoting of Scripture in verse 24 would suggest that the divine authority of the Scriptures is supporting the position?
J.T. I think it is a very important thing in @John 5 that the Lord puts Moses¬ writing as equal to His own words: "If ye had believed Moses, ye would
{27}
have believed me, for he wrote of me. But if ye do not believe his writings, how shall ye believe my words?" (verses 46, 47). Divine teaching is stressed. As already said, the Lord is regarded as Rabbi by those who followed Him at the beginning, and as Rabboni by Mary of Magdala at the end.
G.W. Is it not important that he who gets the victory over the world is begotten of God?
J.T. Yes. And then, "this is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith"; it is what we have learned.
F.K.C. Would you think that what John's gospel produces is this matter of inward power? In chapter 20 it says there are many other things that Jesus did "which are not written in this book; but these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name".
J.T. John is saying that he selected something from infinitude in order to build up our faith. That is the intent, that we should have faith. "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee ... and his disciples believed on him" (@John 2: 11); it was that people might believe really, not merely nominally. John tells us further in chapter 21 that "there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they were written one by one, I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written". These works are selected to confirm and exemplify the spiritual system of truth that is to be understood and believed by the saints. Anyone thus instructed is superior to 'modernism' and 'higher criticism', because these errors are dependent on the natural mind of man which "does not receive the things of the Spirit of God", @1 Corinthians 2: 14.
R.W.S. "The place of a skull".
J.T. That is the end of it.
{28}
A.H.P. Over against the idea of "The place of a skull", is there not the thought that Peter suggests of arming ourselves with the same mind that is seen in Jesus here? "Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin", @1 Peter 4: 1.
J.T. "The same mind", that is the contrast to the thought of the skull. The great fact is that we have the mind of Christ -- the same kind of thinking power.
The gist of all that has been in mind as to these two readings is the thought of "My kingdom", which the Lord expressed to Pilate. He makes it a matter personal to Himself. It does not exclude the thoughts of the kingdom of God, the kingdom of the Son of Man, the kingdom of heaven; but the Lord is pleased to make it a matter of His own. It appeals to those who love Him. Are we all with Him in it? It is a heavenly matter, and you are not to use a sword to defend it. You are to pursue this kingdom, as He does here, recognizing the authority in Pilate, but holding to the principles of the dispensation.
H.B. "My servants", that is a beautiful expression.
J.T. It is very beautiful. It ought to touch us if we love the Lord and what belongs to Him.
Ques. Are "my brethren" and "my servants" synonymous?
J.T. Quite so. It is a personal matter between Him and us, and He is telling Pilate what kind of people His disciples are, that they are like Himself. That is proof that we are not deviating from His way as seen in these passages.
J.W.D. It is a remarkable thing that even after Pilate had crucified Christ, Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathaea still refer to him.
{29}
J.T. Quite so; he is still the governor. Men may be quite capable of being affected by the Lord Himself, and yet not be real Christians. But how far they may be able to go in helping us! Pilate granted the request of Joseph of Arimathaea. In this case the word "demanded" expresses a certain equality in Joseph, as if he had liberty in speaking to Pilate (see the Darby Translation note to "beg" in @John 14:16).
J.W.D. The expression of government can be recognised in a day of grace.
J.T. We do not want to antagonize Pilate. If we know him personally and seek his aid to relieve the brethren, we will talk to him personally. Why not, if you can use your influence with that in view in the name of the Lord Jesus? He is "God's minister to thee for good", @Romans 13: 4. We have these two men in the end of chapter 19; Joseph does not come into Scripture earlier, Nicodemus does, and here he comes in to finish the matter with Pilate; and what they wished is granted. It says, "They took therefore the body of Jesus and bound it up in linen with the spices, as it is the custom with the Jews to prepare for burial".
W.W.M. "With the rich in His death" -- the fulfilment of prophecy. That was ordered too.
J.T. Quite so.
J.R.H. Do you think the account in John's gospel of the Lord's words with Pilate is the witnessing of the good confession?
J.T. Mainly, I think.
R.W.S. These two, Joseph and Nicodemus, were, as representing God, greater than Pilate.
J.T. Quite so. It is a beautiful touch that John brings in Nicodemus in this way. Nobody else says anything about him. John seems to recognise every evidence of the work of God.
W.R. @Acts 3: 13 refers to Pilate again: Peter says the Jews denied the Lord "in the presence of Pilate,
{30}
when *he* had judged that he should be let go". He is a recovered man, and thus free and able to speak in power.
J.T. The Spirit of God carries through that Pilate was minded to let Jesus go. The practical lesson is that we may count on God to influence people in power to help somebody in need, and God is doing that at this very moment in Christendom.
{31}
FEATURES OF THE TRUTH BEARING ON THE LAST DAYS (3)
@Acts 26: 1 - 32
J.T. I thought we could look at the scripture before us in relation to Paul. It is clear that, after the Lord, he stands first in the dispensation, especially in its universal bearing, and this chapter affords opportunity to consider him in this respect in the presence of the representatives of the gentile rulers. The Lord said that He had taken him up in relation to them. He said to Ananias, "Go, for this man is an elect vessel to me, to bear my name before both nations and kings and the sons of Israel", @Acts 9: 15. It mentions nations first, and then kings. This is in accord with Simeon's prophetic word: "a light for revelation of the Gentiles" (@Luke 2: 32), meaning that they were brought into evidence for blessing. The original word 'revelation' means 'unveiling'; there had been a veil over them, but now they are brought into distinct evidence, being unveiled through Christ. And Paul is the servant to be used particularly in this, so that he certainly has the first place after the Lord in our consideration. He is an example for us of service and conduct before gentiles and their rulers. He is a model. But then it should be also noted that this chapter contemplates that the apostle had been wanting in recent movements, insisting on going to Jerusalem, whereas his ministry was to be towards the gentiles. So that the position fits with our own times which are marked by the Lord coming in to take matters in hand Himself, the ministry in the hands of others having generally failed. Mark has this in mind, recording in his last chapter want of faith in the disciples, the leading ones particularly, so that the Lord had to take the matter in hand Himself and readjust the
{32}
position. Paul therefore is seen here as having gone through all this experience. He tells us at the beginning of it "that the Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city, saying that bonds and tribulations await me", @Acts 20: 23. This meant that the saints at all the meetings he visited on the way to Jerusalem testified by the Spirit that he would suffer; and at Caesarea in particular Agabus *acted* the truth, which was a most exceptional thing; he bound himself to show that Paul should be bound at Jerusalem. And yet Paul was not dissuaded. So he went to Jerusalem and was arrested and brought before the gentile powers. But the chapter which we have read shows that he was superior to his circumstances, so that he is an example, wishing that all those present in Agrippa's court were such as he was at that time, without his bonds.
A.E.H. Would bearing His name before nations link on with what you had in your mind last night in connection with the leaves of the tree (@Revelation 22: 2)? It is in the testimony that the healing qualities are. The sufferings that the apostle endured in serving would be like the preparing of the leaves for giving effect to their healing qualities.
J.T. Of course that reference is millennial, but there is in it a link with Paul. God arranged in @Genesis 11 the place the nations were to have. The four monarchies began later, and are distinct. The Assyrian kingdom began at Babel and had no place in the four monarchies. At Shinar God assigned the position of the nations, according to @Deuteronomy 32: 8, 9: it was in relation to the children of Israel; it had their blessing in mind. They were to stand there until the testimony of the gospel was introduced as the time arrived for it. Paul speaks of the redemptive work of Christ as purposed to be witnessed: "the testimony to be rendered in its own times; to which", he says, "*I* have been appointed a
{33}
herald and apostle, (I speak the truth, I do not lie,) a teacher of the nations in faith and truth", @1 Timothy 2: 6, 7. So that the position is marked off in that way, that Paul is the appointed vessel for this purpose; and in our chapter he uses a dignified word for the official position he was to occupy. He says, "And the Lord said, *I* am Jesus whom *thou* persecutest: but rise up and stand on thy feet: for, for this purpose have I appeared to thee, to appoint thee to be a servant", (the word signifying an official servant, not a slave, but an official person) "and a witness both of what thou hast seen, and of what I shall appear to thee in, taking thee out from among the people, and the nations, to whom I send thee, to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sins and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in me" (verses 15 - 18). Paul is an official personage, having the status of an ambassador according to @2 Corinthians 5. The position therefore is clearly marked off as to his service and his relation with the ruling powers. He had this status in the assembly in the gospel. He says of himself that he was an abortion, that is, a person born out of due time, not born after but before; meaning that he represents the Jews in the last days and the mercy that would be shown them in spite of their lawless course, which before he was converted characterized himself. He would love to minister to them. He said he had wished to be accursed for them, he loved them so much; but they were not his primary mission. His position is as a present dispensation minister, involving the new covenant and reconciliation. This gospel brought, not cursing but blessing, so Paul says that the blessing of Abraham has arrived at the nations. It is not 'the gentiles', but 'the nations', meaning the position they occupy in the
{34}
government of God. It is not that the government of God is adverse to them, but rather preserving them in their settings for the time of the gospel. It is through Paul that the blessing of Abraham had arrived among the gentiles. In Galatians he speaks of himself as representing Christ among them, -- "Jesus Christ ... crucified among you". He ministers the Spirit amongst them also, bringing Him in in a practical way; not only the ministry of Christ, but that of the Spirit, too, was witnessed there. I think therefore Paul is a full representative of what we are speaking about -- witnesses of the gospel coming in contact with the rulers of the nations. The chapter before us indicates how he behaved. A leading point in our enquiry is how we are to behave in having to do with those in authority.
A.E.H. Would the four gentile monarchies be in mind in this?
J.T. Yes. Nimrod appears as the first monarch, and he was under God's eye -- "a mighty hunter before Jehovah". Destroying God's creatures for pleasure did not commend him. He was the first monarch, but God did not take him up specially, nor did He take up any of the Assyrians in the same grace in which He took up Babylonish and Persian rulers. He took up Nebuchadnezzar and constituted him king of kings. He did not change his heart at the outset, but He intended to do so, and He worked matters circumstantially so that Nebuchadnezzar could show what he was, a degenerate gentile monarch. But God was pleased to bring one of His choicest servants into contact with him in an attractive way as a servant. The Spirit of Christ had been in mankind before the flood; then He was in Noah, and now He is in Daniel, who was brought into direct contact with this monarch, and ministers to him the truth in the most striking and favourable way. He announced to Nebuchadnezzar in a prophetic
{35}
way that he was the head and beginning of the great system of government which God was setting up. He said to him, "Thou art this head of gold". God had constituted him that, which would imply that he was fitted for it. He became converted to God, which is one of the most important things we can mention in this subject. The first great monarch, the head of the first empire set up of God among the nations, was converted; so that the Spirit of Christ was not only in Daniel but in the king. Thus the gentiles had palpable testimony in their own monarch to the God of the heavens, and that testimony has been there ever since in one way or another, even in the Lord Himself as before Pilate. I am speaking of it particularly as bearing witness to those in authority. How beautifully Paul spoke to Agrippa, as we have seen! He differentiates between Agrippa and Festus.
H.G.H. It would seem that Paul was brought into these conditions because he actually appealed to the authorities.
J.T. That is another thing -- we might say it was below the level of his testimony. If a young brother were to say at a military tribunal in the United States that he was an American citizen and had the right to be heard as to his conscience, the law would be behind him, but he would be on a lower level than that taken by the Lord before Pilate. The brothers, however, are taking the ground of being in the kingdom of the Lord Jesus, as the Lord says, "My kingdom is not of this world", and thus they reflect the Spirit of Christ in their confession. I think Paul lowered himself in appealing to Caesar. It is a question of whether I assert my rights before a tribunal as a citizen of the country, or whether I appeal as a devoted follower of Christ, owning allegiance to Christ and to God. The believer at the same time acknowledges that he is ready to serve
{36}
the authorities so far as the Scriptures warrant -- but that he must obey God rather than men (@Acts 5: 29).
A.E.H. Did not Paul primarily come into contact with the civil authorities in desiring to escape from the hatred and venom of the religious authorities?
J.T. He did. He appealed on the ground of his citizenship at Jerusalem. He says, "I appeal to Caesar", so that he put himself on that ground and God overruled it. According to all appearances, he would have been slain in Jerusalem had he, not taken up this ground, but that is another matter. It was God's overruling.
Ques. "Such as I also am", he says to Agrippa. Would that be a help?
J.T. That is what I thought we might see. He virtually says, 'Now I am going to take the liberty of giving you a life-sized picture of myself'. Previously Agrippa had said to him, "It is permitted thee to speak for thyself". The apostle recognizes that the king has the power to accord him liberty to speak. If he were out preaching the gospel, he would not act on that line at all, he would stand up and preach the gospel as he had done many times, and would suffer in connection with it too; but here he is before the authorities and he is respectful to them. Agrippa says, "It is permitted thee to speak for thyself". Paul did not begin his oration until he was given liberty to speak. That brings up the whole matter of our behaviour before the authorities, and the spirit in which we should address them.
J.R.H. Paul stretched out his hand. Would that be expressive of God's attitude in healing? In chapter 4 we read that the Lord is requested by the saints to stretch out His hand to heal.
J.T. Just so. It is a phrase quoted from Isaiah: "All day long I have stretched forth my hands
{37}
unto a ... gainsaying people", @Romans 10: 21. I suppose there is some allusion to that. You have the same idea in Antioch in @Acts 13: 16, where Paul made a sign with his hand. I suppose the idea is that God is favourable.
A.A.T. I notice that Paul twice in speaking to Agrippa says, "O king", and to Festus he says, "Most excellent Festus". Is that part of the behaviour?
J.T. I think it is. We ought to be very deferential to persons in authority. Peter says, "Honour the king"; and Paul says, "Render to all their dues: to whom tribute is due, tribute; to whom custom, custom ... to whom honour, honour". But if a Roman Catholic dignitary claimed honour, that would be another matter; he has no authority from God.
R.W.S. Behind all this pomp seen in our chapter, the preceding chapter shows these two men talking together between themselves. Would that have a parallel today?
J.T. It would. The influence of Agrippa seems to be in favour of the right; that is important. You get some men in authority in favour of the right.
C.A.M. Agrippa says to Paul, "It is permitted thee to speak for thyself". "For thyself" gives the apostle opportunity to bring out what was in his heart.
J.T. Later Festus interrupted him but Agrippa did not. Agrippa was a different man, and that is a thing to be noted. Men are not all the same. The President of the United States is a different man from the leader of Germany. There are differences in rulers, and differences that are of God. Agrippa was different from Festus, and Paul knew it, and as he was speaking to him Agrippa was evidently affected by what Paul said. I was thinking of how the matter of personality comes into the gospel, into the service of God. In the book of Genesis we have
{38}
the idea of generations, suggesting origins in men and things. There are ten of them mentioned there: the generations of the heavens and the earth, the generations of Adam, Noah, Shem, etc. These persons or systems are traced from their origin. So with a man: he is not regarded simply from the time he is converted, but what preceded his conversion is taken account of; God evidently has to do with that. Every man receives his spirit from God, so that his history really begins with God in that way; and Paul intended here that Agrippa should have a life-sized picture of himself because of the place that the Lord had given him officially. He was an official servant and Agrippa would understand such an office. He was an official personage himself. Paul says, "I count myself happy, king Agrippa, in having to answer today before thee concerning all of which I am accused by the Jews, especially because thou art acquainted with all the customs and questions which are among the Jews; wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently" (verses 2, 3). That is a most apt way of beginning to put his case before a man like Agrippa. Paul did not ask Festus to hear him, but Agrippa was of a higher rank. The idea of rank is always to be observed. Michael observed the rank of Satan, that is the rank he still had although now fallen (@Jude 9).
Paul begins, "My manner of life then from my youth, which from its commencement was passed among my nation in Jerusalem, know all the Jews, who knew me before from the outset of my life, if they would bear witness, that according to the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. And now I stand to be judged because of the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers, to which our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night hope to arrive; about which hope, O king, I am accused of the Jews" (verses 4 - 7). That is
{39}
Paul, briefly presented to the king. He is presenting himself, his personality in a way, to the monarch. The issue is very clear: here is a man competent to give a full account of the truth, and he is dealing with a man who has interest and knows certain things about the truth. Well, this is a practical matter, because the men that we have to do with, both in the United States and the British Empire, do know something of it. They know something about the way of Christianity. Why not appeal to that in them? That is what Paul does here.
A.E.H. Why do you stress the thought of 'official servant'? Do you think that we should have this character about us? While we pay proper deference and respect to those in authority, there is a consciousness that being of God we have spiritual dignity.
J.T. Christianity involves a system representative of God. It stands in that dignity before the gentile rulers. Paul speaking before Agrippa alludes to himself in this way (verses 15 - 18). Christianity is not something done in a corner, a mere sect that has arisen to disappear into oblivion. It is going to stand. It is of God, and great moral dignity is attached to it.
A.E.H. The Lord Himself saying, "I am", enters into the whole course of Christianity through the world.
J.T. When His enemies enquired for "Jesus of Nazareth", He owns that title, but in replying He does not say. I am Jesus of Nazareth, He says, "I am"; 'he' is not in the original. That implies Deity, as in @Exodus 3: 14; that is behind the whole position. Pilate was much concerned because the Jews said the Lord "made himself Son of God". Nebuchadnezzar saw in the furnace one "like a son of God", @Daniel 3: 25. These great facts indicate the presence of God.
{40}
R.W.S. Are you viewing Agrippa more favourably than Festus?
J.T. Quite so. He is a different man -- you can see that. When Festus spoke to Paul he said "with a loud voice, Thou art mad, Paul". That is a very disrespectful word. But Paul says, "I am not mad, most excellent Festus, but utter words of truth and soberness; for the king is informed about these things". He sees that Agrippa is a different man.
R.W.S. I asked that because Festus is a governor for Herod, and Agrippa is a king.
J.T. Agrippa is representing his own authority. For instance, a young brother has to do with the Board, and the Board says, You are granted exemption because of conscience. He is given a card to testify to that. When the young man goes to camp an officer may ignore that. Why does he do that? He is of a different mind. He is an officer and he wants to convert the young man. He has other motives, whereas the Government of the United States is abstractly in accord with Christian conscience as to military service. They do not here make provision for Christianity formally as they do in Great Britain, but nevertheless they do in effect in their state papers. They do not make provision formally in the constitution for Christ, but they do in effect, and that involves divine influence. Primarily that arises from the knowledge of Christianity held by persons that immigrated to the United States; it would not have come from the original inhabitants of the country, for they were heathen. People having come in, many of whom were real Christians, they exercised influence in favour of Christianity, and this affected the government. So that Christ is honoured in a way in the state papers, and so, abstractly, the Government of the United States is in favour of conscience out and out; but when it comes to working it out, some individuals
{41}
are not. The officers often endeavour to convert the young men inducted into the army to induce them to give up their consciences. That is what you have here. Festus is different from Agrippa, and Paul says in effect, I am really speaking to the king. He knew Festus. We have to meet men of that character; but bearing in mind that the President of the United States and the Government are abstractly in favour of Christian principles, the true believer is encouraged to assert his conscience toward God.
A.N.W. It is quite in order to think that God had to do with the clause in the constitution granting freedom of worship. Is that not where the fear of God might be brought in?
J.T. Wherever the thought came from it is there, and it is of God. But we ought to differentiate between persons. If an officer is hard and exacting and unfeeling, you would say, That is Festus. You would not be disrespectful because of that, but Paul would say, I am speaking to the king. It was Agrippa's day and Paul was not at all misled. He knew Agrippa had some favourable feeling about the truth, and as the king gave him liberty to speak, he was the more bold in his presence.
A.A.T. I thought you said a brother would weaken himself by appealing to Caesar?
J.T. He would. The young brothers generally do not do it. The ground they take is that they belong to the Lord, and they follow His teaching and His example. But if a brother says, 'The law supports my conscience', what can you say? It *does* support the believer's conscience as refusing to take the sword.
C.A.M. The officers very often say there is a difference between conscientious objectors, and underneath there is the fact that they will take account of what an inducted man is personally.
{42}
J.T. Yes: I thought we should see that in this chapter. It is a striking picture of Paul, and at the end he says to Agrippa, I would like you and all who hear me to be like me, as I am now. He would say, I do not want you to be like me as I was as a young man; when I was a young man I murdered people; but God saved me out of that, and you can all be saved likewise.
A.S.B. Would there be something in the soul of Paul corresponding to what is seen in Daniel in speaking to Nebuchadnezzar? He says, "And in the days of these kings shall the God of the heavens set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and the sovereignty thereof shall not be left to another people" (@Daniel 2: 44): one people and one sovereignty in relation to one kingdom.
J.T. Yes. The kingdom is a divine thought. The idea of kingdom never ceases with God. It became stressed after Babel, but it runs on even to the eternal state when the Lord Jesus, having subdued all things, delivers up the kingdom to God. That is to say, the kingdom never ceases; what God calls 'kingdom' never ceases. It may take different forms; but the Babylonish one and that of the Medes and Persians as well as the Grecian and the Roman kingdoms will disappear; they will be broken in pieces by the stone cut without hands. But the kingdom set up by God will never come to an end.
J.W.D. Is not the prime intent in this feature of the testimony as ordered by God, to build up the Christian's constitution? There is no evidence that it has vitally affected the authorities, but something essential is built into the personalities of those of the assembly.
J.T. Just so. God is carrying on this operation of building; it is something that is to exist in the nature of a structure. You are begging leave to go
{43}
on with that, making full allowance for the authorities.
J.W.D. There are many chapters in this section of the Scriptures that are taken up with accounts of long discourses as to the truth to men that were apparently unaffected. I was thinking of what you said of the personality of Paul, how all these difficulties regarding ourselves and the authorities are to build something in us constitutionally in relation to eternity. Agrippa was very derisive; he knew certain things connected with Christianity and no doubt was affected to a certain extent; yet is not the main thing in this long chapter, describing such a marvellous outshining of the truth, the personality of Paul, representing what should belong to the personality of all the saints?
J.T. As far as we can see, Agrippa was unconverted. Whether anything came out of this marvellous occasion we cannot be sure. God was there, not only in words in the remarkable speech Paul made, but in the person himself. What influence that had we have to conjecture, but certainly it placed knowledge where knowledge would be disseminated, that is, in high circles. God would get to the highest. Paul is to be sent to the nations -- that is the first thing, and then to kings (@Acts 9: 15). We have no record that any one of these kings was converted; but the first dignitary with whom Paul and Barnabas had to do, the proconsul of Cyprus, evidently was converted. The eunuch was another representative of monarchies and kingdoms, and he was converted; and Cornelius was a military representative of Rome, and he was converted. These are not to be passed by. We do not know what happened after Agrippa and Festus heard this wonderful speech -- and the women too who were present. What would be said, and what influence might be spread abroad in the Roman Empire from it! I
{44}
think that idea is important; what, for instance, might have been disseminated from Pilate? Take Pilate's wife: what would she say to persons of her rank about Jesus? Would it not be in accord with her testimony to her husband? All that was intended of God to spread as a testimony. There is something that the Christian can appeal to in Christendom that is not in heathendom.
S.W.P. The night that Belshazzar was slain Daniel had been in to the king and told him the truth.
J.T. Yes; and the queen mother was in the hall of the feast that Belshazzar had made. There were a thousand of his lords there when she came in. She had not been at the feast, the revelry previously; she came in to tell the king about his father. She said, "There is a man in thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods", and then Daniel is brought in. I am calling attention to what persons such as the queen here would say. Evidently there were women at this occasion in Caesarea; what would result from their report as to what Paul said? These women might say, We never heard such words before! At any rate something had come into the Roman Empire that had not been there before. Now in our day there are a good many in non-combatant service in Great Britain; these men are lovers of the truth, and they speak of it to one another and to others. That is not for nothing. God is following it up.
A.E.H. Is there also involved the idea of restraint -- what restrains or hinders?
J.T. Yes; there is "that which restrains", and "he who restrains". Evil is thus kept in check.
S.McC. It is remarkable that in @Mark 13 and in @Luke 21 reference is made to this kind of situation. The Lord in Luke says, "I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your opposers shall not be able to reply to or resist"; but in Mark He says, "Whatsoever
{45}
shall be given you in that hour, that speak; for ye are not the speakers, but the Holy Spirit". In Luke stress is laid on the human vessel, and in Mark on the Holy Spirit in the vessel.
J.T. Quite so. Then another thing is the matter of government. Government is a restraining power, and it is more restraining as it comes under the influence of true Christianity. In Germany there is no recognition of conscience in the army. That country has not come under the influence of the Spirit of God in the ministry as, to some extent, the British Empire has, and God is taking account of that; for there is more respect for conscience in the governments where the truth is announced. It is undeniable. God uses the ministry as making way for conscience. The authorities are set up by God, and in the countries I have mentioned way is made for the gospel. So even the Roman roads were used by Paul; the Romans built great roads, and God used them to spread His testimony. What is current in a similar sense today is provided by the authorities; and we keep on praying that the use of these necessities might be kept open for us in our service and testimony.
H.G.H. Paul refers to "the promise made by God to our fathers", @Acts 26: 6.
J.T. Quite so. He brings not only himself, but the truth too before Agrippa. He speaks of "the promise made by God to our fathers, to which our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night hope to arrive". That is another matter, that there is the service of God carrying on all the time. There is a real service of God going on; it is the full thought. The whole twelve tribes are said to be in it. He also speaks about their hope, "about which hope, O king, I am accused of the Jews". And now he is going to say something directly to this man: "Why should it be judged a thing incredible
{46}
in your sight if God raises the dead?". It is a question of consistency. If he believes in God, why should any sensible man think it an incredible thing that God should raise the dead? I mean to say that these are examples for us as to what may be said in dealing with the powers that be.
T.L.S. In connection with conscience and the matter of trade-unions, if the employers do not listen to us, would it be right to appeal to the authorities?
J.T. God gives us wisdom in these matters. For instance, in New South Wales the Government is very radical, and they want to impose trade-unionism as a law. However, it is deferred for the moment, but it is in mind. In the meantime you might have the opportunity of talking with a trade-unionist in the Government who is a Christian (he might also be what he would call an out-and-out Briton), and you would refer to unionism as to whether it is consistent with the gospel, with the truth of Christianity. You might also point out that it is not consistent with Magna Carta, and he could not show that it is. On the contrary, you could say, it is entirely out of consistency with Magna Carta; for as a member of a trades union I could not give my son work in my shop because he is not a trade-unionist. The thing is utterly unfair. I would not have any difficulty in bringing forward reasonable points of the foregoing kind to enforce the truth; but to go to court about it -- I could not do that. Paul, in stating the truth to the Athenians, said, "Some of the poets amongst you have said, For we are also his offspring".
J.A.P. Is it well to bring in that we are subjects of the grace of God in speaking to these men?
J.T. We are coming to that, what the converted man is over against what he used to be. Paul tells them what he used to be, "an insolent overbearing man". He had been a very, very bad man. But he
{47}
was not that since he was converted. What had changed him? As we proceed down the chapter, we see that he brings himself in as he is now: "King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest. And Agrippa said to Paul, In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian. And Paul said, I would to God, both in little and in much, that not only thou, but all who have heard me this day, should become such as I also am, except these bonds" (verses 27 - 29). That is the next thing, what he is now. It is not simply what happened when he was converted, but what he is now before them: "such as I also am, except these bonds", the apostle says. That is the final feature of this remarkable interview between Paul and Agrippa.
A.H.P. Is it that "My kingdom" is operating now, so that Paul stresses the idea of the heavenly vision and of what he was as the product of the operation of Christ in his soul?
J.T. God had operated in him; and God has operated in the young men who have a conscience toward Him who are inducted into the army. The subordinate officers will come in contact with the young men, and the spirit they see in them will be a testimony to them.
C.A.M. The mighty change that took place in Paul has, in measure, taken place in these young men.
J.T. Paul is suggesting that it might be taking place in Agrippa. The power was there to change him.
J.H. Would you say that this kind of representation is what God used in justifying the way that He finally dealt with Belshazzar and the Babylonish empire?
J.T. Yes, Belshazzar knew of it. This occasion with the apostle will face Agrippa at the judgment
{48}
seat; so also with Pilate as to the Lord. Hence the importance of bearing testimony to persons in high places. The point that is before us now is that such men at least are capable of being influenced for good. Agrippa's court said one to another of Paul, "This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds". And Agrippa said to Festus, "This man might have been let go if he had not appealed to Caesar". That is what you want to get, that the public rulers should be affected, that the way should be made for us.
S.W.P. Does the fact that King Agrippa uses the word 'Christian' show that he had some knowledge of the things that preceded this issue?
J.T. That is the ground Paul takes, that he was conversant with the matter. He knew the word 'Christian'. If you were to ask him what that word meant, he might say, Just a sect. Paul was expressive of it as of God -- suffering as a Christian.
W.L. Would you say that spiritual history was an important underlying feature with Paul?
J.T. We are trying to show that. We are now coming to the man. Paul is not here claiming that he is a Roman, that is not now good enough for him. "Such as I also am", he says, not a Roman citizen, but a citizen of Christ's kingdom. That is what he means.
R.A. He speaks of his "manner of life", and also of "the outset of my life"; are these important?
J.T. There were incidents in his early life of which the Jews were cognizant. He was a known man in Jerusalem, especially as a persecutor of Christians. What effected the change? That is the whole point. Christ's kingdom effects the change, and Christ says that the power of His kingdom is outside of this world. Paul belonged to another world.
{49}
A.A.T. Is there not today a double testimony rendered sometimes? The military boards are made up of different kinds of men, and on the boards there is sometimes a Jew.
J.T. We have to make allowance for that, and also for the fact that sometimes a man comes outside when you are leaving and says, "I have sympathy with you". That happens.
A.N.W. One of the judges once said to a young brother, "I wish there were more in our church like you".
J.T. That is what we are to look out for. Even if they are not converted, these men have good influence.
F.K.C. You quoted from Paul's words in Timothy, "That in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal". Is this the kind of impression king Agrippa gets?
J.T. That is the point. A kind of man is now before the board, or having to do with the commanding officer in the camp, who is different -- a man like Paul: "such as I also am", as he says. He will make his presence felt there. Instead of their endeavouring to convert him from his views, they will admit there is something in him beyond them.
T.N.W. Many of us may be weak. If we take all this on now it will help us in our prayers.
J.T. It is a great matter to have a clear understanding of the times; all this sorrow in the world has not come up accidentally. It is a question of the times. Of David it says, "the times that passed over him". Extraordinary times are passing over us. God would make us fit for them, He would have us understand them so as not to defeat His purpose in them.
R.A. He is holding nothing back; He reveals His mind through the prophets.
{50}
J.T. So Paul says, "I would to God, both in little and in much, that not only thou, but all who have heard me this day, should become such as I also am, except these bonds". He is preaching the gospel now; it is a gospel time and the point is that a person is speaking who knows. He is permitted to speak and he is using his liberty to unfold the truth, and he is an example of the truth himself.
S.W.P. Is it of importance that he says he is "saying nothing else than those things which both the prophets and Moses have said should happen"? Therefore what he says carries authority and weight with it. He does not inject his own thoughts or opinions.
J.T. Yes. There are other things that he says here carrying down the testimony of God from the start. It is no question of something done in a corner, or of a mere religious sect. It is a universal matter; that is what Christianity is. It is immutable.
J.W.D. Why do you think that today the testimony is linked on with the very young? Those who are the standard-bearers of what Paul represents here are young men, nineteen and on. Why do you think God has ordered that it should be in their hands today, whereas here it is in one who is the very acme of spiritual excellence?
J.T. No doubt under God there has been a measure of preparation, and now it is urgent that the truth should be kept before all grades of the young. There are many here today. They are getting the truth; they will be called upon to use it. The little maid in Naaman's house is an example: she knew enough to say what was needed, and she said it well. 
Rem. A young sister in Great Britain was called up to serve, and when it came to the matter of the clothing she was to wear she responded that she could not wear men's clothing, quoting @Deuteronomy 22: 5.
{51}
J.T. That was a practical testimony, a thing to be noted by young people. How quickly we take on worldly fashions as against Scripture! She took her ground on the basis of Scripture as to the use of men's clothing, a stand which is much needed. So with Rhoda in the prayer meeting at Jerusalem, how well she stood her ground! She was persecuted; she was out of her mind, they said, but she was not. It may not be a matter of preaching the gospel or of teaching, but you know something of God that is needed to be said, and you say it fearlessly and in a becoming way.
A.E.H. Would Paul's words come in here, that his bonds were manifested as being in Christ in the praetorium and in other places?
J.T. Just so; he was not a felon, he was a Christian, a follower of Jesus, and that became manifest. So in Ephesians he says he is Christ's prisoner, not Caesar's prisoner. That is a great thing.
H.G.H. Would you say a word about the last verse? It says, "This man might have been let go if he had not appealed to Caesar". 
Rem. Before that it says, "This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds".
J.T. The apostle is exonerated both morally and legally.
{52}
FEATURES OF THE TRUTH BEARING ON THE LAST DAYS (4)
@Acts 3: 1 - 11; @Acts 4: 23 - 31; @Acts 12: 1 - 7
J.T. The thought at this time is that we should look at Peter. He comes before us in the Scriptures as one occupied in a legitimate business. The Lord called him, and said He would make him a fisher of men. It was in this capacity, when at Caesarea, that he secured Cornelius and his company, thus having to do with the nations or their representatives; and the Spirit also uses him as representative of leadership amongst the people of God. In Matthew in the list of apostles given, he is first, and so the Acts takes him up in that way. The Lord ascended to heaven and Peter is seen in the upper room with the others and proceeds to serve according to what was needful. Then in chapter 2 he is seen as representative of the ministry; his ministry is linked up with the eleven, he stood up with the eleven, giving a lead amongst them. He was divinely qualified and did his work well. He is put forward as representative of the Lord's own handiwork. The idea of it is of one being *made*.
In chapter 3 John is seen taking a second place. Peter is always first. He and John are seen together in chapters 3 and 4 -- we may call them 'Peter and John chapters', but Peter is leading. Chapter 4 brings them forward as sufferers, but knowing how to avail themselves of the circle formed, a retreat provided in the company, into which they merge. Peter, however successful in his leadership, merges with the others; he lends whatever he has to the company. The company is enhanced by whatever one is, as of God, or whatever he has of God, and the chapter shows how the position is so regarded. It is a strenuous time, hence God is alluded to as a
{53}
'Despot', which is the word for "Lord" in the original here. "And having been let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them. And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God, and said, Lord, *thou* art the God ..." The word 'Despot', or 'Master', alludes, as remarked, to the strenuousness of the times. There can be no will, save the will of God; in His kingdom the will of God must be adhered to. So they lifted up their voice with one accord to God, quoting David, "Why have the nations raged haughtily and the peoples meditated vain things? The kings of the earth were there, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ. For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in this city to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before should come to pass. And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy servant Jesus". Now it is for us at this time to see the circumstances, and the truth entering into them; also how far they enter into the present moment.
Then finally, in the passage in chapter 12, Peter is seen in prison, again representing the ministry, although the ministry was rendered impotent for the moment; Herod representing the authorities, which is, the Roman Empire. We see what happens to the rulers as they disregard the will of God, the service of God; the facts are prophetic. In this chapter Peter still represents the ministry. Satan had intervened through Herod to kill James, and then he took Peter because it pleased the Jews, which fact brings
{54}
out how the authorities are affected by the people, the populace. So that Peter is put into prison, and therefore the ministry becomes hindered, at least for the moment. And now the point to be understood is how God met the emergency which the chapter discloses.
A.N.W. This morning you seemed to give Paul a place in precedence to Peter, which is confirmed in Scripture; is it that Peter is "first" in relation to the eleven only, and his ministry preparatory to that of Paul?
J.T. Yes. He takes the lead in relation to the eleven, what the Lord left here, His handiwork. But Peter links on with Paul in chapter 10; that is, not formally, but in his ministry; although it is remarkable that Paul went up to see Peter after he was converted and remained a certain time with him, as if there was at once a spiritual link between them. But Paul as in relation to Barnabas takes the lead, not by formal appointment but by power and efficiency. Saul in chapter 13 is identified with Paul, and it is now "Paul and his company"; a similar comment is never made of Peter or of any of the other apostles. And so Paul is already in the lead in chapter 13, and in chapter 15 he is pre-eminently in the lead, that is, not by appointment, but by fact, linking on with receiving the right hands of fellowship of Peter, James and John. Finally in his epistle Peter formally commits himself to Paul in the ministry, and as a Scripture writer, too. So that I think these facts make the matter clear that Paul is outstanding, a universal minister, a person who has received ministry from the Lord personally more than once. Peter is stressed by the Lord as put in administration in the kingdom -- not in the assembly, but in the kingdom. But our point is to see the link between him and this main subject, that is, how the rulers of the world came in contact with the ministers
{55}
of the truth of Christianity, and how the ministers behaved in relation to them.
H.G.H. It speaks of the hour of prayer in @Acts 3, but in chapter 4 the prayer was specific, about a certain crisis that had arisen.
J.T. That is seen in comparing the two chapters. Chapter 3 speaks of the hour of prayer, the prayer was going on in the temple, and Peter and John went up at that time, showing that it was still a transitional time, and the disciples had part in it, as stated in chapter 2: 46. But Peter and John outshone anything that was there. The temple was really put into the shade, and yet they recognised it. In chapter 4 the prayer is specific, but not in the temple; it was in "their own company", Peter and John merging with the others. It is a question of the company and how thoroughly they were one and how love prevailed, and that God answered them. While they were together in the building it was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke the word of God with boldness.
A.E.H. In Paul have we in a general way the idea of a model set before us, an elect vessel chosen to set out the divine thought; but in Peter, the working out of the truth morally, and therefore the forces of opposition especially stressed with him? There seems to be more sympathy shown on the part of the authorities with Paul.
J.T. The personal touch between Peter and the authorities is not much stressed. In Peter the expense, the overhead, was heavy; the Lord had to spend much on him to make him conform to what He had in mind; whereas the word 'vessel' is applied to Paul from the outset. He is an "elect vessel", meaning that he would be usable and that from the start.
A.S.B. You referred to the idea of processing. That is seen with Peter, as under the hand of the
{56}
Lord; but the result of the Lord's work with Paul is almost instantaneous.
J.T. Paul started to work immediately, and with the right thought: he preached that Jesus is the Son of God. That was the leading thought then and it is the leading thought now. Peter comes to it at the end of his ministry. He never brings it in in his early ministry; that, of course, would be according to the Spirit's guidance. He is about to depart from the service when he speaks in his second epistle about the Son of God.
C.A.M. Paul said, "God, who set me apart even from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations". Would that stand in contrast to what He made Peter?
J.T. I think so. In Paul the idea of the vessel, of one available, is noticed and he had been long in the divine mind. Of course, Peter had been, too, but that is not stressed. There were more personal touches in Paul.
A.N.W. By the 'expense' the Lord had with Peter, do you mean the repeated corrections which seemed to be necessary for him?
J.T. That is what I mean, the exercise the Lord must have had about him. It is remarkable how many instances there are in regard to him. It is meant for us now as to how much overhead the Lord has in regard to each of us.
A.P.T. "I have prayed for thee", would that indicate some of the overhead?
Ques. "I have prayed for thee", would that gain all the apostles? The Lord told them that Satan had sought to have all of them to sift them. But He said to Peter, "I have prayed for thee". He would have Peter notice what he was costing Him. Not that He did not pray for the others, but He says
{57}
to Peter, "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not".
A.A.T. Was the service of Peter more in connection with the kingdom, whereas Paul's was in the assembly, involving the truth of the Son of God?
J.T. The Lord said to Peter, "I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens". It was an administrative matter; whereas Paul had committed to him the ministry of the assembly, the truth of the mystery, the truth of reconciliation and the completion of the word. He was also a competent minister of the new covenant, and he tells us himself that he laboured more abundantly than they all -- Peter and the other eleven apostles. It is plain that he has the first place in the service of the Lord. But Peter had the first place among the early apostles.
A.E.H. The subject of overhead costs, involving mathematics, is interesting. I wonder if that is why Peter uses the word *add* in his second epistle, that the spiritual project might be a growing one?
J.T. According to that scripture the believer is to have in one element another, and in this, another, leading to regulated completeness in the features of Christianity. He says, "Simon Peter, bondman and apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have received like precious faith with us through the righteousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ: Grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord. As his divine power has given to us all things which relate to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us by glory and virtue, through which he has given to us the greatest and precious promises, that through these ye may become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust". And then he goes on to what you alluded to as additions: "But for this very reason also, using therewith all diligence, in your
{58}
faith have also virtue, in virtue knowledge, in knowledge temperance, in temperance endurance, in endurance godliness, in godliness brotherly love, in brotherly love love". There we have the idea of a great system of operation -- elements operating to produce other elements. It is a system of things, and it covers what we are saying as to cost, each believer adding or producing.
A.H.P. Is it not significant that the ninth hour, the hour of prayer, was that in which Peter and John went up to the temple together, linking it on with the sufferings on the cross? There was darkness over the earth from the sixth to the ninth hour.
J.T. It has often been noted and I am sure it is true. It is a question of spiritual sentiment.
T.L.S. Just how much does Peter's occupation enter into this matter of what he was going to do now?
J.T. The word "fisher" is used of him; the Lord says, "I will make you fishers of men". The thought of a fisher would run right through his history. His position at the end of chapter 9 was at the eastern edge of the Mediterranean and not on the Sea of Galilee. That would accentuate the idea of *men*, the universal thought. In that connection he links on with Paul; it is a question of men. Cornelius was a man, and Peter said to him, "I myself also am a man".
C.A.M. Do you think the name Peter, meaning "stone", which the Lord gave him, would link his personality with his service?
J.T. Yes. We have noticed that he was not called, as Paul was, to special service in the assembly; the name given him implied that he was *material* for the assembly. His *commission* specially referred to the kingdom. The Lord said to him, "I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the
{59}
heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest loose on the earth shall be loosed in the heavens", @Matthew 16: 19.
A.E.H. Do you think the original work given to him and Andrew, when the Lord said "I will make you fishers of men", would suggest to Peter that in dealing with those in authority, they too were men? He could pay respect to them, but still they are men, and hence there would be an element in them to which there could be some appeal as having to do with God.
J.T. On the other hand, as opposed to God and His testimony they are degraded -- just clay. The truth works both ways. Peter had to do with a man judged by God in this sense. Herod, although a dignitary, persecuted the apostles, and was eaten of worms.
C.A.M. You were alluding to Cornelius as in a position of distinction. Manhood comes up in that connection with Peter.
J.T. In that section of Acts he links on with Paul as to the whole race. It is striking at the end of chapter 9 that Peter is viewed as "passing through all quarters", implying that he was in accord with the Spirit at the moment as reaching out to the nations -- seen in the next chapter. Today we have been praying as to the saints generally coming into accord, being united; we do not wish to have a different line of things here from that in Australia and Great Britain; we wish to be universal, which the Holy Spirit requires and promotes. Peter seems to come into line with what the Lord is doing, he goes to all quarters. He is seen on the shores of the Mediterranean, and while in prayer he goes into an ecstasy. The vessel comes down from heaven which was to enlarge his view of things, making way for Paul, and therefore he regards Cornelius as a
{60}
man -- as he was. He was a man of Italy, and Peter says to him, "*Ye* know how it is unlawful for a Jew to be joined or come to one of a strange race, and to *me* God has shewn to call no man common or unclean".
J.W.D. Going back to Herod -- if you had been living in the dominion that he governed, how would you have prayed for his government?
J.T. It is a question of the circumstances. God may raise up a man, or allow a man to be raised up to do certain things in relation to His people in a disciplinary sense, and he does them. But he may do far more, becoming lawless and destructive. Then he becomes an enemy of God and an enemy of men. The position changes; the spiritual would discern that. Herod "laid his hands on some of those of the assembly to do them hurt, and slew James", and put Peter in prison, intending to kill him. Here is a man definitely against God's servants and testimony, having the character of antichrist. I should not pray for him -- unless that if it were God's will he should be removed. He is an enemy of God and is eaten of worms. Although this dispensation is one of grace, God in certain circumstances acts in it in the severest way.
J.W.D. God removed him in a summary way without causing the destruction of great multitudes of people. Could we not intelligently pray that an angel of the Lord might operate in a similar drastic way with certain individuals in governments who oppress God's people?
J.T. I pray for that very thing regularly -- that God, if it were His will, might, to save the carnage, deal with the men who are specially responsible for it. God can do that. The great battle mentioned in @Revelation 19 is in relation to the beast and the false prophet and the whole world under them. The
{61}
two leaders are taken first; the beast and the false prophet are taken first and cast into the lake of fire. God can do that.
A.A.T. In the verses you read in @Acts 4 the brethren as they prayed asked the Lord to look upon their threatenings, but did not exactly pray against the government. They ask that they might have boldness to speak the word and that the Lord might stretch out His hand to heal.
J.T. Yes; the idea of the dispensation is greatly stressed in that prayer: "And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy servant Jesus. And when they had prayed, the place in which they were assembled shook, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and spoke the word of God with boldness". It is the gospel they are concerned about, that is a very important item to have before us. It is God's work going on, not simply our relief, that is our concern.
S.McC. Peter had learned this in a practical way when with the Lord. He cut oil the ear of the high priest's servant, but the Lord stretched out His hand and healed it.
J.T. Quite so. That is Luke's point of view; it is the question of the gospel; But John does not mention that, as we had yesterday. From his point of view such things may be allowed to go on to the end unremedied. Now God may not today act in any such drastic way as we see here, but I think we are entitled to pray that He might come in and deal with matters in such a way as not to cause such enormous loss of life and property. God may do that, because it is a gracious time. He may listen to that.
{62} 
Ques. You were speaking about the preparatory work in Paul in view of his service. What would you say about @Galatians 1: 17?
J.T. I think that bears on the thought of overhead that we were speaking of. The Lord would be saved certain expense, so to speak, by Paul's movement into Arabia. It is a question of how much we judge ourselves. Going into Arabia would be going into wilderness circumstances; instead of building up your personal circumstances, comfort or affluence, you take the other course and starve the flesh. If you starve the flesh, you save the Lord expense; I think that is what is meant. Instead of going to Jerusalem, he went into Arabia, and again returned to Damascus; and after three years he went up to Jerusalem to make acquaintance with Peter.
J.W.D. Do you mean that whether we are on the Peter line or the Paul line is a matter for ourselves?
J.T. I think we can in a sense take things on ourselves to obviate the necessity of discipline. In disallowing or non-feeding the flesh much is accomplished. I think Arabia means that we are denied the means of feeding the flesh. John the baptist was brought up in the deserts, meaning that he was brought up in circumstances that prevented the feeding of the flesh. The more we do of that the less expense the Lord has with us. John the baptist's ministry was short; he was only a young man when beheaded, but he was very successful -- of those born of women there was none greater. He kept his body in control. Paul says, "I buffet my body, and lead it captive, lest after having preached to others I should be myself rejected", @1 Corinthians 9: 27.
A.S.B. Is that why the apostle said, "I took not counsel with flesh and blood", in relation to going up to Arabia?
J.T. I think so. He was resourceful in taking care of himself. The fact that he took not counsel with
{63}
flesh and blood would mean that he did not rely on human wisdom, he relied on the resources which God gave him. Going into Arabia implied that he would not trust himself, that, as we have said, he would not promote fleshly tendencies in himself. "Confide in Jehovah with all thy heart, and lean not unto thine own intelligence", @Proverbs 3: 5. The Lord said to Peter, "I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not"; not that he should not fail, but that his faith should not fail. He could go on with His work with Peter if his faith did not fail. Buffeting his body is a good illustration; the apostle kept his body under. Of course he would look to the Lord to keep him, but then, he saw to himself and did not allow the natural to rule. The basis of this doctrinally is in @Romans 6, 7 and 8.
H.B. Is there overhead seen with Israel in the many days of their wandering, over against the eleven days¬ journey they could have taken?
J.T. Yes; God journeyed every extra mile with them. Everywhere they went He went, whereas it was only eleven days¬ journey from Mount Horeb to Kadesh-barnea.
J.A.P. We often allude to Peter and John returning to their own company. They were not puffed up by their service, but took their places in the company as before; they kept lowly.
J.T. I think we know the gain of keeping among the brethren. How our young brethren in the services are at a disadvantage in having been cut off from the meetings! In Great Britain they usually get to meetings, but not in this country and the United States; that is, "their own company" is not generally available. That is a serious matter, they have to progress in spite of that. In these circumstances the word to Timothy is particularly needful: "Youthful lusts flee", and in keeping with it, "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those
{64}
that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart", @2 Timothy 2: 22. The young men have not the brethren near them to "follow ... with", but they can flee youthful lusts and maintain self-judgment, including buffeting of the body, as well as practical righteousness.
W.W.M. Do you think that the thorn in the flesh that was given to Paul saved the Lord a great deal of trouble with him?
J.T. Yes; He gave that to him to work for him. That was one of the workers in his favour: "And that I might not be exalted ... there was given to me a thorn for the flesh, a messenger of Satan that he might buffet me". He also knew how to do the buffeting himself, but he needed more of it and the thorn effected it. He says himself, there are certain things that work for us: "tribulation works endurance; and endurance, experience; and experience, hope", @Romans 5: 3, 4.
A.E.H. What do you see in the fact that in the beginning of chapter 12 God allows an apostle to be slain, and before the chapter finishes He allows sixteen soldiers, I assume, to die to save another apostle? Such a vast difference in the way these two brothers fare!
J.T. That is a remarkable chapter for us now; it is a sort of parenthesis in the general history. The history is dealing with Paul and Barnabas, who come into chapter 11. While they are labouring at Antioch successfully, Agabus comes down there and prophetically announces a famine; the chapter finishes with persons in Antioch who are "well off" sending money to Jerusalem to meet need occasioned by the famine. Now in chapter 12 we have another matter altogether, what is going on under Herod's rule; not against Paul and Barnabas, but against Peter, John and James who were of the twelve. Then the political side of Herod is brought out: he saw the murder of James pleased the Jews and he arrested Peter
{65}
and put him into prison, having in mind to slay him too. Now we have a most remarkable account of divine intervention; the attack was against the ministry and in Peter's deliverance God shows man's impotence. These are touches in connection with Peter's imprisonment which indicate that the revival of the ministry, as well as the restoration of it was in mind, and that the Lord's supper is linked with the latter. The angel smote Peter's side, which would remind him of the Lord's smitten side and what it suggests as to the assembly; as risen from the dead the Lord showed to His disciples His hands and His side, the witness of His unchangeable love for the assembly.
H.G.H. Is it not interesting to see the part prayer takes in connection with that?
J.T. Yes; unceasing prayer was made by the assembly to God for Peter, and a number were gathered in the house of Mary the mother of Mark engaged in prayer, as he was delivered from the prison. Evidently, however, they were not looking for the divine answer, for when Peter appeared they did not believe it was he. They were not ready to receive the testimony that he was released. I only refer to that to show there was a decline in Jerusalem. The chapter is somewhat parenthetical as linking the history of the assembly at Jerusalem with the great movement of the Spirit through Saul and Barnabas among the nations. The remarkable happening in the prison is particularly what we should notice -- how Peter is released and how, when he comes to himself and comes to know where he is -- in the street, left to himself -- he goes to the prayer meeting. But there is a want of faith there. The main line now is evidently in connection with Paul and Barnabas. The need at Jerusalem is met by the bounty of the saints at Antioch, which is sent up there "by the hand of Barnabas and Saul". The work of God in the gentiles was taking the lead.
{66}
He may work in one section, and in other parts His work may be lessened; we have to notice that. But this chapter shows that God does not neglect any part of His field. We see here, too, how God revives His work where there is a tendency to decline, while at the same time entering on new fields.
C.A.M. Do you think He was linking Peter on with the assembly in its wider aspect as seen in chapter 13, and from there on?
J.T. Yes. The assembly had been recognized officially as in Jerusalem -- that was the external position: "At that time Herod the king laid his hands on some of those of the assembly to do them hurt"; they were known to be that; it is "the assembly", having that status at Jerusalem. But now the work of God is moving among the nations, and full notice is to be taken of those who are leading in it. This comes out more clearly in chapter 15. The apostles remained at Jerusalem, we are told in chapter 8; God is not neglecting what is there, there are still godly men devoted to Christ; but there is some weakness, and God is allowing this man Herod to attack them. But the outcome is not that he destroys the assembly at Jerusalem, but that he himself is destroyed; and the ministry is to revive and to link on with what Paul is doing. He is engaged in the universal movement of the Spirit. It is to begin at the Lord's supper; it involves the Lord's side.
J.J. Does the fact that the saints are going through and that the young men in the camps are being maintained imply that the ministry should be increasingly wider and better?
J.T. Yes; and what is indicated in Peter's release from prison is that the ministry is to be free from bondage, but not as released in a mere arbitrary or physical way. It is to be set free in connection with the meaning of the Lord's side as pierced. We are to be brought back to the typical teaching of Adam
{67}
and Eve, meaning the death of Jesus as in @John 20; He showed the disciples His hands and His side.
J.R.H. Do you mean that Peter representing the ministry suffers in a representative way in order that the assembly at Jerusalem may be helped and link on universally?
J.T. Yes. It is evident that Jerusalem needed to be sympathetic with the movement among the nations. The passage states: "And lo, an angel of the Lord came there, and a light shone in the prison: and having smitten the side of Peter, he roused him up, saying, Rise up quickly". Peter had been taken out of prison before, but the record is not nearly so vivid and so touchingly suggestive as in chapter 12. Then we have to enquire, Why all this? Is it not spiritual? Is Peter not coming out of prison a roused-up person with his side affected? And by contemplation and comparison would not @Genesis 2 and @John 20 come into his mind?
J.H. @Acts 4: 27 says, "Both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in this city to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before should come to pass". Would that indicate that governing authorities retain the character of God's ministers even when in an attitude of opposition to the testimony?
J.T. They may; the Lord recognizes that in Pilate. He says, "Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above". But it is when they go wantonly beyond that that a difference should be made, and I think Herod in chapter 12 is thus marked. He is definitely opposed to the ministry. James is one of the ministers; it is a question of attacking the ministers. Earlier, the persecution at Jerusalem scattered the saints generally; the apostles were allowed to stay there but they were attacked. The people are not attacking, but
{68}
Herod is directly attacking the ministry; that is, Satan would destroy what is of God at Jerusalem. What Paul and Barnabas were doing at Antioch is another matter.
A.S.B. Why is it said that "a light shone in the prison"?
J.T. That is a beautiful thought. God is moving in the light. He would make clear to His servant what He is doing; He was not acting in the dark. Peter is to be brought out intelligently.
S.W.P. "Immediately the angel left him" -- you might think he would be needed more than ever at that point.
J.T. Peter knew what to do at this time. I believe the terrible attack on Great Britain was to bring out the work of God; what is there is far more than Satan had calculated, but God diverted the attack in due time. Not that it is over yet, but the main effort is over. 
Rem. It would appear that Herod thought he was going to triumph. He had taken one servant and was proceeding to eliminate another.
J.T. It is one thing after another! Well, God may use men in His governmental purposes, but they may be going beyond what God intended and in that case He takes issue with them. I believe that is the present position.
C.A.M. Do you think the fact that Rhoda recognized Peter's voice would show that there is sympathetic discernment as to whom God is using amongst the saints; that there is youthful feminine feeling in spite of all this outward pressure?
J.T. A beautiful touch! There is in the whole account a remarkable train of circumstances bearing the evidence of God's hand in the preservation and deliverance of His servant: the angel's intervention and guidance as the light shines in the prison,
{69}
the smiting of Peter's side, the gate leading to the city opening of itself, the prayer meeting and the person inside who recognizes Peter's voice. They said Rhoda was mad, but she was not mad; nor was Paul mad when he was speaking to Agrippa, though so charged. Rhoda represents the great importance of standing firmly by what we know in such circumstances. "But Peter continued knocking: and having opened, they saw him and were astonished". God has gained His end and the ministry is released; but those who were praying are put to shame, for they were unbelieving as to Peter's deliverance. There may have been a general need of stirring up in the assembly at Jerusalem. Peter is smitten on the side and the light shone inside in the prison, and over against this the prayer meeting is wanting in faith as to what had happened. Then Herod was eaten of worms; this was the direct judgment of God, "because he did not give the glory to God".
J.R.H. There is an expression here that reminds you of @Luke 15; it says, "When Peter was come to himself". Would that be the work of God in the ministry shining out in its proper native character, underlying the voice of Peter?
J.T. That is the real Peter. There had been conditions that had affected him, but it is now himself. The Lord has him much in mind as His great servant, especially as to the turn things have taken at Jerusalem; and I believe that is the way we arrive at the meaning of chapter 12, which is, as I said, a sort of parenthesis in the history. There was to be a co-ordination there with the work of God in Antioch. Chapter 15 is a sequel to this, where you get the actual facts of certain opposition to the truth arising in Jerusalem, and how an adjustment was reached in which Peter took a most important part. Unity was maintained, the Holy Spirit graciously helping.
{70}
S.McC. In connection with the circumstances Paul was in that we were dwelling on this morning, there is no mention of prayer being made for him anywhere. There does not seem to be from the scriptural record, the same interest in his imprisonment as there is in Peter's.
J.T. That is of deep interest and suggests enquiry. But it is to be remarked as to the comparison between the two apostles that the reference in @Acts 12:5 as to prayer being made for Peter is evidently connected with the assembly at Jerusalem. In @Acts 18: 22 Paul is said to have "saluted the assembly" and the context shows that there also the assembly at Jerusalem is referred to. Peter's special place as the leading apostle of the twelve makes clear why much prayer was made for him by the assembly at Jerusalem. The same interest, no doubt, would be shown in Paul as in similar circumstances. Consider, for instance, the great affection for him manifest in the Ephesian elders at Miletus.
A.H.P. What do you say as to the fact that Peter was asleep in the prison, but Paul and Silas were singing praises in the prison?
J.T. There is a difference. It is not that you would discredit Peter, but he sometimes has to suffer for our learning. In the records of Scripture incidents that love would cover are mentioned so that saints following after might avoid any dangers indicated in them. Singing praises to God with your feet fast in the stocks has more testimony and pleasure for divine Persons than being fast asleep.
S.W.P. Does the mention of these various parts of Peter, his side, his hands, his feet (in reference to sandals), his voice, carry the suggestion that the personality of the servant gives power to his service?
J.T. I am sure that enters into what we are saying. The chapter is remarkable as to what it opens up to people who know and maybe have forgotten,
{71}
or who failed to use what they know. What they may have known in power has lapsed a bit; so that when they are touched it all comes up again. The whole position is brought to light in what happens, and Herod is removed most ignominiously. That enters into the present position, and I believe that if we lay hold of it and keep on praying, God will do something about it.
A.A.T. Do you think the sisters have a distinct place in our prayer meetings?
J.T. They should be there. Many stay at home because they think it is not so important as other meetings. God has put a premium on it, that we should be made glad in His house of prayer (compare @Isaiah 56: 1 - 7).
{72}
FEATURES OF THE TRUTH BEARING ON THE LAST DAYS (5)
@Revelation 1: 9 - 11; @Revelation 10: 8 - 11; @2 Timothy 2: 1 - 6; @Hebrews 13: 23 - 25
J.T. I thought we might consider John and Timothy at this time. We have thus far considered the truth in relation to persons: first in the Lord Himself, then in Paul, then in Peter, and now we shall do so in John and Timotheus. The thought is to speak mainly of John, one who was used of the Lord and served well indeed, a reserved servant as has often been noted, carrying us on to the end. Our enquiry is to consider how he is seen in relation to the authorities, those who are called formally "the powers that be", who are ordained of God. He speaks of them as either apostate or about to be apostate, so that the whole system of rule ordained of God in the four empires culminates in the man of sin who is openly opposed to God and to Christ and to Christianity. This is an important side of our subject, a sub-division of it but a most important one, because it contemplates terrific dislocations on the earth as the ruling powers begin to take issue against God, and God takes issue with them. So that the struggle is terrific. The man of sin, the beast, and the false prophet will be cast into the lake of fire, according to John's point of view. This requires a change of view on our part, and it is intended, too, to influence us as having to do with the authorities, while we might say that in general they are in a favourable attitude towards the saints of God.
Hence John is seen in the passage read in @Revelation 1 as the brother and companion of the saints: "I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of
{73}
Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ" (verse 9). He is representing the ministry in a sense, yet he is a brother and companion of the saints in tribulation and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus; so that the Lord would use him to help us as to how to be in the present situation triumphantly, as accepting the tribulation. It is a time of patience, but nevertheless the time of the kingdom of Jesus. There is one in it -- John -- who knew Jesus, and whom Jesus loved in a special way, who lay in His bosom. The ministry is showing itself in brotherly feelings and affections, but at the same time in the tribulation and kingdom and patience of Jesus. These three features are linked together peculiarly, as the note shows, by one article governing them.
J.W.D. Is God dealing with the nations punitively today?
J.T. There would be a punitive element in it, I think; however, it is to bring out certain conditions in view of the final conflict. It is preliminary; that is, God is not openly punitive, because it is still the period of the Spirit and of the gospel and of the assembly, so that I think there is a certain modification; but at the same time these terrible throes that we are in and have been in more or less for a quarter of a century, point to what is final. I think John's ministry is being used to help us in these circumstances in bringing about the brotherly side in the ministry. In the history of the assembly the ministry took on the lordly attitude in the earlier Episcopalian systems, including Rome; and to some extent in other systems it has taken on a lordly attitude; whereas John's ministry brings in the *brethren*, and the ministers express brotherly feelings in suffering with all the saints. I think here it is preliminary. We shall not be here in the actual
{74}
fulfilment of the throes, but we are sharing something of it, and the brotherly spirit is of great importance; the ministry is enhanced by it.
R.W.S. Does the kingdom here link on with our first reading?
J.T. Yes, the kingdom in Jesus. You will notice it is first "the *tribulation*", then "and kingdom and patience, in Jesus". The word "tribulation" is a strong word. Tribulation may enter into the kingdom, but it is the kingdom in Jesus, and then patience going with that.
A.E.H. Does a good family man make the best kingdom man in that sense? In @John 21 Peter turns and sees the other disciple following, the one who leaned on Jesus¬ breast at supper, as though that would enter into all the brotherliness that was attached to John, and make a good kingdom man of him and a good brother, helping him to be patient in the flood of apostasy coming in.
J.T. Yes. John is a good *second*. He is presented in Scripture as a good second; it is "Peter and John". The earlier chapters in Acts say hardly anything about what John did and said, but he was there as adding to the position. As there the apostle was second; Peter was in the lead. The brotherly element clearly was there and the man that got the blessing in @Acts 3 held them both, as if the ministry of authority must be held as well as the brotherly state.
A.A.T. Verse 9 says "fellow-partaker". Does that mean that others were in it?
J.T. That is the idea. We are all partaking of these three things, the tribulation and kingdom and patience. It is a mutual feeling that is stressed, that there is one brother; the idea of a brother is seen in John, "your brother", not simply one of the brethren. God had given him a distinctive place which
{75}
the brethren would readily recognize, but he was still one of them as a brother.
S.McC. What you said as to the ministry is important, bearing on the present moment. The enemy is intent on impairing and hindering the ministry.
J.T. That is what we shall see, I think, how the devil comes into this book. He has the throne in this book. Satan has a certain place, not yet in the infernal regions; it is a certain historical and geographical position where Satan's throne is (@Revelation 2: 13). To those in Smyrna the Lord said, "The devil shall cast some of you into prison". He is viewed in a military position. The devil had put into the heart of Judas to betray the Lord, and during supper he entered into him (@John 13: 27). It was to get into the position militarily, to get as near to Christ as possible to attack Him. John was in the bosom of Jesus then. The Lord told Judas that what he did he should do quickly; the Lord is holding the reins even as to what Judas was to do. Judas was to do it quickly, yet Judas was possessed by the devil. Now John, according to the Lord's own word, is telling us of the devil being in a certain place; he has a throne here on earth and he is casting some into prison. The agencies by which he is casting some into prison are clearly imperial; that is, they are the same persons or agencies that we are enjoined earlier to respect; but now they are in the devil's hands, his throne being obviously in the very centre of the empire. That, I think, marks off the position in this book, and what is to meet it is this brotherly attitude, one person outstanding, a brother of all the rest, not simply one of them. He is in an outstanding place.
H.G.H. Is there any authority in the term, "your brother"?
J.T. I think there is in a moral sense; just as John had moral authority to address the saints as a
{76}
father and as the elder, calling them his children. He is parental peculiarly. Paul was too, but John is peculiarly that, and if he takes the place of a brother it is a distinctive place, not simply one of them; but on account of his moral qualities and experience and office he addresses them as "I John, your brother".
A.N.W. "I John" brings his personality before us.
J.T. That is important to bring out, "I John". This book brings out his name, his personality, strikingly. What that would mean to suggest to us is, Do not forget the history of this person and what is involved in it, because it bears on the moment. When he says of himself in his gospel that he is the disciple whom Jesus loved, he is stressing more the love of Christ and that he knew Him; but now his personality is established, and it is important in the testimony to have a personality, one that is known and can be trusted. He has established his moral integrity.
W.R. Would the fact that he speaks of himself as a brother be a comfort to the young men in the camps who are suffering as the result of standing for the testimony? They can look back and see how this brother stood in difficult circumstances. He was in the Spirit on the Lord's day.
J.T. That is the idea, it is what impresses them. That will come out as to the younger men in Timotheus, but of course John as having love is the great disciple of love, of how love has become known.
R.W.S. Are we entitled in our prayers to discriminate as to the nations today, praying for the prosperity of nations that favour the testimony, and praying against those that hinder?
J.T. That is good. We are supposed to know them. It is remarkable how the Lord, when He brought up the question of sonship with Peter, referred
{77}
to the kings of the nations, as to how they did things and how they regarded their children and their sons. Peter knew and he could answer Him. It is remarkable the knowledge the disciples had of ordinary things. So in chapter 10 of Revelation the last verse says, "Thou must prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings". That is, the fact that John is to prophesy about them implies that he would know them. It is remarkable how in these wars God has opened up the geography and history of nations to us, how familiar we have become with mundane affairs in that sense, so that the Spirit of God can refer to things spiritually in the book of Revelation and we understand. We are able to discern and to apply what is meant. 
Rem. This isle of Patmos is in the Mediterranean.
J.T. Yes, in the Aegean Sea. That is, it is in the centre of things geographically. How was John to prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings? How was he to be used of the Lord save as he understood these items: "peoples and nations and tongues and many kings"? Their histories are supposed to be known; they have a bearing on the testimony. We become interested when they involve the brethren. Now take Russia: little was known about this dark country, immense in territory and power; but a few brethren were there twenty-five years or so ago in St. Petersburg. Little or nothing was known about them, but presently they were attacked and one of them, an old brother often written about since, was carried away to the Caspian Sea. We followed him in the letters we read about him, and it brought out the hostility against the saints that was arising at that time and that we have followed since in relation to other powers. It is what is going on in central Europe, in the Balkan provinces and Greece, and we
{78}
may say the whole of Europe is involved. That is why John, I think, is directed to get the little book which the angel has in his hand and to eat it, which he does. He says, "And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up". The thought of eating is usually *appropriation* of a thing for a purpose; in this case it is that it should enter into the whole constitution of the person who is to be used in the ministry; and of course he must know what nations and peoples are involved. The prophecy is to affect the Lord's people. John ate the little book, and it was sweet in his mouth because it involved the word of God, as revelation always does. It is always sweet, but the consequence, what it speaks of, causes bitterness to those who love the saints because of what they have to endure.
H.G.H. It says, "The voice which I heard out of the heaven was again speaking *with* me", not, *to* me. Does that mean John was in accord with what the voice was saying?
J.T. Yes. He says in chapter 1, "I turned back to see the voice which spoke with me" (verse 12). This is a similar expression; but in chapter 1 John regards the voice as a person. He turned to see the voice, but he really turned to see the Person: "I saw seven golden lamps, and in the midst of the seven lamps one like the Son of man, clothed with a garment reaching to the feet" (verse 12, 13). The point is that you see "the Son of man". But before the Son of man is mentioned, that of which He is in the midst is spoken of, that is, the seven golden lamps. They are seen *first*. The Lord Jesus is going to have to say to them in a special way. They do not represent the powers that be, they represent the assembly with which the Lord is immediately going to be occupied. Chapter 10 alludes to Him as coming out to occupy Himself with the sea and the land, the literal earth and sea, and that brings in the great conflict that
{79}
is depicted in the remaining part of the book. The Lord comes out and puts His right foot upon the sea, and His left foot on the earth, and He roars as a lion roars. There is "the little book", and that is what John is to appropriate and assimilate so as to know what is going to happen and how it is going to affect the people of God; and that causes him to feel things keenly.
J.W.D. Do you mean that when we are thinking in our prayers and interests as to the governments of this world, we are thinking of them in relation to what is in the assembly, so that our conflict and exercises give us spiritual power? We have no interest in Greece or in the Balkans, for instance, outside of our concern for general mankind, but we have a very great interest in Sweden.
J.T. That is, in the countries in which the saints are; and there are some in all nominal Christian countries. The little book assimilated by the prophet makes him understand. Of course those of us who have travelled into these countries have first-hand knowledge of them, at least to some extent, but most of us have not travelled. But the little book would acquaint us with them. From the divine point of view it is not a big book; God does not intend us to be much engrossed with it. It is a brief account, but it is enough, and it qualifies us to minister because we know the consequences negatively or positively. The negative consequences here are bitter, and we need to know what to minister accordingly. So I do not think what we call our ministry meetings, involving the prophetic ministry, can be rightly entered into or understood aside from the knowledge of this little book. We know what the brethren are, we know where the brethren are, we have our little book as to locations of meetings in different countries; it is indeed little, but it is essential, so that you have a right understanding of what is current in all
{80}
of these countries, whether God is working or not and what He is saying about them. 
Ques. Would that be helped by the reading of letters wherever possible?
J.T. Yes. Sometimes we get excellent accounts of things. We read them in our prayer meetings and I believe they should be circulated as much as possible in so far as they indicate what God is doing.
S.McC. How does this knowledge affect the meeting for ministry? We generally think of it as affecting just the prayer meeting, enlarging us in our scope of outlook in prayer.
J.T. Do you not think that what is said here in verse 11 helps in that? After John tells us that the little book was bitter in his belly he is told, "Thou must prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings". He is qualified to prophesy as appropriating the little book, and it is pretty clear the little book relates to Europe where the enemy is particularly situated and where the work of God throughout the history of Christendom has been mainly carried on. It is only within comparatively recent times that it has extended out to these western countries, but even then it is still in the main in Europe.
A.E.H. The prophetic word then would illuminate the saints as to the elements that exist in these nations and peoples, and as to whether they are favourable or opposed to the testimony and Christ.
J.T. Yes, that is the way I would look at it. We had a sorrowful experience some years back with China. We thought we knew; many of us thought we knew what was there, but really we failed to grasp what was there. What we thought was a work of God was not really such. I only bring that forward as illustrative of what is in mind. The prophet here is to assimilate the little book first and then to prophesy in regard of all the things in mind.
{81}
A.E.H. We might not have been led astray if we had understood what was in the little book.
J.T. Just so; because the little book would at any rate tell us that China must be left for a later day. I do not think the little book gives any account of Asia; I think that is left. What God has been mainly engaged in throughout this dispensation is Europe, that is quite obvious. Eastern Asia is more populous, but it is left for another day. I think the little book has to do with the areas in which God has been working, which Paul indicates in going to Philippi.
A.E.H. What is said of Paul as to the Spirit of Jesus forbidding him would be like a concise chapter in the little book.
J.T. Yes, the Spirit of Jesus. That involves the word we get here: "the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus". That would include Europe undoubtedly. Patmos was not in the east; John was in Europe.
S.McC. It has been generally thought and expressed that the meeting for ministry is directly bearing on local conditions. Do you think that is right altogether?
J.T. I think it should bear more widely than that. I think the outlook of a prophet should be universal as to where the saints are. That is John's outlook. He refers to the saints, the seven assemblies including all who form the assembly. He was their brother. It is John the prophet we are dealing with here, not John the apostle. In Revelation the point in John is not the assertion of apostolic authority, but of prophetic authority, moral authority through one used by God as with Him, as seen here. He is in Patmos and he is there because of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus. The bearing is clearly the seven lamps. Where are they? You say they are in Asia. But they are in the province of Asia, which is very near to Europe. Now Mohammedanism has taken
{82}
all that territory away from Christianity; it is neither Christianity nor Judaism nor heathenism. It represents apostate power. Mohammedanism has taken all that territory away, so that Christianity now is practically out of Asia altogether and out of Africa. It is in Europe and the outgoings of Europe. You might say I am dealing with mere history and geography, but it is a question of how Scripture deals with these matters, and the effect of the little book on the prophet. What is the little book dealing with? Is it dealing with the East, or is it dealing with Europe? It is clearly dealing with Europe. That is where the work has been all these centuries, and we are to understand it. That is what one would like to get clear.
J.W.D. If we understood the territory governed by the little book, we would understand what was brought out by the Old Testament prophets; God used them to prophesy against the nations adverse to the testimony.
J.T. As you look at the Old Testament, Jeremiah was directed to prophesy about all the kingdoms around him, and he himself travelled as far as the Euphrates. Very few would do that, but he did it, and according to this scripture John too would travel long distances. He was directed to "prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings". But in the first chapter it is a question of his brotherly relations with the saints.
S.W.P. Does that help us to understand the insular conditions of Patmos? The enemy would isolate things. The thought of the brother brings in the much wider geographical position you are speaking of.
J.T. Just so -- the seven assemblies.
A.N.W. Would you take the reference to the many gates of the heavenly city as the opposite to isolation?
{83}
J.T. Yes. The whole of Latin America is divided into independent nations. This dominion is in effect an independent nation. In the British family of nations each is practically independent. We have to understand all these things in order to minister the mind of God in the different countries. In this dominion there has been a peculiar kind of antipathy to the conscience of Christians. We have to think of that. It is not so in Australia, New Zealand, or even the United States. What is the reason for it? The brethren here have to suffer from it.
C.A.M. Linking our prophetic meetings and our prayers would suggest the situation with Mordecai: he and Esther were operating in a comparatively small area but the area they affected was immense.
J.T. One hundred and twenty-seven provinces! That was a question of subdivision of provinces; but these provinces have to be understood. The Jews were scattered throughout them. We are to know current conditions, what the brethren have to deal with or suffer from.
H.G.H. So we should be helped in our ministry meetings by the closer personal contact we have with our brethren universally.
J.T. It does greatly help. Some have had the advantage of visiting the brethren in many countries; we know something of their actual conditions. But if we listen to letters, and enquire, we shall get to know what is happening. Take Paul's work at Corinth: Aquila and Priscilla were there. Why were they there? Because the emperor had ordered all Jews to leave Rome. They were suffering from that edict. So the brethren are scattered about and are affected by certain conditions, and we are to know these conditions, and if we write articles for publication we are to bear these things in mind. 
Rem. You made a remark recently about Puteoli; it says in @Acts 28: 13, 14, "We came the next day
{84}
to Puteoli: where we found brethren".
J.T. It is on the way to Rome. It is important. Why should that place be mentioned? We hear today of the greatest events current all around there; but what is most important the saints are there; there is a little meeting a short distance away, in Castellamare. Some of us saw them. There is another little meeting north towards Novi, not far from Genoa, not far from Milan. Our brethren are suffering in all these places, and some down in Rome, too; and in Toulon I suppose the brethren are suffering. Why should we not understand that and minister or pray accordingly?
A.E.H. We need a great deal of moral discernment in a moment like this. Military movements may in the main be favourable to the saints and yet cause them much suffering.
J.T. That is the whole point, and suffering will cause us bitterness; in thinking of what the brethren are enduring there will be bitterness in our souls.
A.S.B. It appears there is to be not only the reading but the eating of the book, as though our feelings and our whole constitution are to be affected by it.
J.T. I think the Lord is intending, by what is taking place, to make us sober and feeling in regard to what is happening to the brethren everywhere. It is having its effect in more knowledge as to what our brethren are suffering.
S.W.P. Does the hand of the angel in any way limit the bitterness of the book? I was thinking of it providentially.
J.T. The Lord is seen in the first part of the chapter: "And I saw another strong angel coming down out of the heaven". We must remember that this is not in the church period strictly, but the preliminaries of it are in the church period. The book of Revelation is divided into three parts, the third
{85}
part beginning in the fourth chapter. This that we have read in chapter 10 enters into the final period but the preliminaries leading up to it are earlier. So we have this angel coming down out of heaven, "clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow upon his head, and his countenance as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire, and having in his hand a little opened book. And he set his right foot on the sea, and the left upon the earth, and cried with a loud voice as a lion roars", @Revelation 10: 1 - 3. Now this is Christ. We are to discern this. It is only Christ who would answer to this.. He is Jehovah really; He is God, because it is a question of the covenant entered into with Noah. He is dealing on a wide basis, what happened from Noah down to the present time -- "all the days of the earth". There is a covenant with man and the Lord is coming in connection with that covenant. He is a covenant Keeper. The current political leaders in Europe are covenant breakers. He is not that; He is going to fulfil His covenant with men. He has wonderful power, and He has this little book; and the point is that John is to get it and eat it so as to make him suitable to prophesy.
F.K.C. Do you think that @Genesis 10 gives a clue to the beginnings of the nations, and especially in regard to the little book?
J.T. Quite so, the nations begin there; not only the Roman Empire but all the nations are in mind. The sea is invaded by the devil and it has hindered the brethren from moving about. The Lord puts His right foot on the sea; that means He has His rights in the sea, in the meantime we may expect Him to show that He is thinking of the brethren and that the way across the seas is to be opened again. That is one thing that we might count on. But John is the person in mind in this chapter, that is, the immediate working out of the thing is in the minister, a prophet -- one who can take up the mind of God
{86}
and knows how to apply it. He has some conception of what God thinks of the nations from the days of Noah. God is working on a wide scale; there are many things that He has to work out that we know nothing of. But the little book will help us, especially if we are to be used in prophecy. We shall know how to speak of this and that nation; the prophet has to do with the Lord's people in all these settings. 
Ques. Why do the prophets lament as to certain nations that persecuted Israel?
J.T. They were the nations surrounding Israel. I believe that God was feeling indignation in regard to them. It is remarkable how they are addressed by the prophets. Today it is the nations surrounding the assembly, what they are and how they are persecuting us; the prophetic ministry is bearing on this. You know where the saints are and what is affecting them there.
S.McC. You have a remarkable chapter in @Isaiah 20 -- it bears on what you are saying. It says that Tartan "fought against Ashdod and took it", and "at that time spoke Jehovah by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy sandal from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. And Jehovah said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years, a sign and a wonder concerning Egypt and concerning Ethiopia, so shall the king of Assyria lead away the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, naked and barefoot, and with buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt" (verses 1 - 4). God makes Isaiah a sign concerning Ethiopia and Egypt.
J.T. Well, in a reading like this we can only touch the fringe of all this, but it opens up something for the brethren to look into. The Lord is saying that He needs us, and He needs to have us
{87}
understand the conditions in which His people are, and if we are ministering, not to overlook these needs. He will deal with these nations punitively presently, but in the meantime He will deal with them through the prophetic ministry.
F.L. What is the spiritual thought of the book being sweet in his mouth?
J.T. I think it is the initial thought of the word of God. The Christian always values the word of God, even such a passage as @Revelation 20 which tells us about the lake of fire, for God Himself ignites the lake of fire. Anything God does has to be sweet. But when you see the consequences on the saints you begin to be sober. Even the Lord Jesus Himself wept when He saw Jerusalem because of what was coming on it.
S.J.H. How would this find expression in a ministry meeting?
J.T. Take any of the prophets, whether those we call the major or the minor -- we must not think that the Scripture is of less import in the minor, so-called, than in the major; Malachi is no less important than Isaiah -- take Amos: he gives the list of nations and he speaks to each one of them, "For three transgressions ... and for four", showing that God is not overlooking what is happening. And so none of these nations that are acting against His people today will be omitted; God will deal punitively with them all. God is looking on what is happening, but the real issue is the saints and the gospel and the assembly.
A.E.H. I suppose prophetic ministry of this kind would help us to get deliverance from nationalistic feelings and give us assembly feelings?
J.T. That is our business -- with the saints. If we have any prophetic ability we have it to use in the midst, the gifts are set in the assembly. The ministry of the prophets bears on the whole assembly.
{88}
J.R.H. In his Collected Writings Mr. Darby has much to say in relation to the nations of the present world; and do you not find that there is much in the way of moral results affected by considering them?
J.T. Certainly. The first meetings they had in Dublin over a hundred years ago were on prophecy. That was to open up the prophetic field in connection with the testimony, how a saint is to regard it. Mr. Darby has commented on Europe and on the nations generally. It is not that we are to be occupied with the nations in themselves, but rather with the saints in them, and what we have to think of in ministering in regard of them.
T.N.W. Would you think the Lord may have some means of giving the prophets in Germany an understanding of the little book at the present time?
J.T. Just so. What a history Germany has had, especially in regard to the Reformation! How the heart thrills at what God did in that country three or four hundred years ago! And then you think of what the devil is doing there now. But still, God has His portion there yet, and a large bit of property too, and so we are not unconcerned about that.
A.N.W. All this would help us to hold the eastern nations in reserve.
J.T. God has that territory reserved and when He starts He will do things there quickly; the angel will preach the everlasting gospel, and the healing of the nations will all be done quickly. But this is the time of the long-suffering of God, waiting in patience on the western nations, not willing that any should perish.
W.W.M. Would the feelings that Abraham had as to his brother Lot be right feelings for us to have? He was thinking only of his brother in the conflict against Sodom and Gomorrah, not of the rest of the matter.
{89}
J.T. That was all his concern in that war, and it was a great war. He was concerned about his brother.
R.A. What would you say about the angel "having in his hand a little *opened* book"?
J.T. It is over against the sealed book in chapter 5, it is open history. It does not unfold anything about the mystery of God but it is simply to instruct the prophet as to what he is to deal with, as Jeremiah was instructed. The positive side would be a large book; John would say that "not even the world itself would contain the books" on the positive side of the glory of Christ.
T.K. What are we to learn from the writer to the Hebrews as he finishes his epistle saying, "They from Italy salute you", @Hebrew 13: 24?
J.T. That fits into what we are remarking. We must remember what kind of people Italians are. Italy at the time; he had just referred to Timothy, and he goes on to say, "They from Italy salute you". Paul is representing what was there. How much the prophets said of such nations as Assyria, Greece, Egypt, Spain! The Spirit of God goes to the trouble of mentioning those nations.
W.R. Paul did not speak very well about the Cretans!
J.T. It is a characteristic trait that they were liars. You have to beware of such.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that Timothy and Italy are connected. That should be a great help to us in the immediate days to come.
J.T. If we follow it up in @Revelation 2 and 3 we shall see something of Italy. That is where Satan's throne is; that is where the great persecutions began; it is where Antipas was murdered.
Now in regard to John's position in the book of Revelation, what we are saying is merely introductory
{90}
to this matter, as to whether the brethren can take on this thought of John the beloved, the disciple whom Jesus loved. Here he is in the isle of Patmos, and he is speaking of being "in the Spirit on the Lord's day". The Spirit of God is making much of that, keeping that before us; this expression is used only here. The same is true of the expression, "the Lord's supper"; it is the same idea as to the Lord. The apostle has that in mind and surely the Lord has blessed it to us. Then he is "fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus"; this is the brother that we are going to learn from in this book. The Lord tells him in the end of the first chapter the order in which he is to write the book. We are to follow that and to see where chapter 10 belongs and how far we have the idea of it already. But certainly this matter of the sea, to which the Lord asserts His rights, ought to enter into our prayers so that we might again visit our brethren overseas. The sea tends to isolation.
C.A.M. The great opening up of Paul's ministry seems to be connected with navigation out from Troas.
J.T. That is another point that comes into this, and the prominence of the Mediterranean, what his experience was right round to Rome.
R.W.S. The sea is put first in chapter 10.
J.T. It shows the importance of the seas ultimately; but the importance in the meantime is that the brethren live across them, and we want to get to them and they want to get to us, and we can appeal to the Lord about that. Now as regards Timothy, the simple thought is to suggest that he is a younger brother and has been in prison, limited in some way. This is the second letter to him, written when Paul is about to die, to suffer martyrdom; and he is the one who is in mind to carry on after Paul, the great minister, is removed.
{91}
Therefore it would seem to be an appropriate suggestion in regard to the ability the Lord is giving to many of middle-age -- but still to be regarded perhaps as young -- in following on to relieve those that are older. How are they to do in assuming the lead? This question of soldiership comes up in verse 3 of chapter 2, which is not without significance, because soldiership is so prominent now among the nations, and it is affecting the saints, tending to damage them. We need therefore to see how Timotheus¬ soldiership is to be regarded. We are all to be good soldiers, the young men especially, of Jesus Christ; that is, He has a kingdom, and if it were of this world His servants would fight with swords and other weapons like that. But it is not of this world, and Paul is therefore dealing here with the conduct of soldiers of Jesus Christ, of which Timothy was one, and a good one!
A.N.W. Timothy is to take his share in suffering.
J.T. It links on with the tribulation and kingdom and patience, that each is to take his share; it is not now to be one man outstanding, like Paul, but a good many younger men who are to join in and carry on when he is gone. They are to know how to be good soldiers, good ones, and to take their share in suffering. Others are sharing, it is an extensive matter. Each one is to take his share in suffering.
A.E.H. I suppose there would be a difference between the idea of a good soldier and of an athlete in the games. Both ideas are here.
J.T. They are used as figures. First, "And the things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men, such as shall be competent to instruct others also". Then, "Take thy share in suffering as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No one going as a soldier entangles himself with the affairs of life, that he may please
{92}
him who has enlisted him as a soldier". That is a figure, of course, so that the Christian soldier is thinking of pleasing Jesus, the One who has enlisted him. "And if also any one contend in the games, he is not crowned unless he contend lawfully. The husbandman must labour before partaking of the fruits". That is, we have the soldier and the athlete and the farmer; these are the figures used. But it is not a question of my being an athlete or a soldier literally, it is what these things mean in a spiritual sense. In the final thought, that of a husbandman, he is, according to the other rendering, to be "first partaker of the fruits"; he is to keep some for himself. If you are going to be on the platform all the time, you must have some yourself first.
C.A.M. What would you say about the armies in @Revelation 19 following the Lord on white horses, clad in white, pure, fine linen? Would they be the saints trained in this way now?
J.T. I would think so. - They are persons who can go forth and do anything. Abraham had three hundred and eighteen trained servants; it does not say soldiers, they would be trained for anything. And I suppose we are being trained now for whatever the Lord has for us to do, now or later. Training is important.
A.S.B. The apostle says at the end of 2 Timothy, "I have combated the good combat" -- the soldier aspect; "I have finished the race" -- the athletic side.
J.T. He uses these figures frequently, showing what a wide knowledge he had of things. This matter of Timothy is, I believe, an urgent one, because the Lord is doing much in providing ability for service both here on this continent and in Australasia and the British Isles. Men are coming forward that are able to serve, and the whole responsibility will be on them shortly, so that the thing is to prepare. These figures that the apostle uses are to be studied; and
{93}
then the fact is to be noted that this brother was a prisoner, where and why we are not told. The matter of importance is that he was a prisoner, that he had the experience of imprisonment even though it might be unjustly inflicted; but he had the experience and the time came when he was set at liberty. That is exactly the position now. Many are imprisoned at the present time, but the time will come when they will be set at liberty. They are worthy. The apostle says, "With whom, if he should come soon, I will see you". Paul intended to come with him; he was a worthy young man and the greatest minister would gladly come with him.
C.A.M. Would it be that these great prophetic matters emphasize the Spirit of Jesus? It is not that we are occupied with events, figuring how they are going to result, but the very suffering in prison, etc., stresses the Spirit of Jesus.
J.T. I think so. The greatest servants are ready to join with these younger men, the lesser ones; that is, those who have lesser experience, perhaps. Paul says, "With whom, if he should come soon, I will see you". That is the merging, I think, of the elder servant with the younger man.
A.E.H. Would it work out too in a spiritual way, that as Timothy comes along Paul would be seen? The ministry is one, is it not?
J.T. Yes, it is. This epistle is to bring out how Paul is to be represented in Timotheus; so that if he come, Paul says, I will come. He sent Timothy to Corinth to represent him there before he went himself. They would well understand Paul's spirit by the presence of Timothy.
A.S.B. Do you think the apostle has that in mind in chapter 3?- He says in verse 10, "But *thou* hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, endurance, persecutions, sufferings", and then localities are
{94}
named in which he had suffered. Then he says, "But thou, abide in those things which thou hast learned".
J.T. That is helpful. The very localities in which the experiences were learned are mentioned.
A.A.T. Then it is all right to ask God to stop the war as soon as possible so that the young men may be set at liberty?
J.T. That is one of the most urgent causes you can set forth. There are so many in bondage and meetings are suffering consequently. Then there is the matter of the liberty of the seas, that we should be able to visit the brethren overseas, and they to visit us. These are urgent matters and I believe God would listen to us on these lines.
{95}
CALAMITY RESULTING IN FRUITFULNESS
@1 Chronicles 7: 20 - 27
I wish to speak of a well-known subject, that is, the believer's household, and for this I have selected this scripture in 1 Chronicles, which is largely a book of believer's households. It is rightly named Chronicles, and was undoubtedly written by one who was a householder. At any rate he was used by the Spirit to write about households; not as if he were to take up a directory in a city and pick out the names alphabetically, Scripture never moves on that principle; it takes account of the children of God, and any scriptural chroniclers have them in view. Hence many must be omitted in any such chronicle or census that may be made. God works on the principle of sovereign selection. We are regarded thus as the elect of God, which is not merely that we profess Christianity, but that we belong to the elect of God chosen before the foundation of the world; as if God looked down the ages and picked out the elect and named them, and then writes about them, speaks about their distinctiveness. Chronicles is a book of that kind, a book of families.
It is not written even on the principle of the firstborn; it is written on the principle of election. It is true, indeed, that the first man, Adam, heads the list, which would mean that although he was the first male sinner -- not the first sinner, but the first male sinner -- he is regarded by God as one of us, worthy of mention, worthy of heading the list. And so on the principle of election we have David coming in early. God has a right to select David, to write about him before He does about others who chronologically would come first, and He does so. But He also writes about Joseph, and I have read verses that speak about Joseph's family, that is, that part of it which comes under the head of Ephraim. I
{96}
want to make some remarks that I do not think will be wholly new, but I do think they will be practical. If we have not got families we belong to families; and if we do not belong to the divine family, God would desire to put us into it, because the matter is still open, the book is not yet closed.
So I have some remarks to make on the divine selection here of Ephraim, who had calamity in his house. The word "evil" here is "calamity". It says of his son that "he called his name Beriah, for he was born when calamity was in his house", @1 Chronicles 7: 23. This was the son Ephraim's wife bore after the others were slain (verse 21). There are very few houses among us that have not experienced calamity, and these verses I hope will show that this matter in each of our houses, whether great or small, as taken to heart and taken up with God is going to result in enlargement. That is what is recorded for us in these verses down to the last son mentioned, namely, Joshua. They show that this house which had calamity in it took the matter up with God and found God and became enlarged, not in the sense of money or of man's learning, but in the sense of families. Race suicide is not according to God; any endeavour toward race suicide is foreign to God. God's thought is, "Be fruitful and multiply: swarm on the earth, and multiply on it", @Genesis 9: 7. That was said to the first man and wife. And so the increase here is in families.
God is thinking of persons, not of the area of the globe. It is a small planet, a small part of the system, one of the smallest I understand, so that God is not thinking of that. He is not thinking of land or of the seas or the mountains or the lakes, or even of the number of the stars, although they afford great variety which God takes notice of. "Star differs from star in glory"; that is a remarkable thing, God surely has some meaning in that. The stars refer to persons
{97}
typically. But He is not thinking of the heavenly bodies, save as part of His creation; they will come to an end really, the heavens and the earth will disappear; that is, those that now are. There will be new heavens and a new earth presently. But these bodies are there evidently to symbolize persons, those persons whom God had in mind before the creation of the stars or the heavens. So that the things that are made are not made of the things that do appear. We cannot tell just what they are made of; scientists cannot succeed in finding out all these things. But we know that God framed the worlds by His word; it does not say in that connection by His power, but by His word, meaning that His mind was in it. He is not telling us everything; indeed we do not need to know everything, especially when we know that they are going to disappear. We are concerned about persons, those that are to remain, those that are eternal. They are to remain in the sense of families, for we read of "every family"; God is the Father of every family.
So I am now speaking of Joseph's family, that is, Ephraim's branch of it. As I said, there is calamity in his house. It is a calamitous time; the world is full of calamities and they are not existent without God; not one of them has happened without God. Not a sparrow falls without Him; that is very comforting. So the calamities, if they fall on a Christian's household, do not happen accidentally at all, they happen by God, or at least by His knowledge. There are very grave ones, very sorrowful ones in houses, and that is why I have taken up Ephraim's house. We are told that he had been specially selected by God; he was put before his brother. Joseph did not wish it, another than Joseph wished it, and God used another, namely his father, to make the preference and to elevate Ephraim above Manasseh. Jacob was the one who did it.
{98}
That brings up much as to this family of which Joseph was the immediate head. In this book of Chronicles the families are subdivided, usually with heads. As you go over these names that I have read, you cannot think of them as all the sons of one man; they are his posterity, and in that sense his sons. Joseph had a great family history, a persecuted history; from the time he was seventeen years of age he was persecuted by his brothers. I do not believe any brother or sister, any man or woman who faithfully serves Christ evades persecution from his relatives; and no one experienced it more than Joseph. It continued for a long time too. His story is most interesting and profitable, because he is a type of Christ, the true Joseph. But eventually he was raised to the supreme place in Egypt, next to Pharaoh, so that he had a most exalted history, as well as, for a short time, a most outwardly degraded one. Ultimately he was raised to the position of second in the kingdom, and in that position he got a wife who bore him two children. One of these was Ephraim. He was born in Egypt and brought up there, as also his brother Manasseh, for Joseph remained in Egypt. He died there, and his generations, possibly most of those that I read of here, were also in Egypt. But they were, at least typically, of the family of God in Egypt, preserved there so that not a hair of their heads perished; showing that although we are in the world, we are not of it, and we are preserved in it as Christians. And so immediately Ephraim is born we are told his name, and that it means 'fruitfulness'. It really means 'double fruitfulness'. Of course it was prophetic. It is not like the ordinary names of men; the names given to God's people in Old Testament times were usually prophetic. It is simple to understand that a person who is foreknown of God before the foundation of the world is going to get some
{99}
prophetic reference as he is born. God has a name for him, and the name discloses the circumstances of his birth; but then, it is also prophetic. So Ephraim means 'double fruitfulness'. Well, that child must be watched and nurtured; God wills that that boy shall be elevated. And so in due time he was; he was put before Manasseh in spite of his father, showing how God over-rules fathers sometimes. We may claim rights in our children, but God says, I have rights in your children as well. So that we cannot regard them as we wish, we must regard them as God wishes. God put Ephraim before Manasseh, and all this must enter into the future history running down; it runs down to one of the greatest men in the Old Testament: that is Joshua. He is the last one mentioned here, Joshua the son of Nun. These are things of importance about Ephraim, and also about Joseph, although he was not without failure, which God did not allow to pass. He made a great failure in this matter of Ephraim, much greater than the surface would disclose. But though -he lived and died in Egypt, there is no evidence that he ever lost ground there, but rather the opposite; he gained there. He died in Egypt and was put into a coffin there; an ark it was really. He was a family man; he lived one hundred and ten years, and the grandchildren of Manasseh were born on his knees -- a very remarkable thing. He must have been a man of great affections to have time to lend his knees for that purpose. You may say, A grandfather would be likely to have affection; but Joseph had children born on his knees; and it is said in the last chapter of Genesis that he saw Ephraim's children of the third generation. He saw them and valued them, not exactly because of their number but because of their quality. Now Ephraim was elevated by God in this family, but at the time of which we are speaking there was
{100}
calamity in his house. As I said, there are a great many such today. Fathers and mothers and brothers and sisters have to be warned that we are in a world that was never so wicked before. The world has never before been so wicked as it is now, though things more wicked have been done in it, because here the Lord was crucified: "Where also their Lord was crucified". That is mentioned in regard of a city. There are other things that might be mentioned, and children are brought into this world in its terribly wicked state at this present time. But despite this there is a warning to fathers and mothers not to diminish their families or defeat God's purposes in regard of them. God could bring the children up in Egypt and preserve them there, and when the time came, save them out of it. Egypt, I apprehend, had become terrible in those days, and the Israelites had doubtless added to its wickedness. They had lived there a good many years, over four hundred, dating from Abraham. Did they not contribute something to the wickedness of Egypt? I am sure they did, and they are contributing to the wickedness of this world at the present time. I am not speaking against them. There is plenty being said against them; but they are not behind in sin, they are old in it, they are clever in it. But they are in purpose God's people, and eventually they are going to be saved out of this world. So it was that in the main Jacob's family was reared in Egypt, Joseph's family particularly; they were born and brought up there. We read of some of them in verse 20: "And the sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son, and Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elad. And the men of Gath born in the land slew them, because they came down to take their cattle". That
{101}
is to say, these young men, or possibly men with families, went down and stole some cattle. They went down. It is not clear where they went from, whether out of Egypt itself or from elsewhere, when they stole some cattle in the land. The expression "the land" would probably allude to Canaan; it is not *that* land, it is *the* land. The reference is not that they stole cattle from the Egyptians, but that they left Egypt, or left somewhere, and stole cattle. I am alluding to what young boys and girls, or older ones, even married people are capable of doing. There might be some right attached to it; these cattle belonged to the land, and possibly the land was Canaan; so that it was Israel's potentially. But an ordinary court would not decide it that way. At any rate, the owners of the cattle slew them, that is what happened. There is no need to dwell too much on that, only to warn young people as to stealing.
Someone wrote to me today about a matter of sin, as to what should be done. Sometimes Scripture just says, Give it up. Oh, you say, but you must judge it! The brethren must come together so that the thing can be judged. But Ephesians says, "Let the stealer steal no more". That is all. It is a very good word, because there is so much done in the form of stealing. "Let the stealer steal no more". These men stole the cattle and they were slain for it. What I am saying is very practical, because we are apt to be stealers, takers-away of what does not belong to us, and especially to rob God. "Will a man rob God?" Malachi says. We may do that and God resents it. If we disregard the rights of God or take them away, God resents it. I am dwelling on that because it is so practical that we should be on our guard about stealing or doing things that are not fair, and bringing down calamities on our fathers¬ houses. Perhaps we get clear of the thing ourselves as young people and say, The results will not come
{102}
on me! But they may come on your father's house and he will feel it. Ephraim felt it; he was only a man. It says, "And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to comfort him". That shows there was good in Israel in those days. But now I pass on from the sons to the father. He is of Joseph, the grandson of Jacob, running back to Abraham. He is an outstanding man; he is elevated, put even above his brother Manasseh. His name means 'fruitfulness', as I said, and that fruitfulness is to go on; it is not to drop out with these sons that were slain. The family must be kept on, and hence the next verses tell us how it was kept on; the names of the sons are given and of their sister. This prophecy of 'double fruitfulness' must be verified. The word comes from God, and God is going to see to it that there are many of the sons of Israel. Scripture speaks of the myriads of Ephraim; that is a big thought. What I am saying is to enlarge us far beyond our own families; it is what the families are to be to God, the myriads of Ephraim. These are they that Moses was speaking about -- not the boys that would steal cattle and were slain for it. "The myriads of Ephraim" is an allusion to the divine blessing, the blessing of Joseph. So that after these sons were slain we are told that Ephraim's wife conceived and bore a son and he called his name Beriah, "because it went evil with his house". That is to say, life comes in in Beriah in the time of calamity; the calamity is bearing fruit. God is being sought; the brethren are coming to him. How important it is, dear brethren, that when calamities happen, whatever form they take, the brethren should surround us; that we should open the doors to them and let them help us if they can. And they can. The brethren have great ability to help. But let it be known that the calamity is taken to God and that
{103}
His rights are recognized in it. So the brethren surround him, "his brethren came to comfort him".
Then there is this other son, the family is replenished. There is a sister too, and a number more are mentioned, because it is to be double fruitfulness. We are to look out for that, for double fruitfulness that is to come to us as we bow to the will of God in calamities. The world is full of them and the brethren are not escaping, but we have to look for what is to come out of them. Do they mean that our families are to die in forgetfulness? No, they are to grow, to bear fruit upwards through the exercise that we go through with God, and the comfort of the brethren. God is the God of all comfort, especially in families, because God is the Head of every family. The family idea is His own and He is determined to have it continue, so that eternity will be marked by families. The prophetic families must come to light. Some of them are slain, but God will raise up fruit as a result of that. In fact the Lord Jesus was slain; not rightly -- He was murdered -- but His death has borne much fruit, as it says, "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit", @John 12: 24. That is the principle, *much* fruit. So it says in verse 24, "And his daughter was Sheerah; and she built Bethhoron the nether, and the upper, and Uzzen-sheerah". That is to say she was a builder, which is a very important matter for sisters. It comes out in the book of Ruth how certain sisters built up the house of Israel. David came out of it. It is God's way that calamitous things, humbling things, become the means in His hand, as the brethren surround us and He is appealed to and owned, of fruitfulness not only in quantity but in quality. Here we have a sister who built two towns, the upper and the lower, which is a good suggestion; because if we build too far up we are apt to be building in our pride, but
{104}
the lower would be foundational. If you go in for the heavenly, be sure you build foundationally or you will have a fall. So that let us go on quietly and peaceably and humbly. If you are going to build at all -- I refer to the sisters -- build foundationally, and let the top story come in in its time.
Then we have this list of sons from verse 25: "And his son was Rephah, and Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son, Laadan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son, Nun his son, Joshua his son". Where names are repeated in families it would mean there are two sets of families, or several sets, so that the name is resumed. We have, for instance, Shuthelah in verse 20, and then we have it again in verse 21. That does not mean there were two Shuthelahs in the same actual family; they were descendants. It is to show they were great men in their families; they were leaders or heads, a most important thing, especially in the assembly, to have those who can be trusted for judgment. Finally we come to Joshua, the son of Nun. It is not an accident that he is here, he is an outstanding man. He is here because he descends from a man with a calamity in his house, who got to God about it and whose brethren came to comfort him. So let us disclose these matters to one another, as it says, "Confess therefore your offences to one another, and pray for one another", @James 5: 16. Let us open our hearts to one another and not hide things too much from the brethren. There are things to be hid, things that would do harm if we advertised them; but there are things to advertise, to be made known so that the brethren can pray for us. At the same time God kept a secret for thousands of years. He did not say anything about the mystery for thousands of years, He kept it in His heart. God conceals things; kings or wise men open them up. That is the way. That is, kings, such as apostles and great men of God, are
{105}
able to do things; they are used of God to disclose things when the time comes, the fulness of time. God divides time and gives to each great thing its own time. So we have Joshua just mentioned here; he is the son of Ephraim away down the line. He is first mentioned in @Exodus 17, so that evidently he was born in Egypt, and he became a great general in the army of God. He conquered Canaan. His name is just mentioned here in its place in the family, but it opens up wonderful history, not only on earth but in heaven, the fact that this son of Ephraim was the great military man in Israel. He conquered Canaan. He is a type of Christ as the Conqueror who conquers heaven as well as earth. The great Conqueror will come out presently riding on a white horse and the armies of heaven will come out with Him on white horses. But here we have just Joshua the son of Nun, that is all. Elsewhere we have great things about him, looking on to the Lord Jesus, as I have said. I am only speaking of him now that we might see what may accrue even though the worst things happen in our families. One speaks about these things feelingly, that if we are with God about them they will come out so as to glorify Him, and God will enlarge His family through the calamities. That is the thing, there is glory in the families; God is glorified in His families. Every family in heaven and on earth is named of Him. May God bless this word to us!
{106}
LIBERTY IN SUFFERING
@2 Corinthians 12: 7 - 10; @Acts 16: 19 - 25
I wish to speak about *liberty*, liberty wherewith Christ sets His people free. We may possess it and yet be hindered in it by external circumstances. If the enemy cannot rob us of the liberty in principle, he may rob us of the enjoyment of it. I wish to speak of the enjoyment of it, continuing even although there may be external pressure that the enemy would use to hinder us in it. It has cost the Lord much that we should have it. He died in order that we should have it. Many were in bondage because of fear of death, and it may be so now. All their lifetime, we read, they were subject to bondage through the fear of death, but Christ abolished death. It cost Him His life to do that, that through death He might destroy him who had the might of death to deliver those who all their lifetime were subject to bondage through fear of death. I just touch on that; doubtless most of us have had the experience of it, but not, surely, through the whole of our lives until now; that would not be characteristic of a Christian. It was characteristic of those who belonged to God before Christ died, but certainly not since; nor should any true believer in Christ have the fear of death nor any bondage connected with that fear.
As I said, it cost the Lord His life to liberate us from the fear of death, and it has cost the Spirit, too, something to liberate us; for our liberty is in the Spirit and we are to stand fast in it. It is only by the Spirit we can do so. We are to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has set us free; He has set us free in freedom, a most precious designation of the great fact of our liberty. But as I was saying, it has cost Christ His life; and it has cost the Spirit
{107}
something too to maintain us in liberty. Then it has cost us ourselves something, for there must be some correspondence in us, dear brethren, to what it cost divine Persons to secure any given thing for us; and that correspondence comes about through light as to the thing itself that causes fear, whatever it may be, whether death or bondage to the world or any other matter. Light comes to us and the Spirit operates in us in relation to that light. Without the Spirit light would fade. With the possession of the Spirit, light normally does not fade; it shines brighter and brighter until the day be fully come. That is through the Spirit operating in the believer.
And so I have undertaken tonight in the scriptures read to speak of liberty, preservation in liberty from any external circumstances; chiefly governmental ones, but also persecutional. The first scripture read, that is, @2 Corinthians 12, treats of governmental circumstances which cause bondage in those who should be in liberty. The apostle Paul serves us well in many respects, but in this respect especially, that he is a model for Christians. He is a model of Christianity in its varied forms. He became affected by governmental circumstances though he was an apostle, and these scriptures show that the circumstances would tend to rob him of his liberty, the liberty which he had in Christ and which he valued, and of which he has taught us much. In speaking of models, the Lord Jesus is, of course, the Model of everything that is of God in the Christian. It is so as to liberty. Thus we read in @Matthew 12 that He went on the Sabbath day through the cornfields. We are not told just why He did it, but He did it. We know now why He did it: He wished to set an example to His disciples of liberty from legality, from worthless legality. He wished them to be free to use the creation of God as needed. He created everything; He made the
{108}
corn to grow, and there was the field of corn growing; it was usable, and the Lord went into the field and walked through it. He did not eat the corn; He did not pluck it; He intended to liberate the disciples. They were hungry, and they were not to suffer from hunger because it was the Sabbath. The Lord tells us in that connection that the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath; therefore it is not intended to deprive those who are of faith; to rob them of the creation, of the blessing, of the fulness of the earth. The earth is the Lord's, we are told, and the fulness thereof. So the Lord walked through the cornfield; He did not pluck the corn, but His disciples did. He did not tell them to do it; He did not tell them to walk through the cornfield, but He intended them to do it. Though He did not tell them to pluck the corn, they took the liberty of doing it and so did more than He did; they plucked the ears of corn and rubbed them in their hands and ate them. That is what the Lord intended. He intended that they should be in liberty to that extent; that is, He intended to indicate that the fruit of the earth may be availed of without legal restriction. There are those that do not eat meat on Friday; that is a legal restriction in which there is no value whatever; it robs a creature of God of what God has provided to support his life. There are many other illustrations of damaging legal bondage, but the Lord illustrates the liberty He would have us to enjoy.
And so Paul enjoyed that liberty, as well as many other Christians. The Lord used Paul to unfold this matter in the epistle to the Galatians. But when we come to this governmental matter that I have read of in @2 Corinthians 12 the apostle is in danger of being inflated. He was, after all, a man like ourselves, as is said of Elijah, "a man of like passions to us", @James 5: 17. The Lord never was. He never
{109}
sinned. "Which of you convinces me of sin?" He says. No one. He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners". That is Jesus, but that was not Paul. Paul was not made higher than the heavens, although he was made as high as the third heaven, and that is the point here. He was caught up *into* paradise, but caught up *as far as* the third heaven. What the measurement in literal altitude was, I cannot say. It is not given. The apostle said he could not even tell whether he was in the body or out of the body when he was caught up. Such are creature limitations. But still, he was in that elevation, and he said he heard unutterable things there, things that are not lawful for a man to utter. But he heard them. He does not tell us what he saw, it is what he heard; not that there are not things to be seen up there; of course there are, but the point is what he heard. He makes much of it in relation to his veracity; he says in verse 31 of the previous chapter, "The God and Father of the Lord Jesus knows -- he who is blessed for ever -- that I do not lie". See how important it was to the apostle's mind, so important that he says it as before God, that God knew that he did not lie. He was going to relate the actual truth and he relates it, and that is just what we get in the early verses of the next chapter. He says, "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;) such a one caught up to the third heaven. And I know such a man, (whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows;) that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter. Of such a one I will boast, but of myself I will not boast, unless in my weaknesses. For if I shall desire to boast, I shall not be a fool; for I will say the truth; but I forbear, lest any one should think as to me above what he sees
{110}
me to be, or whatever he may hear of me. And that I might not be exalted by the exceeding greatness of the revelations ..." (verses 2 - 7).
That is the point I had in mind in reading this whole section: "And that I might not be exalted". You will notice, as I have already pointed out, the stress he lays on truth. What he said was the truth; he calls God to witness that it was the truth. Let no one quibble or question the verity of the statements here as to Paul's exaltation; it was as high as the third heaven, and it was in paradise. Whether in the body or out of it he did not know, but it was so; personally he was there. So that now I come to my point: "And that I might not be exalted". This is a governmental matter, and it is a most solemn matter, that such a man as Paul -- the great apostle Paul -- should be subject or made subject to governmental suffering: to a thorn for the flesh, a messenger of Satan, he calls it, an emissary of the devil. As one might say, God took this emissary out of Satan's hand to use it against Paul for the moment, so that he might be saved from talking about himself or his exceptionalness in the service of God; about the fact that he, and only he, was caught up so high, caught up to the third heaven and into paradise. There are the two things: one is as far as the third heaven, and the other is into paradise. He was actually in the place called paradise.
Well, he came back. It happened fourteen years before he wrote this; but the thorn for the flesh happened then too. It was not just when he was writing; it was immediately after the exaltation had happened. And so it is, dear brethren, that in our experiences as Christians we come under governmental restrictions and sometimes under governmental sufferings. I mean by that, or rather the Scripture means by it, that a thing happens to you, not because you have sinned, but because you may
{111}
do so; you are in danger of it. It is a very precious thought that I am saved from it through a governmental action; as if God were to say, I cannot trust you with those revelations, for you are likely to talk about them and become inflated through them; and I do not want you to be inflated because I lose My servant if you do; I lose you temporarily at least, so I am not going to let you be inflated. To guard against that I am sending an emissary from the devil -- a most terrible thought! David says, "Let me fall, I pray thee, into the hand of Jehovah" (@1 Chronicles 21: 13); not into the hands of men, and certainly not into the hands of the devil, but into the hand of the Lord; and it was into the hand of the Lord, so to speak, that Paul fell. God took him in hand and *He* sent this emissary to him. How soon after I cannot just say, but I should say quite near the time of the revelation this emissary of the devil was sent to Paul to limit him so that he should not be inflated, that he should not be exalted above measure; that he should remain a valued servant, an honoured servant, a loved servant; that he should be in liberty, too, in the suffering. I cannot define just what the thorn for the flesh was; I cannot just explain to you physically what it was. Possibly it was something that he suffered from in his eyes, a very tender part. If God is going to afflict us -- and He does not afflict willingly -- but if He does, if He wishes to reach a man quickly, He touches his eyes. In fact He uses this matter as a picture of Himself in relation to His people, that they are the apple of His eye. Let nobody touch them with impunity! Nobody can! Very likely the devil was allowed to touch, indeed sent to touch his eye or eyes; I would say his eyes, going by the epistle to the Galatians; Paul says there, alluding to their regard for him, "that, if possible, plucking out your own eyes ye would have given them to me". It is pretty safe to
{112}
say, as others of reliable judgment have said, that this must have been what he is alluding to.
And so for this cause, he says, a messenger of Satan was sent to me. Why was it that a great preacher, a great teacher, a great lover of God and of His people, a most effective servant in every way should be suffering from a thorn? He says, I asked the Lord three times to remove it; a very good example in regard to prayer. If anything acute has happened you ask the Lord three times to remove it, and if He does not remove it you say, Lord, it is Your matter; I will wait for You. How safe you are then! "For this I thrice besought the Lord that it might depart from me". Three times; the measure is set for us. The Lord in the garden prayed to the Father three times: "My Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me". It is a governmental matter. If God has sent it in love, well, pray about it of course; the door is always open to us to pray, but at the same time the spiritual man will know that if the third time is not answered the Lord is going to leave it. He says, in effect, You will need it.
In saying this you will know what I am speaking of. I am just going over well-known ground, although it is often healthful to go over ground already covered and learn the lesson well. And so, as I said, this is governmental, and the apostle's comment is, "For this I thrice besought the Lord that it might depart from me. And he said to me, My grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me". This is a transaction with the Lord Jesus, some day or some night, between Himself and the apostle. Well, you say, what is your point now? My point is that someone is suffering under the government of God, in some circumstance -- business or family -- whatever it be. It is governmental; and he is likely
{113}
to lose his joy if he has not already lost it. He is likely to lose his liberty in prayer if he has not already lost it. He is likely to lose his power in ministry and service to the saints if he has not already lost it. The Lord says to Paul, You have asked Me three times about this: "My grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness". Paul might have said, It is a hard experience, I have never had the like before; although he had had most severe experiences, as I need not tell you. If you look at the previous chapter to this, what a list he gives us of experiences in suffering! Remarkable! He has gone over the ground in suffering, and then he says, I come to visions and revelations; not now sufferings, but visions and revelations. But then, he would mean he had sufferings in it too -- this thorn! That is what I am speaking of. It is a new experience. Five times he had forty stripes save one, he tells us earlier, yet he did not ask the Lord to reduce them at all. No; he left it and went through. But this time he is smarting from the thorn as he is in danger of being exalted by the greatness of the revelations. That is what I am speaking of. If you are in this case in any sense, suffering under the government of God through circumstances arising from household or personal or business matters, or whatever it be, get to the Lord about it. Do not lose your liberty; do not lose your usefulness. Continue in usefulness; increase in usefulness; and the Lord lays down the way. He says, as it were, It is a bitter experience, I know; it is a bitter experience, but "my grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness". This is all the Lord says; a short explanation and the matter is settled.
And now, what is Paul saying about it? Is he just saying, as we sometimes say, Well, that is a short or rather curt answer to me in a most serious prayer, in regard to what I have prayed about most seriously
{114}
and feelingly? But that is all the Lord says; He says, so to speak, The matter is settled from My point of view. And Paul says, It is settled from mine! That is victory. Let the thorn be severe or otherwise, he says, it is settled for me. "My grace suffices thee", are the Lord's words, "for my power is perfected in weakness". And Paul responds, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me". What an issue and what a conclusion! How it points to the reality and power of Christianity and what Christ can be to us; what He is to thousands of the brethren in their present sufferings! How many prayers have gone up for the cessation of these terrible things that are happening! The Lord says to any one of us suffering in such a way, "My grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness". And I answer, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me". One might enlarge on the power of Christ resting on him; surely it is something that is visible. If we had been accustomed to meeting the apostle as he moved about among the saints in these circumstances, we should have seen him suffering. There must have been the evidence of suffering every day and night and at every meeting, doubtless; but then there would be more than that. The power of Christ would be visible. What victory! What a recompense! it is like what Peter says, "For the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you". The idea is that the Spirit of Christ rests on you under certain circumstances; when one suffers as a Christian one is glorified externally in a moral way. So Peter says further, "But if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this name". And so here, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon
{115}
me". So that if we had seen Paul at any meeting or met him on the road we should have noticed his suffering, but also seen the power of Christ resting there; a victorious man, suffering under the government of God, but the glory of Christ resting upon him in the support he gets from the priestly grace of Christ. "My grace suffices thee".
Well, now, that is the first part of my subject. The next is a matter of persecutional sufferings. Someone may be saying, We do not know anything of these now; but I am not one of those who would say that. They are quite current. Secret persecution, if not open, is quite current in word or phrase or look. There are many ways of expressing persecution toward another, and the persecution carries with it suffering. And so I have read from Paul again. I have read about him in @Acts 16 where he had the most intense sufferings, as you will remember. It is the incident of the jailor, well known to many of us. Myriads have found blessing in the gospel from this section, but what I am going to speak about now is the liberty this persecuted man, or these persecuted men, had in spite of their sufferings. The Spirit of God enlarges on the incident. It is said in the chapter which I read, "And her masters, seeing that the hope of their gains was gone, having seized Paul and Silas, dragged them into the market before the magistrates; and having brought them up to the praetors, said, These men utterly trouble our city, being Jews, and announce customs which it is not lawful for us to receive nor practise, being Romans" (verses 19 - 21). I might observe here, dear brethren, that the word "Romans" denotes a class of people who have had to do with the people of God adversely; they have also had to do thus with Christ Himself personally. They have had to do with the people of God for twenty centuries and here is another example of their persecution, that continues
{116}
and will continue until the time comes when retribution will come down from heaven for it. There is no other such celebration seen in the book of Revelation as that which arises from the destruction of the harlot, the Roman harlot described in that book whose existence has run on for centuries. I mention it because the word "Roman" comes in here. Philippi was a sort of Roman colony; the inhabitants of such colonies had the distinction of being Roman citizens. There are many who have distinctions of that kind now, religious distinctions, Roman distinctions. No true spiritual man wants any such distinction: "being Romans". That is what they say here. They say, "These men ... being Jews announce customs". Paul is regarded as a Jew here, and so is Silas. They are, of course, Christians and are persecuted by the Romans. Pilate would have spared the Lord, would have released Him, but he did not. He is not therefore immune from penalty because he would have wished to release Him; he put Him to death; he crucified the Lord of glory. Whatever his inward motives were, or feelings, he did that. In his mind the Lord was a Jew.
So that is just the issue today. They say, "These men utterly trouble our city, being Jews, and announce customs which it is not lawful for us to receive nor practise, being Romans". That is the position. As I say, there are those who are dignified in this sense, not because they are Roman citizens, but because they are Roman religionists. There are only a few Roman citizens literally, but religiously there are three hundred millions of them on the earth according to the statistics. This is a most serious matter, dear brethren, as to how things are today. It is said they refused the customs of Paul; they were the customs of heavenly ones, because Paul and Silas, his companion in service, were representatives
{117}
of heaven upon earth. And this is what happened to them: "And the crowd rose up too against them; and the praetors, having torn off their clothes, commanded to scourge them"; that is the first thing, that they commanded to scourge them. "And having laid many stripes upon them" (we are not told how many) "they cast them into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely; who, having received such a charge, cast them into the inner prison, and secured their feet to the stocks". This is what happened to the two most heavenly men on the earth. Certainly Paul was the most heavenly, the most representative of God and of Christ on the earth, and this is what these Roman citizens, so-called by themselves, did to them. But it says, "And at midnight Paul and Silas, in praying, were praising God with singing, and the prisoners listened to them". Can I say anything more noble or dignified or more glorious of any Christian? They are suffering peculiarly, in the bitterest way, but they are not hindered in their souls. They are not deprived of their liberty. They are not allowing their sufferings to hinder or interfere with their spiritual liberty. They are in suffering, indeed, but they are in liberty. They are heavenly men, they belong to the heavenly choir, whatever their persecution may be. How they have spread abroad in the earth! That is what I wanted just to leave with us all. Whatever we are suffering from governmentally from God, let us not lose our liberty. Let us be out and out. Our liberty cost Christ too much for us to lose it, or to allow it to be lost or damaged, or to allow the service of God to be damaged. And then, if I have been persecuted for the Lord's sake in any sense, let me not lose my liberty from this either. I am likely to be revengeful. If a person persecutes me and I have more power than he, I am likely to
{118}
be revengeful. But "Vengeance is mine", God says, @Deuteronomy 32: 35. Do not attempt vengeance; do not attempt revenge against any act of persecution; you will lose your liberty if you do. "The Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God" rests upon us in the persecution. But then, there is more than that; the position that belongs to God is secured to Him as we are maintained in liberty. And so these two dear men -- one never tires of speaking of them: "At midnight Paul and Silas, in praying, were praising God with singing, and the prisoners listened to them". Wonderful servants! Did any greater strains of music ever pierce heaven than from those two dear men from that prison in Philippi? The Lord Jesus uttered from the cross such words: He says to His Father, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? ... And thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel", @Psalm 22: 1, 3. That is where God dwells. If you want to know where He dwells, that is where He dwells; dwelling too, of course, amid a suffering people, but it is in grace He does that. If you want to know where He dwells, it is in the praises of His people. He was dwelling in the praises of Paul and in the praises of Silas as they sang from the prison in Philippi on that night never to be forgotten.
And so, dear brethren, the Spirit of God would put it on us, whatever it is that is causing the suffering; if I am persecuted in any degree, let me be victorious. Let me sing; let me sing praises. Let us be victorious in feelings. Let the feelings of sufferings be drowned by the songs of praise that issue from the hearts of the lovers of Christ and the lovers of God. So that this is what comes out in this remarkable passage. It is a question of sufferings from persecution, but liberty is there; the liberty of the servants is there in good measure. The prisoners heard, but heaven also heard. That was
{119}
the victory. We are not told that the prisoners heard the groans of the sufferers at all, but the praises of the sufferers -- they heard those in the prison.
May God bless His word!
{120}
PROSPERITY
@1 Corinthians 16: 1, 2; @3 John 2: 1 - 14
I wish to speak about *prosperity*. The first feature of what I have to say stands, as you will observe, in connection with "the collection for the saints". None are more worthy of it; but my main thought is prosperity as it stands in this connection. The verse read contains one of the 'concernings' in the epistle, and it is in relation to the collection. The word "concerning" affords a certain heading for subjects in the letter, which is a lengthy epistle subdivided into subjects introduced by this word, as if it were needful either because the saints had written to the apostle about some matter, or because he knew of the conditions requiring to be dealt with. As it is always in the history of the saints, there are things that are distressing from time to time, such as are called a "present necessity" in chapter 7. What the "present necessity" in these parts is I am not undertaking to say, but this epistle furnishes us with an example of how current necessities or consequent ones have to be dealt with in an authoritative sense; because the idea of authority must have place, and we have the authority, not by human appointment, but by the Lord, as He says in the gospel of Mark: "having ... given to his bondmen *the* authority" (@Mark 13: 34). That is, there is only one. It came from God through Christ and it extends to the bondmen; not simply to the apostles but to the bondmen, those who are entirely subservient to the will of God. It works out through appointed vessels, for the apostle in this epistle says that if anyone takes the place of being spiritual, or a prophet, "Let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment" (@1 Corinthians 14: 37). You could hardily get two words put together more pungent in that sense: the "Lord's commandment"; not
{121}
simply Christ's commandment, but the Lord's. So that what comes in the way of authority on this principle is to be observed, and if it be resisted or disregarded in any way it implies penalty. Let us not exclude the idea of penalty in this present dispensation; if it is not executed now it may be deferred. Deferred penalty remains; it is only a matter of time. So that in this epistle we have deferred penalty: "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", that is, when the Lord comes. It is deferred.
Well, the verse read in chapter 16 has a "concerning", and it is the heading of a certain subject, namely, the collection for the saints. It is not just "a collection", the object left hanging in the air. Is it for the levites, or for the saints? Is it for the needy? Well, it is for the saints here. There are no more worthy persons, and the thought ought to stimulate us as to the collection. Having the idea of prosperity in mind, I would point out, dear brethren, that the apostle is practical in connecting it with time, and with defined time: the first day of the week. That gives the first day of the week a certain status, though not an official or legal one. The Lord's day has its status too, but it is not the day that the apostle brings into this verse. That day is only mentioned once in the Scriptures. We might have expected that as the apostle was dealing with this matter in a formal sense he would have brought in the Lord's day; but he does not, he brings in the first day of the week. John brings in the Lord's day, and it is a confirmed day because he was characterized by it. Whatever we deal with as representing the mind of God or the mind of heaven needs confirmation, and so the Lord's day needs confirmation, that is to say, in the sense of subjective confirmation. John did not specify what he meant when he said he was in the Spirit on the Lord's day. If anyone had
{122}
been there he would have had confirmation of it. If anyone had said to him, John, explain to us the Lord's day; can you point it out on the calendar? he would have said, No; there is no almanac that has it; no calendar has it. What authority has it then? How is it to be understood? We have according to Galatians that the assemblies in Galatia -- of which there were more than one -- observed days and months and times and years. If we were to enquire from any assembly in Galatia as to any given day, Why do you keep this day? we should probably have the answer, Well, it is a very recognized matter here, not simply by one of us but generally; and so in regard to the months that are kept, and the times and the years, it is very definite. Yet these designations of time are not confirmed in any spiritual sense at all. Years have rolled by and the days and the months and the times and the years have been added to ecclesiastically, but with no spiritual confirmation. Now it is clear from the epistle to the Galatians that we are, as Christians, to be free of all that. We are to be free of what has no spiritual confirmation or, I might add, *scriptural authority*. But when John uses the expression "the Lord's day", were I with him I would enquire as to his meaning. He says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". Suppose I had been with him on that particular day and seen how he acted on it, how he spent it, what occupied him, I should have some impression as to what the day meant. There was a subjective confirmation of it; one man, anyway, was in the Spirit on it. But the Galatians had no such confirmation, and I speak of it in this way, dear brethren, so that we might in a very practical way be free of these days and months and times and years, of which the apostle spoke. They have become so numerous and extensive that they have involved the whole world system, as I might say, with no confirmation from the Lord. If
{123}
we are to be taken up with them we shall be engulfed with them. But you may say, Why should the apostle say elsewhere to the Roman Christians that one brother may observe a day and another brother not, but regard every day alike? One brother observes and another does not. Why should the apostle admit of these things at Rome and not in the Galatian assemblies? The simple fact is that the apostle's letter to the Romans is setting up, among other things, individual Christianity. He is telling them that there is such a thing as having faith and having it to yourself; there is such a thing as one brother observing a day and another not. Why should he be allowing that? Well, it is to bring out the flexibility of the truth in certain applications of it, that the persons believing in it are of immense importance to heaven, every one of them. That is to say, each is a Christian; each is a brother; Christ has died for him. He has no personal friends in his special exercises, he has no conferences, he is of no party, he has no following, he is not influencing anyone into his way of thinking. He is in principle in the realm of the Spirit, the realm of faith, which God has inaugurated: "Jesus the leader and completer of faith". The apostle is making much of everyone that has faith, making much of him by himself; he is so valuable, even the weak brother, for whom Christ died. And so we have this first day of the week. Is the apostle telling the Corinthians that they are to mark it on the almanac to be observed as the sun rises on that particular day? No, he is not meaning that at all; he is not speaking of legal observances. He is implying in what he directs them to do as to the collection for the saints that there is such a day as the first day of the week and that they know and recognize it. It is not binding them, it is not a party matter, it is Christianity. It involves Christian sentiment,
{124}
if I may stress that expression, for why should we not have sentiment? What would we be without it? The Spirit of God in each of us promotes such a thing as that, He witnesses to each one in himself that he is one of God's children. He is making much of the individuality of the saints. And then He brings in the collection and He says that it is to be on the first day of the week; He does not say on the Lord's day. Why should He not say the Lord's day? He uses in chapter lithe very same type of expression, only instead of the Lord's *day* it is the Lord's *supper*. It is the dominical day, a very beautiful thought, that is, the day that is characterized, not by Christ, but by the *Lord*, by what *belongs to Him*. This day belongs to the Lord. It is a question of what each individual saint makes of it. It is no matter of a national day nor of a local day, nor of a local position or holiday. It is a day that belongs to the Lord. How does it belong to the Lord? The trains run as usual, thousands of things happen as usual. These things do not afford any suggestion of authority for the day, and they are likely to influence those that do afford such suggestion. I am seeking to bring out the greatness of a Christian, weak though he be -- what he effects by his estimate of the day, that it is the Lord's day; it belongs to the Lord. There is such a thing as that, that heaven is intervening and taking on that day. But how? Not by appointing it officially or legally. It is established in one man, John the prophet. He says it was that to him. Nobody else says so, showing what one Christian may effect as he responds to what is presented to him subjectively. He *confirms* it, that there is such a thing as that as an actual fact, in a confirmatory way and in an enjoyable way, for what confirms me in *heaven* is enjoyable. As I said, the apostle Paul uses the same expression without the word 'day' for the dominical supper. These
{125}
are precious thoughts and have confirmation in persons. No one person can keep the Lord's supper, it is a collective thought; but the observance of the Lord's day is not necessarily collective, it is an individual matter. John expresses it when in the isle of Patmos as a prisoner. The prison does not express it, no, indeed! but John does.
But here in @1 Corinthians 16 it is not the dominical day, it is "the first day of the week", and I wish to enlarge on that for a moment, dear brethren, because of its bearing as over against the Lord's day. The Lord's day is in time, and obviously it will have no place eternally. There will be the day of the Lord, but that will be introductory, involving judgment. There will be the day of God too, and the day of eternity. But the Lord's day is a term that is not applied save as to an individual Christian, a very remarkable fact, and I want to be one of those Christians in confirming that there is such a day. It is a special day to me; if it cannot be carried out externally, it is a real thing to me in my soul, as it was to John. He was not causing that the prison where he was should keep it; he made no suggestion of such a thing. It was in himself. But the first day of the week is brought in here, in @1 Corinthians 16, as to how it is to be carried out in the affections of each individual saint. The point is not that he is going to break bread on that day, it is something else that he is going to do, and it refers to temporal matters, to money. It refers to money that he has been prospered with, not to a legacy. Understand, I am using words designedly to make the thing clear. It is not exactly what is 'left' to a man, although that might be included; it is a question of his prosperity, that in which he is prospered in the ordering of God. It does not say in the original that God has prospered him, the idea is that he is a prospered person; and his prosperity has to do with the collection,
{126}
and it is to be affected by the first day of the week. That is to say, he is a brother who has spiritual sentiment. He is looking on into eternal things. The steward that the Lord brings forward in @Luke 16 had in mind eternal habitations; he knew that his money or whatever material wealth he had would have no value in eternal habitations; but he used what came to him by his own cleverness in view of a latter day. "Eternal tabernacles" is the expression the Lord uses, and He wants us to become familiar with Scriptural expressions. "Eternal tabernacles" -- what a thought that is! What an incentive as outlook! What greatness we are coming into! We are going to be received *there*. You do not want to have to knock at the door or present your credentials; the idea is that we shall be "received" into eternal habitations. The Lord Jesus was received up in glory, and so are we to be received. The poor man Lazarus was received: he was carried by the angels into the bosom of Abraham. What a thought that is! What a reception it suggests! Carried into Abraham's bosom: may we not dwell on it as indicating how we are to be received? The idea of the bosom of the Father -- the Lord Jesus is said to be there, in the bosom of the Father, that is His place; but what a thought that we are loved as the Son is loved! What a prospect! How it should affect us as regards what we are earning, and what we are doing with what we are earning in a material sense.
Now "collection" is the word used here, and it is used twice. The apostle says there is to be none "when I come", no collection, meaning that it was no authoritative matter. It was not the Lord's day as such he had in his mind, it was the first day of the week. He is assuming that the saints are going to be affected by what he is writing. And so the question is as to the prosperity and what is accruing
{127}
from it, what use is being made of that with which each is prospered? It is not said that God prospers us, but right Christian sentiment and understanding would say, It is God's prosperity; it is material blessing that God affords us. Perhaps you say, I applied for a position and I got it and I lost it. Why should you lose it? But perhaps you say, I got a position through prayer. A Christian who has the first day of the week in mind, who enters into the spirit of the first day of the week and is thinking of eternal habitations, such a man is having to do with God about his matters and he prays. Such a man would say, I made a sale through prayer; I made a purchase through prayer; I am accustomed to doing things that way and I am prospered. Can I leave God out of that? I do not leave God out, I am in the strongest way bringing Him in. I am not thinking of losing the position, I am thinking of what I am going to do with the proceeds, with the prosperity; I am with God. I am not going to reckon on the basis of Monday morning, or of rent day, or tax day; I am going to reckon on the basis of the first day of the week.
I think you understand me, dear brethren. I am not seeking to interest the natural mind; but that in this matter God is thinking about local conditions and general conditions, and about persons and the whole assembly; and He is thinking of how the proceeds are to be used. Is the enquiry on our side: Will it mean an increased number of dresses or cars, or increased importance in business circles or in acquiring neighbours? No, that will not do. It is a question of the first day of the week, and of being surrounded, as @Hebrews 12 says, with a great "cloud of witnesses". That is on this first day of the week; John and Paul and Peter and all the saints come into the cloud of witnesses; not that they are looking on, but they are witnesses to this great
{128}
matter, and we are going to be caught up together with them to be with the Lord. I am thinking of that, of being like Christ forever, of being amongst the sons of God and He in the midst of us. There is a great cloud of witnesses and I want to be with them, to add to the cloud, because everybody that is affected by any particular testimony adds to the witnesses. "For in the power of this the elders have obtained testimony" (@Hebrews 11: 2): that is the idea, the elders. And so I am affected in this way and so are all the brethren. It is the first day of the week we are thinking of, it is that particular day, and I have sentiment about it. I have a long outlook, I am looking on to eternity, to the eternal day. So if I am requested to work on the Lord's day, and I should get twice as much for it as for Thursday or Friday, what am I going to do about that? I am speaking practically; we are tested by these things, as to whether we are selfish, whether we are denying the Lord in this matter of days or time for the sake of what we are getting, and thus losing ground among the saints and losing ground in heaven, losing status.
So in the third epistle of John we have this same word, "prosper". It is written to the special brother, Gaius, "whom", says the apostle, "I love in truth". You can see how authoritative persons such as I have been speaking of single out persons who are lovable, lovable as in the truth. The apostle goes on to say immediately about this brother, that he desires his prosperity in all things. The Darby Translation says, "Beloved, I desire that in all things thou shouldest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers". Now here it is not simply a matter of making money, making a bigger salary, but that in all things I may prosper and be in health as my soul prospers. So that we have another point of view, as to a brother who loves the truth and is
{129}
known universally. John has a good deal to say about him. When you can speak freely to a brother about himself, and the things in him that are worthy and commendable and honourable, that brother is worth loving. He is trustworthy. That is what this brother was, known to the apostle John. He says to him, "Beloved, I desire that in all things thou shouldest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers". Notice the individuality of it. He is not building up any partisan views, or building a brother up in his own mind in relation to others who admire him -- one of the most baneful things -- a circle of admirers. That is not in mind at all. It is an individual matter here, and I am aiming at that, dear brethren, that we might be built up individually and then go on to the collective side; and first as regards love of the truth. Gaius is looked at as loved in the truth, he is lovable in that connection.
And then the apostle says, "I desire that in all things" -- whatever it be: my business matters, family matters, including marital matters, assembly matters, and if I have gift or ability or if I am an elder, these matters too -- "that in all things thou shouldest prosper". It is to accredit the man. You say, Is he accrediting the man to himself? Yes; to strengthen him in his soul as regards what he is going on with. In everything I am handling I am to be prospering. If I am not handling anything I am not prospering much. The Scriptures contemplate men of affairs and particularly spiritual men of affairs. Some have too much, perhaps, but nevertheless it is an honourable thing to have affairs, a lot of things to do. Someone has said, If you want anything done, ask a busy man to do it; he is a likely man to do it. People who have nothing to do are inclined to be indolent. Persons who are accustomed to doing things get commissions, and such commissions
{130}
as are valuable. Even a cup of cold water given in the name of a disciple shall not lose its reward. But I am speaking now of "all things". Joseph in Egypt was a man of affairs; he came into his house at lunch time, and you can imagine that he could have spent the whole afternoon there; his long-lost brothers were there, and he loved them. And yet he gave to them only a small portion of his time on that day. Who knows what he had to do with Pharaoh that day? But he was able to take up things as they came and he prospered in them. I am often rebuked because I turn down something that I am asked to do. I may think, Why did not someone else do that? Why did the person who made the request not do it himself? But if it comes to me, let me be ready to do it. And so the apostle says here, "Beloved, I desire that in all things thou shouldest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers". A mountain of things are there in the morning to be done, and he gets them done. If you have to leap over a wall -- David says, "By my God have I leaped over a wall" -- you do it *by God*. It is a matter of prosperity. In everything you do you are conscious, in that sense, that you are well paid for it. This very apostle speaks in the previous epistle of receiving "*full wages*". How do you get the full wages? Not by cheques, no; he got the wages largely in the doing -- full wages -- although, of course, there are rewards at the end.
But here, dear brethren, we are to prosper and be in health, even as our souls prosper; so that the saints of God are to be fat and flourishing. The Scriptures abound with these thoughts. As one is speaking there are many things that come up that we could speak of, and it is well God has apportioned a short time for such a season as this, because people cannot take in very much at one time. The
{131}
hours are well named. An 'hour' is often a critical time; it is a time, however, in which things can be done. One thing can be done or a number of things, but the point is that I am prospered in what I do. I am never overcome with the sense that time is getting ahead of me, that business is getting ahead of me, that work is getting ahead of me. If I am overcome I am not prospered; I am depressed by the fact that there is a pile of work to be done. It is a question of what I can do by God's help. I thus learn to work methodically; to do it as to God; and to do it well, as it says of the Lord, "He does all things well". So that the apostle John would look at his brother in fatherly affection. He addresses himself to him as "The elder"; he does not call himself by name. Gaius might say, He is well worthy of that title; his very words mean that to me, he is thinking of my prosperity. I often think of the prosperity of the brethren; and this elder, this brother, is thinking of the prosperity of Gaius. It is not only in one thing he is to prosper but, as I said, in his family, his business, his ministry, in all things. Gaius is a prosperous man and his soul is prospered; that would mean that inwardly he is becoming as great as he is outwardly. Even John could not know, perhaps, all that was going on in that man's soul. God knows. The apostle Paul says as to one of the most wonderful things that happened to him, "God knows". Whether Paul was in the body or out of it when caught up to the third heaven, God knew. And so John could not know everything that this dear brother enjoyed inwardly, for each of us has an inward history with God; it is a most precious thing to have an inward history with God; and that in that history my soul is prospered. Mary said, "My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour". If I am divinely prospered, that is my own inward matter. I commend
{132}
the word, dear brethren, in the sense of prosperity; individual prosperity, and correspondingly, of course, collective, that the assembly is prospered.
May God bless the word.
{133}
LET US GO FORTH
@Hebrews 11: 22; @Hebrews 13: 12 - 14
These verses contain the thought of "going forth" in keeping with the teaching of the epistle to the Hebrews, from which I have read, in which Christians are largely regarded as having settled down in earthly circumstances -- in general, religious ones, but still earthly; that is, settling down short of the heavenly calling. The Lord is said to be seated in heaven, although at the same time ready to serve; Stephen saw Him as "the Son of man standing at the right hand of God", @Acts 7: 56. The heavens were opened to him, and according to this epistle they were opened to the Jewish believers of that time. Hebrews has been called 'The book of the opened heavens', so that the writer tells us in chapter 2: 9 that "we see Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour". The Jewish believers at that time had the greatest opportunities in such ministry as the twelve afforded, men with apostolic authority and apostolic ability, the Spirit coming in and leading them on, so that they ministered in such power that even the Spirit Himself depicts the result, not only in @Acts 2 but later. The ministry was maintained, and these Hebrew believers are enjoined to remember their leaders who had at that time spoken to them the word of God. Then there were others still continuing the same holy service, whom they were to obey. So we have these significant words in chapter 11 as to Joseph: "By faith Joseph when dying called to mind the going forth of the sons of Israel". "The going forth" -- the phrase is to be noted as characteristic of Hebrews, which is spiritual enlargement, illustrated in many phrases such as, "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling" (chapter 3: 1). So that faith is addressed in this book,
{134}
and we are directed back to Joseph, who was one of the sons of Israel, specifically called that. He was one of the children too -- a wider expression numerically; "the children of Israel" is a phrase or designation that is very common in the Scriptures, alluding to the generations; to the family, too. But the sons are *distinctive*.
I am speaking thus to make an application, the application being directly to ourselves. The Spirit is constantly pressing upon us the importance of spiritual dignity, and the dignity I am speaking of belongs to us. Peter says of the prophets, "To whom it was revealed, that not to themselves but to you they ministered those things ... by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven, which angels desire to look into", @1 Peter 1: 12. So the coming into Egypt mentions the sons of Israel: "And these are the names of the sons of Israel who came into Egypt", @Genesis 46: 8. We get their distinctive names, that is, the names of the tribes. They had become very numerous; the land was full of them, we are told, and in their great increase they would somewhat lose the distinctive character that marked them in their incoming, although Jehovah would maintain them in it and He would have the king of Egypt know of their dignity. He said to Moses, "And thou shalt say to Pharaoh, Thus saith Jehovah: Israel is my son, my firstborn", @Exodus 4: 22. There are none like them -- Jehovah's son, Jehovah's firstborn. And, He said, if you do not let him go, I will kill your son, your firstborn. So the matter is put on a very high level in that address to Pharaoh, they are regarded collectively as God's son, God's firstborn. This would be cumulative, adding to the earlier statement, "sons of Israel", which they were as coming into Pharaoh's kingdom. By the average Egyptian they would be looked at very differently, abominated by some of them because of their very calling; what they were
{135}
accustomed to do made them abominable. They were shepherds, and all shepherds were an abomination to the Egyptians; yet these shepherds were coming in as the sons of Israel. They had twelve names, tribal names, family names; but they were also sons of Israel. And Jehovah would make them stand although they had spread abroad and filled the land, as Pharaoh said, so that he had to take measures to restrain them and to reduce them, most drastic measures. It is being done now too, but they will stand, they will come out: the sons of Israel.
Well now, you can see how Joseph would have all this in his mind. He "called to mind the going forth of the sons of Israel". It came to his mind. We are to have with us a means of reminding ourselves; indeed Joseph himself inaugurated that idea; he said to Pharaoh's butler, "Only bear a remembrance with thee of me when it goes well with thee", @Genesis 40: 14. We must never forget the Jews, but it is a question of Christ, not of Joseph himself. Joseph did not forget them, he did not forget his brethren, in his greatest glory they were in his heart. So it is with the true Joseph; His brethren are in His heart tonight, and woe be to them who deal with them adversely! They have a place in the heart of Christ, in the heart of the Messiah; He is watching over them. So it is with Joseph; he called to mind the going forth of his brethren, that is, of the sons of Israel. He was one of them, his name is given as one of them; the Lord Himself was one of them too, made in the likeness of men as one of them. He carried on a conversation with a Samaritan woman and she intimated that He was a Jew, which He did not deny. "Ye worship ye know not what", He says; "we worship what we know". He says "we"; He was one of them outwardly and really. Real value was there, infinite value in a Person
{136}
known as a Jew and accepting that position. Presently ten men shall "take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you", @Zechariah 8: 23. That time has not come yet, God is not with them today; He is with them governmentally, watching over them, but presently the Lord will be apprehended among them, coming back to them, as it says, "Whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things", @Acts 3: 21. And again, "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven" (@Acts 1: 11); and still again, "Thus the Christ also, having been once offered to bear the sins of many, shall appear to those that look for him the second time without sin for salvation", @Hebrews 9: 28. So that there is a great time ahead for them, and as the apostle Paul says in @Romans 11: 26; "And so all Israel shall be saved". That does not mean every Jew that is alive today, far from it. "All Israel shall be saved", says the apostle, but that is the real Israel in all its tribal heads; all its tribes. Paul says, "To which our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night hope to arrive", @Acts 26: 7. James, as we have often remarked, writes to them, so that they are in some sense existing. Maybe some of them are here tonight, real Jews, that is, converted to God: "For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly ... but he is a Jew who is so inwardly ... in spirit, not in letter", @Romans 2: 28, 29. There are such, the apostle Paul brings himself forward as one; he is represented in that, "one born out of due time", he says. They are "a remnant according to election of grace", @Romans 11: 5. It is a question of sovereign selection; they will all be on that footing.
I have digressed a little as to that, but it is an important matter to have before us, because what
{137}
is in the heart of Christ should be in our hearts. If you look at the epistle to the Romans, chapters 9, 10 and 11, you will see how Paul reflects the heart of Christ in what he talks about: "My brethren", he says. Now you can see how Joseph would have all this in his mind when he called to mind the departure of the sons of Israel. That is to say, they went out gloriously. They came in gloriously too, though it says, "A perishing Aramaean was my father" (@Deuteronomy 26: 5), and it is well to take that into account. But they are not to be in an eternity of blessing on that line, they are to be there on the line of divine purpose and formation so that Christ will not be ashamed of them. Joseph was not ashamed of them when they came into Egypt; he took five of them and presented them to Pharaoh, and his father blessed Pharaoh. It was a great day for Israel in Egypt when these things happened. We want to get the spirit of Israel and of the sons of Israel and of the Israel of God, and to see how we are immutably established as part of the divine purpose. And so I referred to this, that Joseph "called to mind the going forth of the sons of Israel". We have a very brief record in @Exodus 13 and 14 of how things were as they went out; Moses himself recorded it afterwards, and with great accuracy. You wonder how he had time to do so much in the wilderness; to write Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy; and to write a song as he was about to die. He wrote a wonderful song in @Deuteronomy 32 ere he went up to die. He was entirely in God's hands, he lived in the divine realm; he lived, we may say, with God; he had access all the time to God. It was not so with Aaron. Again and again we have, "The Lord spake unto Moses, saying ..."; all that refers to his entering into the holiest to hear the divine communications. What times he had! Forty days with Jehovah on the mountain,
{138}
too. How Jehovah would press upon him what His people were to Him, to God! And as I said, he depicts the facts.
So the people drew near to the Red Sea; the time had come for them to go forth. It is a question of how they went forth and of how Joseph called to mind that they should do so; what details entered into it and how the Spirit of God tells us about Joseph's bones in the midst of all those details. They were pursued by Pharaoh and his host, but the cloud appeared before them and then came behind them; Jehovah was in the cloud and there they were under His protection. In Jehovah's mind they were the sons of Israel, and they were going forth. And so, dear brethren, @Hebrews 13: 12 - 14 which I read brings that phrase into our circumstances in a peculiar way. It calls attention to the glory that attaches to the people of God in their going forth. Our presence here tonight would indicate that we have come forth. We have been elsewhere; hardly anyone here would not admit that he has been elsewhere in his history, in different surroundings from these, unhallowed ones. There is much ado made about today, this very day, the date, so-called, of the birth of the Messiah. He was certainly born, but it is a poor foundation people are on; all that is being done to celebrate this day is not in keeping with the sons of Israel. There is nothing hallowed in it. One is only thankful for the day because by governmental authority we have it free. But all of us who are here have doubtless been saved from something. Had we remained in our houses, in our families, the natural would certainly have had much more scope than it has here at this present time. In a certain way we are in a divine sphere, where Christ's birth has, of course, its place, but where His death and His resurrection have their place too. We are sons, not literally of Israel, but of the resurrection.
{139}
Let us take these things in, dear young people; we are sons of the resurrection, and accordingly we are sons of God, sons of God because we are sons of the resurrection. That is how we emerge from the lesser into the greater. So through the idea of being sons of Israel we emerge into the thought of sonship to God. We are sons of God! It is a great emersion; why not avail ourselves of it? The heavens are opened to us, it is a question of going there. We are welcome, it is our place, it is our calling, -- "the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus", @Philippians 3: 14. So that, as I said, the idea of the sons of Israel develops into that of the sons of God, Jehovah's sons. That is a collective thought; God sent the message to Pharaoh on collective grounds: "Israel is my son, my firstborn. And I say to thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me. And if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will kill thy son, thy firstborn". That was the message, most solemn, and of course every word of it absolute truth. But then they are also called sons of God in the Pentateuch. I am speaking of all these things for ourselves, because it is ourselves that is in mind in the Scriptures, in their application. When it comes to fellowship, what is said of the lower creatures applies to us; there are clean ones and unclean ones and we are not to eat unclean ones. The Israelites were not to eat unclean ones. Why? Because they were sons of Jehovah, not only sons of Israel. And so it challenges us as to the associations we have, because in the types the idea of eating is fellowship, and we may eat creatures clean or unclean. That is, you may be appropriating the society of some young person because you like him or her naturally; you are dropping down to the level of an unconverted young man or young woman. The types show you are dropping below the proper
{140}
level, to say the least. There are more severe things to be said than that, but that at least is true. If the Israelites were to avoid eating certain creatures because they were sons of Jehovah, for the same reason we are to select the right companions. This is one of the most vital matters we have to deal with in the assembly, the selection of companions for the young. The antitype is, "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and *I* will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty", @2 Corinthians 6: 17, 18. These are very solemn words as to the company we keep and how the dignity of the saints is to be maintained. Instead of dropping down to the level of the natural, taking on of its character, we are to keep ourselves clear of it.
And so this passage in @Hebrews 13 says, "Let us go forth to him without the camp". The Israelites were not directed to go out of Egypt *to* somebody, but we are; we are going out to Someone -- there is Someone outside. We are going to heaven, to be sure, but more than that, we are going to be with Christ. We are going to Christ, we have a Person before us. They had not; the type of Christ was in Moses, and in Aaron too, but they were with them. There was no one in Canaan to be looked for; there was no one set before them, no object for their affections. It was a question of the *land*. The "going forth" was in view of that. God brought them out in order to bring them in, but the "going forth" does not imply the going in, it was a question of leaving Egypt; that is the primary thought in chapter 11, dear brethren, whether you have left Egypt or not. But chapter 13 contemplates a Person. It is not only heaven; Hebrews is the book of the opened heavens, and we are partakers of the heavenly calling; but it
{141}
contemplates a Person, it is full of that thought. It presents us with a Person. "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son, whom he has established heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds" (chapter 1: 1, 2). The first chapter is just full of the glories of Christ. He is worthy of your heart's affections, that you should go forth to Him bearing His reproach. "For we have not here an abiding city", it says (chapter 13: 14). We must be very guarded as to anything that refers to our national position, but these are scriptural facts. We have no continuing city; there is no one in this whole country with all its millions who can deny this fact. They may say, We have a city and a capital, But is it a continuing city? Far otherwise! There is no such city except the city which has foundations, "of which God is the artificer and constructor", @Hebrew 11: 10. This is the city the Christian looks for and of which he is part. He seeks it; "the coming one", chapter 13: 14. He has gone forth to Christ without the camp, having the heavenly city in view.
"Therefore let *us* go forth"! The writer accompanies this injunction, this exhortation, with the most touching references to the Person of Christ, the circumstances He has been in. He says the bodies of those beasts whose blood was carried into the holiest by the high priest were burned without the camp. It refers to the great day of atonement when Aaron offered up the sacrifices for the sins of the company, those who form the assembly, or who then formed Israel; that is what the apostle is alluding to here. The bodies of those beasts whose blood was carried into the sanctuary on the day of atonement were burned without the camp. That refers to Jesus. Think of that! How it should touch our hearts! "Wherefore also Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his
{142}
own blood, suffered without the gate". He suffered. Let us not modify that word. He suffered without the gate. He was an outcast. As noted, the world is glorifying Him today, but He was an outcast; that is just what He was. He suffered without the gate. They carried Him without the gate, He was crucified outside Jerusalem, hung up on a gibbet there. And now what is the logic or deduction for us? "Let us". That is one of the "Let us" expressions in Hebrews. We are going to heaven together, so do not lag behind. There was no collective idea attached to it when Jesus went forth, He suffered alone. It is intended to touch our hearts and soften them. Our hearts naturally are just as hard as the stones on which the law was written; but God says, "I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh", @Ezekiel 36: 26. That means impressionableness, that we are impressed by the sufferings of Christ. He was hung up by wicked hands; Peter says that by wicked hands He was crucified and slain. That happened without the camp. Then the appeal is, "Let us go forth to him without the camp". You say, What is the camp? It is what Jerusalem was then, the centre of man's religion. Judaism had become just a human belief, and there in Jerusalem they crucified the Son of God. That is what Christendom has become; it has the word 'Christ' written over it, but what is underneath? Then let us go to Him "without the camp", not, of course, in a literal sense, because we cannot leave the physical world, but the point is to be outside the religious organizations of men, having a judgment about them.
So Joseph "called to mind" the going forth of the sons of Israel; and the Lord's supper is a "calling to mind". "This do in remembrance of me", or for the "calling" Me "to mind" (see note, @1 Corinthians 11: 24). We have no word as regards the date of the actual
{143}
birth of Christ; we are told where it happened, but the date is not stressed at all. A supposed day is now taken on and made something of; it is a convenient name for men and their religious pretensions, that is all. It is most solemn to have to say that. But "without the camp" is all outside of that; that is simply Jerusalem as the centre of religion, human religion. Christendom has dropped down to the level of human religion, beside heathendom, Mohammedanism and Judaism. This is a most solemn thing, but it is a fact; God would say things to us about that too. But the apostle says, "Let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach: for we have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one". This book makes a good deal of the city, the writer is telling us to look for it; not only that, but he says, We seek it. He will not admit that the thing is not true abstractly, however weak we may be about it. "We seek one to come", he says, and I want to be amongst those who do so, one who is known to have here no continuing city. In your inward feelings and outlook it is not yours at all; you are not claiming it, but "we seek one to come". And it is coming; it is not that it is likely to come, it is really coming, in fact it exists now. I may go further and say it is composed of people. The most marvellous thing in the whole universe outside of divine Persons is that great cube of persons called "the assembly". Its height and depth and breadth and length are equal -- it is a cube (see @Revelation 21: 16). It is solid, it is substantial in holiness as Christ was substantial in holiness. There never was a babe before that was substantial in holiness, nor a man; but Christ was such, and the assembly is composed of persons that are substantially holy. These are great facts for us.
So it says, "Let us go forth to *him* without the camp". It is a Person to Whom we are called to go
{144}
by the Spirit of God in this wonderful epistle. The name of the writer is left out, but we can discern him to be Paul; there can be no question but that it is Paul. He speaks of his brother Timothy; it is undoubtedly Paul, our apostle. He wrote to the Jewish believers who were in danger of going back and he says, "If he draw back, my soul does not take pleasure in him", chapter 10: 38. It is the expression of the feelings of the heart of Christ. How can Christ have pleasure in one who goes back from Him? He said in the days of His flesh, "Will ye also go away?" @John 6: 67. It is "also". What a challenge! Alas! for those who turn away from the truth. Do not leave the saints out; if you turn away from them you are turning away from Christ; as the Lord said to Saul, "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?" So that you not only turn away from the truth, but you turn away from Christ and the saints. But the word now is, "Let us go forth". There is no continuing city here; we seek one to come. We have a long outlook, we see it in the distance as Abraham did, and he saw the glory of Christ too. That is a beautiful touch in @John 8 where the Lord is in close quarters with the devil and is triumphant in conflict. @John 8 is full of that, it is like the mighty man of David who went down and slew a lion in a pit on a snowy day. The Jews bring in Abraham, they say, "Abraham is our father"; but the Lord says in effect, Do not claim Abraham! The natural cannot lay claim to the spiritual; do not *you* claim Abraham! He says, in effect, Abraham is not your father, the devil is your father -- a terrible thing! They had descended so low. They are reprobate Jews. He says, "But now ye seek to kill me this did not Abraham". Abraham is a great model for us negatively in that statement; "this did not Abraham". There are millions of Jews who have been slain by wicked hands, but these Jews were
{145}
ready to slay Christ. He says, "This did not Abraham". No, he did not do that! That is a negative thought about Abraham, but his generation after the flesh were seeking to do it then. In a little they crucified Christ by wicked hands. But they insist still, "We have one father, God". The Lord says, You have not God as your Father; He is My Father. It is a hand-to-hand matter between the Lord in lowliness and holiness and the devil, who is surrounding Him with his instruments. God is His Father, God was not their Father; the devil was their father, an awful thing! They had come down so low. The proof of it was that they would murder Christ, and that was really the devil; murder of that kind is from the devil, he is the destroyer. It is remarkable that the name given to him in @Revelation 9 has the sense of Destroyer. In that chapter there are two words used for him, one from Greek and one from Hebrew, Apollyon and Abaddon, meaning Destroyer and Destruction. These children of his crucified Christ, but He says, Abraham did not do that. Then they claimed that God was their Father, but the Lord says, No, you cannot say that either; "Abraham exulted in that he should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced".
In truth the real Abraham is our father, the father of us all; you have to understand in the context what is meant. God is our Father, of course, but then Abraham is our father. It is wonderful how he is spoken of in the Scriptures, and of course it is because he reflects God. The Lord says of him, "Abraham exulted in that he should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced". He was able to see the glory of Jesus, the day of Christ, he rejoiced to see it; he saw it and was glad. You can picture the patriarch -- and the Lord spoke exactly the truth about him -- he was glad when he saw the day of Christ. You say, What did he see? That is a good question.
{146}
What did he see? He saw someone delighting in Isaac as he was weaned; it was a great time in Abraham's house when Isaac was weaned, that was when Christ got His true place in Abraham's house. Has He His true place in my circumstances, my house, and all my affairs? Isaac had his place in the house when he was weaned; Abraham made a great feast. Is it not evident that he saw Christ in some sense? He saw and was glad; he rejoiced in Isaac. "In Isaac shall a seed be called to thee", @Genesis 21: 12. Abraham rejoiced in that, it was Christ. And so the Lord goes further, because He must have the last word in conflict with the devil; He goes the full length as to His Person, and that is, "Before Abraham was, I am". Wonderful! Whatever is said about Abraham is only to reflect what God is and what Christ is. There are three divine Persons and only three. So the Lord says, "Before Abraham was, I am". The verb is changed to the present; it is "was" in regard of Abraham; but "I am" is present, eternal existence. Let us bow our hearts before the Lord Jesus. He is worthy of our worship. "Before Abraham was, I am". What a triumph in close quarters with the devil! The Lord did not have to say, "Get thee hence"; no, not there. In the presence of the I AM there is no room for Satan. If we make room for the I AM, there will not be room for the devil. He must go. The matter is settled there in what He said: "Before Abraham was, I am". Would Abraham reason? Would he not bow and say, Amen? He would say that in the presence of Jesus. He is a saint of God, as we all are, I trust, and it is for us to say that from the depths of our hearts. Jesus is the I AM, as He is said to be "Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen".
{147}
DIVINE SYSTEM IN EXODUS (1)
@Exodus 2: 1 - 14; @Exodus 3: 1 - 10; @Exodus 4: 27 - 31
J.T. I have in mind on this occasion the system which appears in the early chapters of Exodus, intended to be used by the Spirit to lead the saints out of the world. The world is a system represented in Egypt. God has come in system-wise as seen in that book; it is typical of the truth of the gospel. We shall hope to cover roughly chapters 2 to 15 particularly, but inclusive of later chapters as to what occurred at Sinai and Horeb.
It was thought that we should first see the character of the persons employed in this divine system. In developing the thought we shall see the place it now has and that the divine family is involved, also how worship appears. The last verse read says, "And the people believed. And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped". This is a feature that may be seen running through as well as the brotherly or love feature. Inasmuch as the divine way is to add to this system -- the church system -- each one who accepts it in faith, it can be readily seen that love is required in each of us, and to be cultivated, so that the system is characterised by it. The woman of Samaria is a good example of how persons who believe through the testimony are added to the faith system and become in themselves gatherers of others. At a time of great weakness among the brethren in regard to gatherings, God may look upon our afflictions in different countries and give deliverance and give additions, gather others besides those that are gathered.
A.E.H. In Peter's remarks in connection with adding other qualities or graces, he ends up by saying,
{148}
"in brotherly love love", @2 Peter 1: 7. Does he have in mind that this constitutes the last fusion point as we come into the system on our side?
J.T. That is a good suggestion. It is Peter's last recorded, written contribution to the testimony of God, and he shows in it that the last should be the best. As we come into the closing moments, it should not be a fag end, a worn out or tired condition, but an increase of liberty, of adding to what is there. So that "an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ", @2 Peter 1: 11. Peter shows that he certainly is contributing to it in the way he refers to the transfiguration; and particularly the way in which he brings in the truth of the Son of God, which he never did bring into his ministry formally until then. Speaking in connection with the excellent glory of the Voice which was to be heard he says, "This voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain" (@2 Peter 1: 18). And added to that we have his allusion to the leading minister of this dispensation, Paul, in @2 Peter 3: 15. How thoroughly Peter introduced whatever was best!
A.E.H. In the end of the first epistle Peter refers to Silvanus, who had been associated with Paul as a "faithful brother", suggesting the linking of Moses and Aaron together. It is before the allusion to Paul that Silvanus is called "the faithful brother": "By Silvanus, the faithful brother, as I suppose, I have written to you briefly; exhorting and testifying that this is the true grace of God in which ye stand".
J.T. The beautiful link between Paul and Peter stressed in that final epistle should, I think, have a voice to us. That is how brethren should be linked, especially those who are ministering. 
Ques. Where did Peter get the word "beloved" that he uses in @2 Peter 3: 15? He speaks about "our
{149}
beloved brother Paul"; and in speaking about the Son of God the same word is used: "my beloved Son", @Matthew 3: 17. Where do we get this word that we use about one another?
J.T. It is a word the early ministers made much use of, not in any formal or perfunctory way. We use it much now in our letters to the brethren, but the question is how much fervour enters into our use of it to one another, and how much sense have we that we *are* beloved? David stands for quality in the types in the Scriptures, and his name means "beloved". It is introduced not simply as a name but as expressive of the person. David is expressed by the word "beloved" and he was anointed in that connection; so that quality expressed in "beloved" is a fixed matter in the divine system.
J.R.H. In this matter of the affections, is this account of Moses in regard to his birth and being taken out of the water calculated to touch and engage our affections?
J.T. Yes. It is said of his mother, "And she saw him that he was fair, and hid him three months", @Exodus 2: 2. His father joined in that according to other scriptures. Moses was "fair" and was hidden in that connection. Then we are told, "And the daughter of Pharaoh went down to bathe in the river; and her maids went along by the river's side. And she saw the ark in the midst of the sedge, and sent her handmaid and fetched it. And she opened it, and saw the child, and behold, the boy wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews¬ children". It seems clear that she was affected. She was in the enemy's camp outwardly but evidently moved in it; in principle she was taken out of it by this sight; evidently she was touched.
H.G.H. Do we see love in activity in the inauguration of this system? The passage says, "And a
{150}
man of the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi".
J.T. It is very apropos that we should get such facts stated in view of marital relations and all that develops out of them. We shall perhaps notice this again in chapter 6, how that it involves "wholly a right seed", @Jeremiah 2: 21. Peter contemplates this in the fact that we are "born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the living and abiding word of God", @1 Peter 1: 23. I think that thought will open up to us in the way it is worked out in "Aaron and Moses" and in "Moses and Aaron" -- the outstanding products of this union -- and in Phinehas, the last of the genealogy in the priestly line in chapter 6, who obtained the priesthood for ever according to @Numbers 25: 13. All that will enter into what we have in mind. The fact that the daughter of Pharaoh is affected is noticeable. Although outwardly she did not join in with the people of God she is evidently touched, and impressed too. We should, as those under reproach, impress those of distinction in this world so that they might be loosened, perhaps released, out of the camp of the enemy. The child touched her clearly, so that she saved him.
A.A.T. Should we pray for the authorities in connection with matters affecting the brethren, that they might be touched?
J.T. It is a young man's time in testimony, and a young woman's time, too, especially in certain other countries. It is a question of what is presented to those in authority, where there are any touchable. Evidently this princess was such. The facts related link with the previous chapter where the male children were sought out to be destroyed. But Pharaoh's daughter did not join in with this destruction, nor did the midwives of chapter 1; they feared God and God took account of that, giving them fixity in building
{151}
houses for them. The world is being invaded in this way and ultimately Egypt is "spoiled" as Israel goes out.
H.G.H. Would the movements of Pharaoh's daughter be God moving sovereignly in relation to this system?
J.T. Yes.
A.E.H. "The boy wept"; is that a feature of manhood? Jesus wept at the grave of Lazarus.
J.T. Yes, weeping is a feature of manhood. The Lord, as you say, wept. It is a feature of manhood, not simply of childhood. Any babe might weep, but here it expressed the situation in which the child was found. That is what meets the eye of Pharaoh's daughter.
L.E.S. Do you think Isaiah would have this seed in mind in chapter 59: 19 - 21? "When the adversary shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of Jehovah will lift up a banner against him. And the redeemer will come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith Jehovah. And as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith Jehovah: My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith Jehovah, from henceforth and for ever".
J.T. That is good, the use of the word 'seed' runs through; "wholly a right" one, which is found in @Jeremiah 2: 21. I think it is in mind here. The idea enters into the Psalms. It comes out in Genesis, running through in Abraham, and we find it in @Psalm 22: 30, "A seed shall serve him". Again in @Psalm 24: 6, "This is the generation of them that seek unto him, that seek thy face, O Jacob". It is the generation that is affected by where God is, that is, those with whom God is identified. In @Psalm 24 we have the generation of them that seek God's
{152}
face in Jacob; but then the king himself adds increase and dignity and glory; the "king of glory" appears at the end of the psalm joining in with those that seek God's face in His people.
A.S.B. Does @Hebrews 11: 23 help? "By faith Moses, being born, was hid three months by his parents, because they saw the child beautiful; and they did not fear the injunction of the king". It was the potential divine system over against what the king represented.
J.T. Just so. These parents had an eye for the beautiful. Their names are not given here, but they are given in chapter 6; that is where the dignity of the people comes out. In chapter 5 they are under great reproach but chapter 6 opens up the greatness that attaches to the people. The generation that is outlined in that chapter culminates in Moses and Aaron; they are the ones to keep our eyes on.
H.B. Does chapter 2 suggest that there should be the maternal element among us, so that we should seek to protect the young brothers in having to do with the authorities?
J.T. Yes; so that chapter 1 should be kept in mind although we did not read it. There it is a question of Jacob; there is far more about Jacob in the Psalms than about Abraham because it is a question of experience and of what the people go through in sufferings. "And these are the names of the sons of Israel who had come into Egypt; with Jacob had they come, each with his household: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah; Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin; Dan and Naphtali; Gad and Asher", chapter 1: 1 - 4. They are linked up in certain groups but they are all the tribes. "And all the souls that had come out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls; and Joseph was in Egypt". That is the general preface to the book, and our minds are attracted to these persons. Ultimately they come into captivity
{153}
and sufferings, but the first chapter is to bring out how they were increasing: "And the children of Israel were fruitful, and swarmed and multiplied, and became exceeding strong; and the land was full of them". So that God as King is preparing His way in this. Then the devil's attempt appears in the new king that did not know Joseph; he is an instrument of the devil; "And there arose a new king over Egypt, who did not know Joseph. And he said to his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel are more numerous and stronger than we". That is the thing to notice, this increase is of God. So he counsels: "Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass that, if war occur, they take side with our enemies and fight against us, and go up out of the land". The devil is planning through Pharaoh, but God is also planning; it is God against the devil working in Pharaoh. So we find dissent over the work the enemy has to do: "And the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives -- of whom the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other was Puah", their names pointing to distinction in this profession. They are incorporated into this system on the principle that whatever is of God is incorporated; it implies that these persons are useful in the system for the preservation of what is of God. It is the generation of God over against the devil's effort to destroy, and so these two persons run through the remaining part of the chapter. "And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses". The system is taking form for the preservation of what the devil would try to damage and destroy. I believe his effort now is to damage the younger brothers who are diverted from their homes and local meetings and fellowship. The enemy's attempt is to damage them morally; and hence the *spirit* of the midwives is needed.
{154}
H.B. "Let us deal wisely", Pharaoh says. Is this counsel what the Lord calls Hades¬ gates?
J.T. Yes, and over against that are the gates of Zion, where wisdom is.
S.McC. Would that greatly expand our outlook in regard to present afflictions in isolated circumstances in different localities, that they all stand related to this system operating in view of our deliverance from this world?
J.T. Yes. Moses¬ name is not mentioned at first, nor his father's or mother's; but the names of these two women are mentioned because they are preserving life. It is official service incorporated into this new system.
S.J.H. Does the system start with the *homes* here? The Lord has raised this issue with us that the seed may be right. "A man of the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi"; so the system is brought into play.
J.T. Yes; that is very noticeable. And these two women are mentioned by name as of the official class, noted by the king but incorporated and used by God for the preservation of what the devil wants to destroy. The first chapter should be kept clearly in mind as to trained persons. Abraham had trained servants in his house; they were labourers. These women are trained persons, not anybodies, neighbours, or the like. They may have had others under them, but they are clearly professional. We find in the captivity in @Jeremiah 29: 2 that "the smiths, had departed from Jerusalem"; the trained and skilled workmen were captivated. The devil does that, but they *belong to the Lord*. In the divine system we should look for skilled persons, persons who can do the needed work rightly in the fear of God.
A.A.T. What kind of work is in mind?
{155}
J.T. Any divine work we take on should be done well; "to each one his work", it says in @Mark 13: 34. That is the principle with the Lord. We are to know what to do and how to do it. It is characteristic of Mark that he says of the Lord, "He does all things well".
W.L. These women seem to have a universal setting, not peculiar to any tribe.
J.T. Their importance lies in their skill and fidelity.
J.R.H. As a result of their services the people multiply and become very strong. They evidently were used to maintain the strength of the people.
J.T. That runs through chapter 1. "Then Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, but every daughter ye shall save alive". He thought he was very wise in that, but the devil is always amiss; what he would save alive here, God is taking on. Five women have taken on a service.
S.McC. Phoebe "has been a helper of many", @Romans 16: 2. She does things well. It was something like that.
J.T. Yes, that is important, to do things well. As already said, it is said of the Lord that "He does all things well". If we are allotted anything to do, let it be done well.
L.E.S. Timothy and Titus teach much as to elder-hood and care generally.
J.T. Those epistles, 1 Timothy and Titus, have skilled workmanship in mind, that is, in the *care* of the saints.
A.A.T. A sister can entertain the saints with skill.
J.T. Yes, that is what is said about Phoebe; she knew how to do things and did them well, in a dignified way.
L.K. Chapter 1:5 says, "And all the souls that had come ..." -- soul enters into it.
{156}
J.T. Peter uses the word "soul" eight times in his two epistles. That is what is needed, persons who have affection, not soulless but *soulful*, who can yearn, who have bowels of compassions. 
Ques. Is it not interesting to note that "the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt had said to them, but saved the male children alive"?
J.T. Moses himself, when grown, was not afraid of the king's commandment: "By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king; for he persevered, as seeing him who is invisible", @Hebrews 11: 27. We may have to face a command which implies disregard of the will of God, but in such a case we must not be afraid to disobey. Of course we have to fear God all the time, like the midwives. We must brace ourselves not to cower before man's commandment; if God's will is involved we can do no other than what is right, stand for what is right.
A.E.H. Sometimes being obedient in regard of the king's commandment is incompatible with that. There is a difference between obedience and subjection to the powers that be.
J.T. Yes. Moses is not afraid of the king's command but is facing all the consequences whatever they may be.
R.H. What is involved in the midwives¬ answer to Pharaoh?
J.T. They had a good deal to say about the vigorous qualities of the Hebrew women, which *spiritually* ought to mark all of us.
A.S.B. That they "saved the male children alive" is an excellent feature.
J.R.H. In regard of the king's commandment, do you not think there is a continual call for spiritual discernment and intelligence as to what we should do and what we should not do? I do not see why you cannot do this, they say; and you often hear the same remark made by those amongst us.
{157}
J.T. "But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt had said to them, but saved the male children alive". We want to be sure any advice we give in the presence of emergency does not endanger the young brothers, because if they are in a false position their spiritual life is in danger. Many have been damaged because they have taken wrong advice. The mothers are said to have vigour, the male children are saved alive. If they are placed in a false position through advice or through any selfish considerations, the environment will damage them and spiritual life may ebb out.
F.K.C. The attack against the male children is one of the devil's efforts against what would assert the fights of God. The family side is there for the protection of those who would care for God's interests and stand militantly for them.
J.T. Yes; you get that throughout. Take Rebecca: she said, "On me be thy curse, my son!", @Genesis 27: 13. She stood in the breach. That is the principle here in verse 17; these women are fit for the testimony and the service of God and for use in the divine system.
F.K.C. Is the attack made on the male children when the Lord Himself was born a similar action?
J.T. That is where you get the wail of Rachel. Her sepulchre has a place in the Old Testament, but in the New Testament it is her weeping, her right feelings about her children.
A.A.T. The midwives get not only approval, but houses.
J.T. You can see how worthy they are of occupying houses of which God was the Architect. These women are honoured in that they come into houses built by God. What kind of architecture would enter into these houses? Would they not condemn the houses of Egypt? It says Noah "condemned the world" (@Hebrews 11: 7); he did that by building the
{158}
ark. What are we aiming at in our houses? We do not know whether Noah had blue prints, or what kind of men he would employ; but for the pattern God gave him specifications, verbal specifications of the ark. The passage referred to says that "Noah, oracularly warned concerning things not yet seen, moved with fear, prepared an ark for the saving of his house". If I go in for Egyptian patterns it is certain my house will damage my family. If I go in for God's architecture, what He would indicate in living features in the houses of the saints, I am not endangering the family. Noah prepared the ark for the saving of his house, not simply the preserving, but the saving of it. The house has something to do with the saving of the family. So these women would have houses to which they could at any time invite the young brothers, the boys they had saved, and entertain them. There would be nothing to damage them.
A.S.B. There would be no radios in those houses.
J.R.H. The household is the way of approach either to the assembly or to the world.
J.T. Quite so. If it is an Egyptian model it leads in the direction of Egypt; but God Himself built the midwives¬ houses.
L.K. Perhaps the authorities are not rightly affected because there is lack of this weeping that was seen in Moses, a right representation of the testimony.
J.T. It is not put here for nothing. That is what met the eye of Pharaoh's daughter when the cover was removed from the ark. The babe was weeping. There was of course good cause for weeping at that time. What was in the heart of his mother that she put him there? There could be no doubt that faith in her was assured of the salvation of the child. "And when she could no longer hide him, she took for him an ark of reeds, and plastered it with resin
{159}
and with pitch, and put the child in it, and laid it in the sedge on the bank of the river ... And the daughter of Pharaoh went down to bathe in the river; and her maids went along by the river's side. And she saw the ark in the midst of the sedge, and sent her handmaid and fetched it. And she opened it". What was in her mind? What was she going to find? What treasure was there? She would open it herself, and she "saw the child, and behold, the boy wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews¬ children". Her mind and affections were brought into action, and actually she is linking on with what Moses¬ mother did in providing that ark. It is the same word as 'ark' in @Genesis 6; it is connected with Noah's ark. It is a question of the salvation of what is in it. How does this happen? It is a question of a woman's affections, not only in putting the babe there, but in finding him.
A.P. Pharaoh's daughter was apparently more affected by the weeping child than by Pharaoh's command.
A.E.H. In @Luke 10 where the seventy are chosen, wolves are mentioned; but over against them there is the thought of lambs, and representatively they are the sons of peace.
J.T. The missionaries, the seventy, were, as sons of peace, to enquire for a son of peace and go in there.
A.E.H. I was wondering if Pharaoh's daughter would suggest a son of peace?
J.T. Yes, I think so; there is something there of God.
R.H. Nehemiah's sorrowful face affected the king.
J.T. Yes. He was really endangering himself by the sorrowful face in the presence of the monarch, but we must not forget it says, "the queen also sitting by him" (@Nehemiah 2: 6); that is the feminine side
{160}
coming in, giving lustre and softness and compassion to the position. He acquiesces in what Nehemiah sought. The queen was sitting by, where she should be.
F.M. The Lord grew "in favour with God and men"; up to a certain point it was "with men". The world has received Christianity nominally, but when it comes to making a definite stand for what is right and holy then the whole thing comes to an end as far as the world is concerned.
S.McC. It is remarkable how the feminine side comes in in all these matters: Pharaoh's daughter here, the queen in Nehemiah, Pilate's wife in Matthew and in Daniel the queen mother.
J.T. Quite so; a woman is generally essential to the governmental position. It begins in @Genesis 1: 26, 27: "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion ... male and female created he them". That runs through. The queen represents dominion; it is a question of sisterhood, womanhood, in the system, rising to a queenly thought. That is what is in God's mind, a king and a queen.
A.P. Esther stood by Mordecai in suffering times.
J.T. That is where you get the truth worked out in womanhood amongst the gentiles.
L.E.S. Abram is referred to as a Hebrew. The word Hebrew enters into this chapter a great deal.
J.T. It is a term of reproach. When Abram came from Ur he was called "the Hebrew".
L.E.S. "One who had escaped came and told Abram the Hebrew", @Genesis 14: 13.
J.T. He does not belong there, he is a stranger; but he is equipped. He is not throwing down his hands or letting them hang down; he is ready for what comes, as we say. He has three hundred and eighteen trained servants in his house; they know what to do, they are fighters.
{161}
S.McC. Speaking of the feminine side again, it says in @Daniel 5: "Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his nobles were confounded. -- The queen, by reason of the words of the king and his nobles, came into the banquet-house. The queen spoke and said, O king, live for ever! let not thy thoughts trouble thee, neither let thy countenance be changed. There is a man in thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father, light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods was found in him; and the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, [even] the king thy father, made him master of the scribes, magicians, Chaldeans, [and] astrologers" (verses 9 - 11). Is that not wonderful as bearing on our circumstances today?
J.T. It is. I think the queen mother has the position in hand. Belshazzar's queen was not worthy; it is the other queen. It was what God had. She was out of date but she was a real queen; "There is a man in thy kingdom", she says. She knew. She is one in whom womanhood comes in in the times of the gentiles: it works out in relation to Israel too. Vashti was a gentile queen and Esther became a gentile queen, the queen of a gentile monarch.
S.McC. In present day circumstances as we have to do with the authorities there may seem to be a certain amount of hardness, but we can rely on the system you have alluded to, the elements operating on our behalf.
J.T. Yes. "There is a man in thy kingdom", and there is a man's handwriting on the wall; the suggestion comes up as a kingly thought in the testimony, and the queen mother is womanhood in the testimony standing in relation to the man. She *fills* out the position.
L.E.S. Lydia's house would stand in relation to the work of God in Philippi. She was marked by the
{162}
fear of God and the recognition of all that was coming into evidence in Paul's ministry.
J.T. That is the way it would stand at Philippi. Lydia had her household baptized and the jailer had his, so the protective, Noah idea runs into that.
W.R. Pharaoh's daughter brought Moses up to be her son but he broke away from that influence.
J.T. That shows how the thing may wear out. We see how Christendom is petering out, though persons are used often to protect what is of God in the systems. With Moses the real thought had been there in sonship at the beginning, and in time God took him on. He had a good deal to unlearn, as every Christian has today as taken out of system; though he may have been a real son before. There are many real sons there.
J.R.H. Will you say something about verses 11 to 14, as to the way Moses moved?
J.T. They show that the work of God had taken effect in him -- notwithstanding his violent action against the Egyptian. The influence of Pharaoh's court did not overcome God's work. In His inscrutable government God sometimes allows His children to be in positions that are in themselves damaging, but they prove the superiority of His work; in result it overcomes, answering to His rights. At forty years of age according to @Acts 7: 23, Moses "refused to be called son of Pharaoh's daughter", @Hebrews 11: 24. The development of the work of God in him progressed in Midian; in our times that would imply sonship. It is said, "He sat by the well"; that is where he, in principle, developed sonship. "God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts", @Galatians 4: 6. We must have the Spirit for sonship, that is what is involved. As our young brothers are found in defiling circumstances today, instruction in the truth of sonship, involving holiness, is most urgent for them.
{163} 
Ques. Do we confess to the authorities that we are not part of Christendom in that sense?
J.T. Moses had to do that. It says that Pharaoh's daughter gave him his name, "she called his name Moses". He never lost that name, he was drawn out under these circumstances; she is a saviour you might say, she helps up to a point. And then it says, "It came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out to his brethren". It is really a mark of growth; he has in his heart that formation, *his* brethren -- not *the* brethren -- but *his own*. He is going out of the system that he has been in.
W.R. He never grew up as an Egyptian at all.
J.T. No; but here he is giving up whatever Egyptian links he had. The idea of sonship attaches to him in principle and he is coming under another influence. To go on with the passage, it says, "he sat by the well"; we should notice it is said, "*the* well", as if there is only one. It is a question of the Spirit. We must recognize the Spirit for our brethren in the systems, we should make it clear that the only hope for them is to recognize the Spirit of God. Then "the priest of Midian had seven daughters". We are not to overlook these seven daughters; they all apply to elements in the formation of a vessel for God's system. It is the father-in-law that is leading in all this, which is a safe position. "And he said to his daughters, And where is he? why then have ye left the man behind? Call him, that he may eat bread". They ought not to have left that question to their father; if they had been governed by ordinary and right feelings they would have known, they would have been very interested; but they are not. "And Moses consented to remain with the man; and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter". He is out of Egypt now, not seeking
{164}
for worldly glory as a prince of Egypt, and he consented to dwell with the man.
J.R.H. It is the spirit of the well.
J.T. Yes, a quiet, simple, humble man; once an Egyptian prince, he is now consenting to dwell with this man, obviously against his natural feelings. "And he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter". The whole position is indicative of manliness in a man who might have been otherwise just an out-and-out worldling. It is a question of how the young men are going to be affected as the idea of the Spirit of God grows in them. Jethro here must be viewed as having some authority from God; he was a provision from God as much as Pharaoh's daughter was. He must be looked at in this way as a provision of God in these circumstances. 
Rem. The position is changing from the feminine to the masculine.
J.T. Seven daughters would show that there was plenty of femininity there, but not active, not dominating. It is the father that is active, that is a mercy. Jethro is a provision of God for this young brother, it saves him.
A.E.H. Often in forming the links that lead to marriage and the establishing of households there is merely physical attraction and infatuation. The suggestion here is that the brother should have features of the Spirit, as indicated in the well, dominating in him and then there would not be so much in evidence on the physical side to attract the wrong kind of sisterly element. God has provided this setting for Moses and he is taken out of all the glamour of Egypt and is consenting to what Jethro suggested, and goes through it humbly as according to the will of God.
L.E.S. So the fruit would correspond to the position of the testimony itself.
J.T. Something comes out of it for the testimony.
{165}
DIVINE SYSTEM IN EXODUS (2)
@Exodus 5: 1 - 23; @Exodus 6: 1, 14; @Exodus 7: 1 - 7
J.T. For the benefit of those absent this morning it may be stated that we are engaged in these readings with the earlier chapters of the book of Exodus which disclose a system, a divine system designed of God to deliver souls out of Egypt, that is, out of the world. We read this morning out of chapters 2, 3 and 4, touching only on chapters 1 and 2. We were engaged almost entirely with Moses as representing the elements of the divine system, having Aaron in view. Chapter 3 was not touched on, but it was read to bring out how the material in the system was affected by God in the appearing to Moses in 'the burning bush', as it is commonly called. Chapter 4 was read to bring out the brotherly relations that evidently must enter into the divine operative system, that is, love entering into it. Love between brothers involves family relations, love entering into family relationships. It is evident that love is basic in the divine operative system; indeed the formula for it is "faith working through love". So we have at first a brother and a sister of the tribe of Levi, and then two brothers, their sons, these two men Moses and Aaron. They are seen in the end of chapter 4 as linked together in the operative service; it is said, "And Jehovah said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him on the mountain of God, and kissed him". It was remarked that worship is necessarily in mind; it runs throughout, out the divine operations, but associated with love, brotherly love. Peter's second epistle was quoted this morning, that we are to add to "brotherly love love"; brotherly love, and love added to it. Such love is essential to divine operations whether locally or generally.
{166}
Now at this time it is thought that we should see in chapter 5 the actual state and condition of the people that were to be delivered, and how a systematised thought is carried through into chapters 6 and 7. Chapter 5 shows a degraded condition, the state of the people is one of bondage and degradation and cruelty. Chapter 6, involving the system, shows the people as dignified, they have their dignity tribally. Then there is the priestly family; so that chapter 6 is over against chapter 5. Chapter 5 is degradation and cruelty and bondage: chapter 6 is tribal national greatness, that is, the saints of God viewed in their dignity, necessarily entering into their deliverance. Then the system is carried through in chapter 7 where we are told that Jehovah said to Moses, "See, I have made thee God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet. Thou shalt speak all that I command thee; and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land". Then we are told in verse 6, "And Moses and Aaron did as Jehovah had commanded them: so did they". And verse 7 goes on to say, "And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron was eighty-three years old, when they spoke to Pharaoh".
A.E.H. To refer back to the end of chapter 4, your suggestion in regard to faith working by love: is this scene suggestive of Paul calling the elders of Ephesus and speaking to them of what had marked him at Ephesus, pointing to what characterised his ministry -- that the work of faith and labour of love entered into all the localities which he visited?
J.T. Yes; adding to what we had this morning as to the final relations between Peter and Paul, representative servants of the dispensation. What reciprocal, mutual relations existed, especially seen in Peter speaking of Paul as "our beloved brother Paul"; not, "our beloved apostle", but "our beloved
{167}
brother"! Also he refers to Silvanus as "the faithful brother", Silvanus evidently being Silas, the same one that worked with Paul; "the faithful brother", Peter says, "as I suppose". So that brotherly relations were good between Peter and Paul, although there had been friction, at least on Peter's side; but now they are blessedly and happily in the relations of brotherly love which are so essential to the operation of the system that God has set up.
A.E.H. The sovereignty of God seems to come into the plan at a particular juncture, when there was a change-over from Barnabas to Silvanus. There is some indication in all Peter's writings to make way for the shaking conditions that may come in. I wonder if that might make way for the changes that may come in among the saints?
J.T. No doubt. Good brotherly relations are essential to the operation of the system we are speaking of. They are founded on sonship. Peter never ministered sonship, according to the records of Scripture. Doubtless he had the revelation of the Son; he knew who the Lord was, the Son of the living God, but it did not enter into his ministry. Not that he deliberately shut it out, but he ministered what the Spirit gave him. But he brings it in his last letter in a most beautiful and touching way, in reference to the Voice that was heard on the mount, "This is my beloved Son, in whom *I* have found my delight; and this voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain", @2 Peter 1: 17, 18. The idea of sonship enters into that, the idea of excellence. Paul preached the Son of God; indeed it is characteristic of the first preaching we have of his. He announced and preached in the synagogue that Jesus is the Son of God. He began that way. He tells us later that God "was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him
{168}
as glad tidings among the nations", @Galatians 1: 16. And he tells them in the second letter to the Corinthians that the Son of God has been preached "by me and Silvanus and Timotheus". He is the Yea and Amen of everything: "For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus), did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us", @2 Corinthians 1: 19, 20. It especially brings out this essential point for divine operations and those who are active in them, that brotherly love should be there. Let brotherly love continue; it is essential to the system, and so it is that sonship is the leading thought in Paul's ministry in the gospel.
J.R.H. Would these thoughts of sonship and brotherly love issue in the doxology at the end of Peter's second epistle? "To him be glory both now and to the day of eternity. Amen".
J.T. It is a state of things that is fit for eternity, where the Son Himself is subject, as we are told, that God may be all in all. So that is the position, that we are filled to the fulness of God and have an understanding of the spirit of sonship. 
Ques. Does that spirit operating in the system shut out rivalry?
J.T. Yes; that is one of the exclusive thoughts of it. We are not rivals of each other; in sonship each esteems the other better than himself. So that in the letter to the Corinthians, to brethren who are not happily united, we are told that love never fails.
A.S.B. Has Peter to learn that in @John 21, in relation to love shepherding the sheep? Might there be rivalry there? "When therefore they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?"
{169}
J.T. Yes. He was, we might say, a bit egotistical in saying he loved the Lord more than the others, and that he would not deny the Lord, and that is what the Lord had in mind. Does that hold good yet, Peter, -- the Lord would say in effect -- or have you changed? He had changed. So that the operation of the system was made to hinge on the Lord's remarks to him: "Lovest thou me more than these? ... Feed my lambs". It is a question of love, not love in rivalry, but love in esteeming others better than ourselves. The Lord is teaching Peter to fit in; but even after this lesson he said to the Lord, "And what of this man?" That is Peter again. The Lord never had popery in mind; the pope would tell everyone what to do, but the Lord is saying that that is not going to prevail at all in this system. Peter was not over John. "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee?" The Lord is telling us that such things are not our business; there is plenty to do, but it is not our work to regulate the brethren in the service. So the Lord says, "Follow *thou* me".
L.E.S. Would the prophetic word in @Hosea 11 bear on this? "When Israel was a child, then I loved him ... I drew them with bands of a man, with cords of love" (verses 1, 4).
J.T. "I it was that taught Ephraim to walk" (verse 3). Well, that is the point. Peter says, "What shall this man do?" It is a question of walk: "Follow thou me" is a question of walking, following in His steps. John had to do that too. The Lord teaches us how to walk; that is the book of Numbers, how He taught Ephraim to walk. The brethren are set in relation to God in the tabernacle and then in relation to one another; four groups of three each around the tabernacle, each has to find his place. That is how we are taught to walk.
{170} 
Ques. Subsequently Peter seems to have been greatly helped, according to his writing. He tells the elders how to act, "not as lording it over your possessions", @1 Peter 5: 3. Would he see how it is worked out himself?
J.T. Quite so. It is remarkable the instructions that are found in Peter's ministry, the very one popery is professedly founded on.
A.P. Would the happening on the mount of God when Aaron met Moses and kissed him, be essential before there could be practical deliverance of the saints out of Egypt?
J.T. It is to show that love is operative among the brethren generally and how it culminates in worship, the very opposite to rivalry.
H.B. God says that Aaron will be glad in his heart when he meets Moses. Would that be a challenge to us as to greeting one another?
J.T. Yes, quite so.
A.A.T. I noticed that you said at the beginning that the divine system is designed to deliver our souls out of Egypt, and yet this worship all takes place in Egypt.
J.T. Yes; it is before they go out to the wilderness. The worship is not to be deferred. The primary thought is that they are to go out to the wilderness to serve Jehovah, but they are able to do it now, as is indicated here: "And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped" (chapter 4: 31). It is the kind of worship that flows from what God does for us. It is not exactly worshipping "in spirit and truth", like @John 4: 24; that is because of what He is to us, but this is because of what He does.
A.A.T. It is not very far on, but God has something in it. It is like a believers¬ meeting.
J.T. But the underlying thought is love.
{171}
A.S.B. Is there something in the fact that Jehovah spoke to Aaron in this section? He was speaking to Moses earlier, but now it is to Aaron in verse 27.
J.T. You get that continued later on; Aaron is often addressed directly, but so far the position in general is, "Moses and Aaron"; and chapter 7 says, "Jehovah said to Moses, See, I have made thee God to Pharaoh", so that the communications so far are properly from Jehovah to Moses, and Aaron is the spokesman. Chapter 7 is especially in mind in regard to the system because in these two brothers it is a system representative of God.
J.R.H. Would it be right to say that Moses and Aaron in their approach to Pharaoh are greatly strengthened in moving, not merely as individuals, but with all the faith and worship of the people behind them?
J.T. The instruction is cumulative. Moses is the prime thought of God and it is he who gets the signs from Jehovah. Aaron comes in incidentally, as you might say. There was a vacancy, a lack in the system and he is added, but he is added by a link of love; not just as appointed, but added in love. He is thy brother, God says; we must keep that in mind. It is a question of your brother, and he is going out to meet you and when he sees you he will be glad in his heart. Aaron kissed Moses. The love is evidently at first on Aaron's side and therefore it would be a balance, because Moses was younger than Aaron. Moses had the light, the gift, ability and commission, but Aaron had the love, and love never fails. Even if a brother is younger than you, and has more ability, love will save you from rivalry. Later history would show that Moses led in love as in all else.
A.E.H. This morning in referring to Jacob as mentioned earlier in the book, you connected it with the Psalms; and in the beginning of chapter 5,
{172}
Moses in addressing Pharaoh says, "Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel". These Levites, even though approaching Pharaoh in connection with the sufferings of the people, are acting in the light and power of God's purpose as they bring in that name of God, "the God of Israel".
J.T. I think the Psalms help us on that point. In the service of God we need not only the light of God's counsel as in Genesis, but we need the experience that enters into it. So that whilst Abraham is the great father, "who is father of us all", yet Israel, or Jacob, is mentioned far more frequently in the book of Psalms than Abraham. So in @Psalm 24: 6, it is said, "This is the generation of them that seek unto him, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Selah".
A.E.H. Is that the thought that enters into the book of The Revelation? Worshipping companies come to light there. They remember God, and not only as He is revealed in Christ but His ways on the earth in regard to matters of His judgment; it seems to add tone and quality to their worship.
J.T. Yes. The four and twenty elders in @Revelation 4 represent experience with God. The living creatures are not representative of experience with God, but are representative of life; so that in the elders and the living creatures we have the combination of life and experience. In verse 8 it is said, "And the four living creatures, each one of them having respectively six wings; round and within they are full of eyes; and they cease not day and night saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come". That is what they are doing; and verses 9 to 11 tell us why they are worshipping: "And when the living creatures shall give glory and honour and thanksgiving to him that sits upon the throne, who lives to the ages of ages, the twenty-four elders shall fall before him that sits upon the throne, and do homage to him
{173}
that lives to the ages of ages; and shall cast their crowns before the throne, saying, Thou are worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were, and they have been created". It is important as to experience involved in eldership, that we not only set examples to the flock, we not only do right things, but we tell why we do them; we point out what God is.
H.G.H. Is that the reason Aaron is brought in? Moses would appear to lack that experience in chapter 4.
J.T. Yes; the chapter brings out certain defects in Moses. Where defects of great servants are called attention to, it is not that God would cast a shade on any of them. Moses is great enough to stand it, and there is value for us in the narration. Moses lacks wisdom in calling the people rebellious, and God records it that we in our little service should not belittle the saints. Indeed Paul himself when belittled says, All things are yours -- even the servants are yours -- whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas, all are yours. So the servant keeps the saints in mind in their dignity.
L.E.S. In the book of Deuteronomy Moses says, "The Lord was angry with me for your sakes".
J.T. Deuteronomy enables us to understand what the three preceding books set out. It is what Moses sees himself, as it were. And we learn in that book that he suffered for the sake of the saints.
S.McC. Zipporah's spirit and language seem to be beneath the dignity of the system that is operating in the way she addresses Moses in verses 25 and 26.
J.T. Quite so. The position really is broken. It is a humbling chapter as regards Moses, and his wife is not helping him. So it is a broken picture, but it ends beautifully, and it is the unfailingness of love that gains the victory. In verse 26 she says, "A
{174}
bloody husband -- because of the circumcision". God Himself had been about to deal most drastically with Moses. But then verse 27 is love, and we ought to look for a change if there are any broken conditions, because love is a sure remedy, it never fails. So that Aaron kissed his brother Moses, and Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him and all the signs that He had commanded him. "And Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the children of Israel; and Aaron spoke all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and did the signs before the eyes of the people". I think there you get relief coming in from the disorderly condition in the earlier part of the chapter. Love can undo wrong. The two brothers had a good time on the mountain. As to this beautiful result, Aaron is not adding something and saying, I can say that better, but he says what Moses says; he is Moses¬ spokesman, and the result is that the people believed; and when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, then they bowed their heads and worshipped. Faith is developed in them because of this happy, lovable condition between the two brothers. It is a dispensation of faith that we are in, and here we see how it is promoted by the happy state of love existing between these two great servants, brothers.
S.McC. So where the picture may be broken, as you were suggesting, but love becomes victorious, all the saints may be affected as we have in the verse referred to where they bowed their heads and worshipped.
J.T. We have to be on our guard so that we may not hinder that. Love brings the change.
A.E.H. It is faith working by love here.
A.P. Is the spirit of independence removed in @1 Corinthians 13, making room for the ministry meeting to go forward happily in chapter 14?
{175}
J.T. A brother may be giving a good word, but someone sitting by may have a revelation, and that supersedes what he is doing and he sits down. Love is essential to the operations in the assembly.
A.S.B. What would you say about the mountain of God, the place mentioned in relation to the meeting of the two brothers?
J.T. We could link that with @Genesis 22, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". The mountain of Jehovah symbolizes divine resources. We know how much came out there afterwards.
A.S.B. In chapter 3 it says Moses went "to Horeb". It is not yet said to be Sinai, it is Horeb.
J.T. The position there is made very clear. It says, "he led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God -- to Horeb". Horeb is the covenant mount; it is in the same range as Sinai, but the two words are used in the way of classification. Horeb is the covenant mount, and Sinai the mount of the law. Moses led the flock to the mountain of God, to the right spot, and the angel appeared to him there. Aaron also went there, it is put that way; Jehovah said to Aaron, "Go into the wilderness to meet Moses". There is no preamble at all. We do not know when they saw each other last; there might have been a long time of separation; but Aaron went and met Moses on the mountain of God and kissed him. It is not very remarkable that two brothers should kiss each other, but the Spirit of God considers it necessary to tell us that Aaron kissed Moses. It is important to know how to kiss divinely, to know what a holy kiss is.
W.R. Do you think the state of the people affected Aaron in @Numbers 12 when he and Miriam murmured against Moses? Recovery was quick on the part of Aaron.
{176}
J.T. Yes, and he interceded for his erring sister. How often a sister comes in to cause dissension amongst the brethren! Now in saying all that, I think it is important for us to follow the result of cumulative circumstances, that faith is coming in; then the people worshipped, believing. Then chapter 5 tells us of the great sufferings of the people, of the degraded conditions they are in because of their bondage to Pharaoh. It is certainly a very different scene from the end of chapter 4, and we have to see now how the degradation and suffering and reproach relate to chapter 6, where Moses and Aaron come in again. In verse 26 of that chapter it says, "This is that Aaron and Moses"; and then in verse 27, "this is that Moses and Aaron". Then in the next chapter we are told how old Moses was; he was eighty and Aaron was eighty-three. The Spirit of God pursues the history of these two brothers, so they should be in our minds. What we have to see now is the practical lesson for us in the vicious opposition of Satan in Pharaoh. How unreasonable he is, and how pretentious! He says in chapter 5: 2, "Who is Jehovah, to whose voice I am to hearken to let Israel go? I do not know Jehovah, neither will I let Israel go". He continues his arrogant attitude in verses 3, 4 and 5. I think we may see how this chapter in a practical way contemplates the everyday employment of the saints, young saints especially. Satan attacks us in these circumstances; we are perhaps looked down upon, belittled, brow-beaten. And in our chapter things are becoming worse and worse, no relief in sight in spite of the word from Jehovah; even Moses and Aaron come under the power of Satan in the way he attacks the saints.
A.E.H. Have you any idea why this one time, in verse 4, it is "the king of Egypt" instead of
{177}
"Pharaoh"? Is it fully identifying the position, so that there is no mistaking the opposition?
J.T. It is, I think, to stress the power against the people; to show the advantageous position of persons in this world, employers, men of money; what power they have in their hands, and how Satan uses it to oppress the saints, to cause unbelief and complaint. It is a warning to us in view of our coming out of the world. Such persons are pictured in the king of Egypt and the taskmasters: "And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying, Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore let them go and gather straw for themselves. And the number of the bricks they have made heretofore shall ye lay upon them: ye shall not diminish any of it, for they are idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God. Let them put heavier labour on the men, that they may be taken up with it, and not regard vain words. And the taskmasters of the people and their officers went out and spoke to the people, saying, Thus says Pharaoh: I will not give you straw: go ye, get yourselves straw where ye may find it; but none of your work shall be diminished. And the people were scattered abroad throughout the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw. And the taskmasters urged them, saying, Fulfil your labours, the daily work, as when there was straw. And the officers of the children of Israel, whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and it was said, Why have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick, both yesterday and today, as heretofore?" Let us notice that it is the king of Egypt and the taskmasters against the children of Israel and their officers; the position is turned against the people. It is of great importance to see this, because young people whom God has
{178}
delivered out of Egypt are often caught in this way and become complainers.
S.McC. Often turning against the ministry, I suppose, the operation of the system through Moses and Aaron, blaming the ministry in a complaining spirit.
J.T. They are blaming Moses and Aaron: "And the officers of the children of Israel saw that it stood ill with them, because it was said, Ye shall not diminish anything from your bricks, the daily work. And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood there to meet them, as they came out from Pharaoh. And they said to them, Jehovah look upon you and judge". We have to be on our guard how our spirits are on Monday after the Lord's day. Our employer is harsh, maybe, and we get overwhelmed and bitter and complaining and come home in a bad spirit. Satan is in that.
B.P. Does the need of righteousness enter into that, the idea of doing what we are commanded by our masters in a right spirit as those taken out of the world morally?
J.T. Peter helps us on this part of our subject. He instructs us to be entirely subject and non-complaining as a matter of actual righteousness in what we are told to do. Employers may be very unreasonable, but we ought to learn to overcome in such circumstances.
A.S.B. Is there something in the idea of the great brick system being carried forward from @Genesis 11? There "they had brick for stone, and they had asphalt for mortar".
J.T. Bricks are a human product -- not so durable as stone. The position here was almost impossible; what was demanded of them was almost impossible to fulfil, and when such a thing arises we had better stand still and see what God will do for us. It is better to be quiet and suffer -- Peter tells
{179}
us that. They do not suffer quietly here, their spirits are irritated and they turn against the servants. They blame the brethren.
A.E.H. "For what glory is it, if sinning and being buffeted ye shall bear it? but if, doing good and suffering, ye shall bear it, this is acceptable with God", @1 Peter 2: 20. Mr. Darby has added a footnote to "good", that it means "beneficent".
J.T. That is the passage I was thinking of. I am sure the Mondays are a real test for young people because of the character of the employers. No doubt unionism is the product of it in the world, but unionism is the very opposite to the way of God and to the Spirit of Christ.
H.G.H. The activities of God are on behalf of His people in the officers interceding for the children of Israel: "Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried to Pharaoh, saying, Why dost thou deal thus with thy bondmen?"
J.T. They are the Israelites¬ own officers, their own people. The taskmasters are higher up, responsible directly to Pharaoh; he is the king and more powerful. So that the thing is to meet it in the Spirit of Christ. It says of the Lord, that He "gave himself over into the hands of him who judges righteously", @1 Peter 2: 23. 
Rem. If my spirit is affected on Monday, it will affect the system on Monday night.
J.T. Yes; the prayer meeting is the right outlet, and relief comes in there.
L.E.S. Do you think the position is like that in @Acts 4? "And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that sighs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy servant Jesus".
J.T. Quite so. That is the right spirit in servants, those who work the work of the Lord. But this, I
{180}
think, refers to our own everyday work, such as on Mondays, and I do not think any one of us will deny it is a very real test; the devil is using our employers, the taskmasters, those high up too. Our spirits become irritated and deified and there is no testimony.
F.K.C. It says, "Christ, then, having suffered for us in the flesh, do *ye* also arm yourselves with the same mind", @1 Peter 4: 1. It is a question of our arming ourselves to meet this.
J.T. That is the idea. There are different armours: there is the armour of the mind, the armour of God and the armour of light; here it is the mind that is to be armed. It is the attitude of my mind, and I am not to be overcome but wait for God to come in. We are to wait to see what God will do after the prayer meeting. At the end chapter 5 Moses himself is distressed; so it says in chapter 6, "And Jehovah said to Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh; for by a strong hand shall he let them go, and by a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land". That may be looked for after the prayer meeting, what God will do. 
Rem. In verses 6, 7 and 8 God says, "I will", "I will", "I will".
J.T. Yes; first, in verse 2, "God spoke to Moses, and said to him, I am Jehovah. And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, as the Almighty God; but by my name Jehovah I was not made known to them". He brings Himself before Moses as the Almighty God. He is telling Moses about Himself, and a revelation is made to him. "And I established also my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, in which they were sojourners. And I have heard also the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians have forced to serve, and I have remembered my covenant. Therefore say
{181}
unto the children of Israel, I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will deliver you from their service, and I will redeem you with a stretched-out arm, and with great judgments. And I will take you to me for a people, and will be your God; and ye shall know that I, Jehovah your God, am he who bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians". That is what you had in mind, God's "I will". The meeting for prayer is really the victory meeting. In a general way the prayer meeting begins in New Zealand while it is still the Lord's day in this country and moves around finishing up in America on the Pacific coast. It is a long period and God is hearing and we shall get the answers. Those will be in these expressions, "I will".
H.B. In chapter 6 God reverts to the thought of the land.
J.T. Yes; and not only to these great thoughts including the land, but He brings in the genealogy of the tribes, first Reuben, then Simeon and then Levi. But Levi opens up a new page, a chapter of glory, the greatness attaching to the priestly family to which we all belong. The prayer meeting is linked with that.
S.McC. So no more is said as to the generations after Levi is introduced, as if the end is reached.
J.T. Levi, as it were, has all the tribes incorporated in the tribe of glory, and would link up this idea with @Deuteronomy 33 where we shall see what a tribe it is, the priestly family. Well, when are we going to enter into all this? The chapter opens up an eternal state of things to us, full of personal glory that culminates in Eleazar and Phinehas: "And Eleazar Aaron's son took one of the daughters of Putiel as wife; and she bore him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according
{182}
to their families". Phinehas has the everlasting priesthood.
A.A.T. You spoke about how we are tested by our jobs and our employers; as living in abnormal times and doing war work, meetings are likely to be missed; is that in line with what you were speaking about?
J.T. The extra work hinders development in the saints, and also the extra hours worked bring relatively larger incomes, and our cupidity is aroused by the possibility of great earnings. It is really against the priesthood. It is what God is doing that is the point. This system that we want to understand is a liberating system and God is setting it over against the system of oppression. 
Rem. If I am suffering I would recall the fact that God delivered Jacob from Laban.
J.T. Yes; Jacob does not say his wages increased ten times, but they changed ten times. That was a complaint, it was really a hardship to his mind, a good cause for unionism, but we do not want to live in that; Jacob was on low ground when he talked about his wages being changed. Christ is our great Priest above; Melchisedec is the very acme of priestly greatness and dignity.
S.McC. In @2 Corinthians 6, among the sufferings and afflictions narrated Paul injects this word: "in the Holy Spirit". Would that have a bearing on chapter 6 over against chapter 5?
J.T. Yes; that is the power of the thing. The word *in* very often means 'in the power of'. "In the Holy Spirit" means it is in that power; it is victory over against what he has been speaking about. I think this chapter ought to be in our minds over against chapter 5, as indicating the system of love, the system that God is setting up. We shall see from chapter 7 onwards that Moses is not only representative to man but he is made God to Pharaoh, and
{183}
Aaron is his prophet. The servant is made representative of God. I mention that so that we shall have it before us.
J.R.H. Another of Peter's words would link on with this, that "the Spirit of God rests upon you".
J.T. Quite so.
{184}
DIVINE SYSTEM IN EXODUS (3)
@Exodus 7: 14 - 25; @Exodus 8: 16 - 24
J.T. No doubt the brethren will bear in mind the remarks made in our previous reading with regard to chapters 5 and 6, and how the idea of a system is confirmed and seen operating effectively. We finished yesterday by reading chapter 7, verse 1, "And Jehovah said to Moses, See, I have made thee God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet". This passage is a striking confirmation of what has been said about the system that God had inaugurated in type in Egypt, the antitype being His present operations through the gospel for the deliverance of His people out of the world. He keeps Himself before us representatively here in the type. He said to Moses, "I have made thee God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet". Moses would thus be representative of God, not made 'a god', but made "God to Pharaoh". Thus God can be represented. The evidence of this in the antitype refers to Christ being God, being a divine Person, being Deity in Himself, not merely by appointment (Moses¬ place is by appointment), but in actual fact; He is a divine Person who has part in the Godhead, but is known as Man down here. In Colossians it is said, "For in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell" (@Colossians 1: 19). Then in chapter 2 it says, "For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily" (@Colossians 2: 9). So that what was in type in Egypt gives a complete representation of God, and this is seen operatively in the verses read: "And Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened: he refuseth to let the people go. Go unto Pharaoh in the morning -- behold, he will go out unto the water -- and take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him; and take in thy hand the staff
{185}
that was turned into a serpent. And say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness; but behold, hitherto thou hast not hearkened. Thus saith Jehovah: In this shalt thou know that I am Jehovah -- behold, I will smite with the staff that is in my hand upon the water which is in the river, and it shall be turned into blood". The staff which Jehovah says is in His hand is the staff that had been turned into a serpent; it is seen here in Jehovah's hand, though actually in Moses¬, showing how perfectly the idea of representation is there. It was seen in effect in Moses¬ hand, in Jehovah's hand, and in Aaron's hand.
L.E.S. Would chapter 7 be a further thought than chapter 4 in regard to Moses being God to Pharaoh? In chapter 4 it refers to Moses being God to Aaron.
J.T. Well, I suppose Moses¬ position in chapter 4 is typical, being representative of Jehovah. "And he shall speak for thee unto the people; and it shall come to pass that he shall be to thee for a mouth, and thou shalt be to him for God". There it would be 'instead of' or 'for', more qualifying the God set out in Moses; but in chapter 7 it is, "I have made thee God", not simply 'for' or 'instead of', but God Himself. The full thought would be there, and what Moses would do would be, as it were, final. It would be God operating. The former is somewhat modified and yet the same idea runs through both. Colossians is the antitype, the full idea that Christ is God. He said, "He that has seen me has seen the Father", @John 14: 9. That did not mean that the Father was there, save as one divine Person seen representatively in Another, and therefore the Son's position would be mediatorial. But in Colossians it is "all the fulness of the Godhead bodily"; that is not mediatorial, it is really Deity in Christ. In the first chapter it is "the fulness" without saying
{186}
what fulness it is, as if the word "fulness" carried the thought of Deity. But in @Colossians 2 it is more definite and personal to Christ as Man down here when the word "bodily" is added. I think that here in chapter 7 Moses is a type of Christ as having part in Deity, not simply having a mediatorial position, but God being there. "I have made thee God", not 'a god', or 'for God', or 'instead of' God, but 'God'. God is verily there; Pharaoh is made to feel that.
W.L. Does that mean that God would do nothing in regard of Pharaoh or the Egyptians apart from Moses?
J.T. That is the way it worked out. The very rod that Moses held, according to verse 17, was God's, indeed the very hand of Moses was God's hand. "In this shalt thou know that I am Jehovah -- behold, I will smite with the staff that is in my hand upon the water which is in the river"; such is the completeness of the representation that God is there.
A.E.H. Would you connect this in any way with what is current in the last few years -- that the matter of the Person of Christ has been clarified for us so that we know His part in the Deity as we did not know it before? So that we may look at what transpires on the earth now in that light as connected with the judgment here upon Egypt.
J.T. Well, hymn 181 became a sort of crucial part of the hymn book on the point. Hymn 1 [in the 1932 edition] was intended to represent the deity of Christ in Fatherhood, but it has since been shown by analysis to be somewhat defective, whereas hymn 181 [in the 1932 edition] is more accurate, conveying what is now in mind. It says in verse one: 'Wonderful the Godhead glory Shining, Saviour, in Thy face!'
{187}
Then in the last verse we have: 'Thou art greater, glorious Saviour, Than the glory Thou hast won; Thee -- the great "I AM" -- we worship, Mighty God, Eternal One!' (`181:3).
It is not 'Eternal Son', but 'Eternal One', that is the change made. 'Eternal Son' did not represent rightly the deity of Christ, but carried with it, as in the creed, the thought of inferiority in the term 'Son', whereas in truth He is in the Deity. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God", @John 1: 1. That is how the Scripture presents the truth. I think that it is, at least in figure, seen here in the word "I have made thee God to Pharaoh", not 'a god', but God Himself provisionally. "I have made thee God to Pharaoh"; so that the very rod that Moses held in his hand, (verse 17) was in the hand of Jehovah.
A.E.H. I was wondering if this statement coming just where it does in chapter 7, preceding the divine dealings with Egypt and the extricating of the people, might suggest that we might look at what is going on in the earth now in a different light. God would not take one step until this matter was cleared up. Now that it has been clarified, we may see something of what transpires in the judgment of Egypt.
J.T. I think it has explained the difference between chapter 4 and chapter 7. Moses was to be "for God" to Aaron in chapter 4, but in chapter 7 he is made God to Pharaoh.
S.McC. Would there be a link with Luke's gospel? In @Luke 9 the Lord healed the child and handed it back to the father, and it says, "And all were astonished at the glorious greatness of God". Do you think there is something similar there?
J.T. Yes, God is there. God has visited His people, so that Matthew says, "They shall call his
{188}
name Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted, 'God with us'". It was nothing less than "God with us".
H.G.H. Do the operations of Moses in chapter 7 suggest authority in connection with this system?
J.T. That should be impressed upon us, that God had come into Egypt. He reveals His name to Moses according to chapter 3: "And Moses said to God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say, What is his name? what shall I say unto them? And God said to Moses, I AM THAT I AM. And he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: I AM hath sent me unto you". Now there is a plain statement of who was there. Moses would have it brought out. It is not now a mediatorial thought, it is not God in someone, it is He, Himself. It is not simply "I AM", but "God said to Moses, I AM THAT I AM", that is what He calls Himself. The phrase, "THAT I AM", would bring out what was happening, what Moses might see or would see, but the "I AM" by itself is, we might say, like the title of Jah, it is abstract, the essential idea of Deity.
S.McC. What is the difference between the idea of "the Word" as in @John 1 and God speaking "in ... Son" in @Hebrews 1?
J.T. That latter statement alludes to Christ incarnate. @John 1: 1 - 3 does not allude to Christ incarnate, it is Christ in Deity before incarnation. In verse 14 He is seen as become flesh, and verse 4 touches on that when it says, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men". That involves that Christ had become Man amongst men. Verses 1 to 3 involve what He was before incarnation; whereas @Hebrews 1: 1 alludes to Him in incarnation. It is a question of God speaking: "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these
{189}
days has spoken to us in (the person of the) Son". It is not 'by' the Son, but 'in Son'. The truth is conveyed in the best way that translation can convey it; we must look at the Darby Translation to get the sense. In the original it is, "God ... at the end of these days has spoken to us in Son". That alludes to Christ in incarnation, but "the person of the" is inserted in brackets to give the full sense; it alludes to Him as Man, and that God is speaking in Him (the Son being a divine Person); the speaker is God Himself. (See notes in Darby Translation).
J.B. Would the beginning in @John 1 be the same as the beginning in @Genesis 1?
J.T. Well, it is the same beginning; @John 1 might be somewhat greater. 
Ques. Does this enhance the system?
J.T. It does. That is why I thought we might begin with the first verse of @Exodus 7, transferring our thoughts to the antitype, where the New Testament brings in a divine Person actually here, not only in a mediatorial sense, but actually here.
J.R.H. Why does God bring forward the deity of Christ in this great appeal to the world's system to free His people?
J.T. I think it is to carry weight into the gospel. It is a wonderful thing that God should take the position of appeal in the gospel.
F.C. In @John 8 the Lord says, "Before Abraham was, *I* am"; and then in the end of the gospel, when they seek to take Him, He says, "*I* am he", and they went away backward and fell to the ground. Would they rightly understand that God was there?
J.T. We can hardly say they understood it, but we can understand that what affected them was the presence of God. He was there.
A.H.P. The same thought is in @2 Corinthians 4, "Because it is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our
{190}
hearts for the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ".
J.T. Quite so. God shines in our hearts.
L.K. Would what follows in @Exodus 7, "and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet", enhance the divine speaking?
J.T. I think so. Of course, what is seen here is largely typical, although, as we said, God was there. The mediatorial position is seen more in Aaron, especially if you refer back to chapter 4. Aaron is able to do the same things as Moses did; he is able to use the rod of Moses, but nevertheless Jehovah, alluding to Moses¬ staff, said, "The staff that is in my hand". It was really God operating and Moses was to understand that; so that when we come to the "gnats" the magicians said, "This is the finger of God!" (@Exodus 8: 19). Truly it was, the literal action was God's. He had said to Moses, "Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy staff, and smite the dust of the earth, and it shall become gnats throughout the land of Egypt". It came from God, through Moses to Aaron. The mediatorial position was very definite there, but it was nevertheless the finger of God that was operating.
A.E.H. Your suggestion of bringing the deity of Christ into the gospel, giving weight to it, is interesting. I wonder if Peter had that in mind in chapter 4 of his first epistle: "For the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come; but if first from us, what shall be the end of those who obey not the glad tidings of God?" I suppose that is the idea there, that it is God, or the finger of God, and it must be weighty if that is so.
J.T. Well, it is important for any of us who are qualified to represent God in ministry to keep before us the ground on which we are.
L.E.S. All this would be basic in regard to the complete overthrow of the world's system. In @Luke 11: 20
{191}
the Lord brings it in, "But if by the finger of God I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God is come upon you".
J.T. I think that is right. It is the index finger that is in mind in such an operation; to use a commonplace phrase, He put His finger on the real issue. The mind is involved in the index finger. God is operating to show He is taking account of the thing; He is dealing with a particular thing just as it is.
S.McC. In regard to the two lines of thought you have been stressing concerning the Person of Christ, this matter of representation and then the thought of Deity in Him, do you view in the Person m the gospels these two lines of thought going together, or do you view them at distinct times?
J.T. I think chapter 4 is more mediatorial, that is, Aaron acting. Moses acts for God to him and Aaron understands, and the end of the chapter shows that the position was very effective because the people believed. I believe the mediatorial thought runs through the Acts in Paul's ministry, "how that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself", @2 Corinthians 5: 19. It is not simply that God was reconciling the world to Himself, but was in Christ doing it. That is mediatorial, bringing the Person of Christ into evidence, so that He is representative of grace in the system. 
Rem. The apostle continues in that scripture, "We are ambassadors therefore for Christ, God as it were beseeching by us, we entreat for Christ, Be reconciled to God".
J.T. It is not stated so strongly as to infer that God is doing it directly through us. The mediator-ship is in Christ. It is more manifest in Him than it is in any servant, even Paul. When the thought comes down to the actual servant, Paul is a servant of Christ, but he is still the minister of reconciliation.
{192}
As the statement in @Exodus 4 is somewhat modified as compared with that in chapter 7, so we come to this, that it is God Himself we are dealing with, only in "Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever". It is Christ, God Himself, with whom we are dealing, "He is the true God and eternal life".
M.O. Is that the thought in @1 Corinthians 14 where an unbeliever is brought to say, "God is indeed amongst you"?
J.T. Just so; "and thus, falling upon his face, he will do homage to God".
J.R.H. Would you liken the staff to the prophetic word bringing God in?
J.T. Yes. The staff is a symbol. This specific one that had been turned into a serpent is the very one that was in God's hand, and the very one that was in Moses¬ hand, and the very one that was in Aaron's hand, too, suggesting the Trinity you may say. Each One of the Deity is God; They are not gods, but God may be represented in any of Them. Aaron used his own staff also.
A.H.P. Do you regard Pharaoh here as suggesting the god of this world, and Moses standing before him as the thought of God operating to liberate His people from him?
J.T. Just so. Satan is an imitator, that is what the magicians represent here. Paul takes them up and names them in 2 Timothy, though they are not named here; indeed they are not mentioned by name anywhere except by Paul, to bring out that they were just imitators; he says, "Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses" (chapter 3: 8). Satan is an imitator, he observes what God does and imitates it, but adds his own foul character to what he does.
S.McC. Are you viewing the thought of the mediatorial service in chapter 4 as something in which we might have part; but the thought of "I
{193}
have made thee God to Pharaoh" in chapter 7 as exclusive to Christ in the antitype?
J.T. Yes; "whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and shall annul by the appearing of his coming", @2 Thessalonians 2: 8. That is God, God Himself.
S.McC. Peter says, "If any one speak -- as oracles of God". Would that be more in line with chapter 4?
J.T. It would be. I am glad you brought that out. Chapter 4 says, "And he shall speak for thee unto the people; and it shall come to pass that he shall be to thee for a mouth, and thou shalt be to him for God". That lay between Moses and Aaron; Aaron would speak to the people. But in chapter 7 it is, "I have made thee God to Pharaoh", so that Pharaoh is having to do with God Himself, and Aaron is the spokesman or prophet.
W.L. Is that why we do not see any failure in Moses¬ dealings with Pharaoh?
J.T. Just so. All that goes through here in regard to the plagues and dealings with Egypt is remarkably accurate; it is God's operation for the deliverance of His people, so that He ultimately says, "I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself" (chapter 19: 4). Moses and Aaron were used in all that. 
Ques. David says in @2 Samuel 7: 23, "And who is like thy people, like Israel, the one nation in the earth that God went to redeem to be a people to himself?". The word "went" there is plural. Would that be in connection with the mediatorial side?
J.T. We have the plural in a similar sense m @Genesis 1: 26: "Let us make man in our image". We might put the Trinity into it. The plural, however, is a matter of emphasis in some instances. Clearly we are entitled to put Deity into @Genesis 1: 26,
{194}
because we know the truth, God being now revealed.
A.S.B. Is all this to bring out the superiority of God's system as over against Pharaoh and his system?
J.T. Quite so. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world", @1 John 4: 4. It is the Spirit of God in detail, but it is God, and it is greater than he that is in the world, so that we are victorious from the start. 
Rem. It says in chapter 11 that Moses was very great.
J.T. It actually reads, "the man Moses". I refer to that because God would keep the man before us; and so in @Numbers 12 where he is rivalled by his brother Aaron and his sister Miriam. "But the man Moses was very meek", it says. God would bring in these thoughts to keep our eyes on the real Man whom He is using.
H.G.H. In chapter 7: 16 God is referred to as "Jehovah the God of the Hebrews"; whereas in verse 1 it is, "I have made thee God to Pharaoh". Would you say a word about that?
J.T. It does not seem that God wished to convey that Moses was God in any general sense; he was God to Pharaoh, but there is no suggestion that he was God to the Hebrews. He was *for* God to Aaron, which is a more limited thought, to make the thing effective; but God Himself in the absolute sense is the God of His people. So He says, "I am ... the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob" (chapter 3: 6) In verse 16 it says, "Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness". God is now putting Himself forward in regard of His people, they are precious in His sight. He had previously been telling Moses what
{195}
He thinks of them, how He is coming down to deliver them, and how He intends to be worshipped by them, and hence He had sent to Pharaoh saying, "Let my son go, that he may serve me. And if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will kill thy son, thy firstborn" (@Exodus 4: 23). That is, God keeping Himself before Pharaoh, He is telling Pharaoh in the strongest terms that He has before Him an object in the relationship of son. All this is very precious, but you could not apply that to Moses. The application of the thought of God to Moses is very limited, just for a provisional purpose. In the abstract it is God Himself. "The Lord our God is one Lord" (@Deuteronomy 6: 4) and again, "In that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one", @Zechariah 14: 9. That is kept before Israel always; so that it is the service of God by His son that is in mind, and the crucial point was to get Israel out of Egypt in view of this. God is saying, so to speak, to make the position as effective as possible, I will make the mediator God; I will invest him with divine prerogatives so as to express power.
A.E.H. In our contact with the authorities in these days, do you think the full position requires that there should be conveyed to them in some sense that they are having to do with God as well as with us? In addition to our being able to say, He is our God, they should have the sense in their own consciences that they are having to do with God.
J.T. That is so. God is brought to them in the saints, in the young men who go before the Boards. On the other hand, the Boards represent God, but that keeps you humble and lowly, for they are God's ministers for good. So the position is remarkable, how God presents Himself in the person of the young brother who is before the Board; and on the other hand, in that tribunal he has himself to do with God in his conscience as a believer in Jesus.
{196}
That gives him a moral greatness the Board could not have. 
Ques. What about "the God of the Hebrews"?
J.T. That means that the people are under reproach, yet God is there and is Himself their Leader.
F.M. They are not looked at as Moses¬ people, but as God's people.
J.T. Moses was an Israelite, and they were Israelites. But this matter of clothing persons with authority is important in Scripture. In @Acts 10: 38 it speaks of "Jesus who was of Nazareth: how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power; who went through all quarters doing good". He went about doing good, for God was with Him; the anointing represents the authority of God. It was not simply God Himself doing good, but God was with Him as He was doing good; that is another matter, a mediatorial matter.
F.C. Why is Moses¬ attitude, the stand that he is to take, emphasized here? "Go unto Pharaoh in the morning -- behold, he will go out unto the water -- and take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him".
J.T. "Go unto Pharaoh in the morning". There are a good many mornings spoken of in Exodus. "Behold, he will go out unto the water". He has just risen on this morning in the sense of his own greatness; the river is his, he is the big man in Egypt. The river is the support of Egypt and, according to his thought, it is his river. The prophets tell us that that would be the language of his heart, that the river is his, whereas truly it is God's. Egypt represents the resources of this world, man having them under his hand, and Pharaoh is seen here in his own greatness. God is telling Moses to make due allowance for that. "And take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him": 'Moses, you are not to be servile now; you are not a god,
{197}
but God. I am qualifying you with that, I am making you all-powerful. You stand with that in your mind, and if you do you will be victorious. What can he do against you?' "And take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him; and take in thy hand the staff that was turned into a serpent". That is the weapon he carried, that staff of Moses¬, which in another sense, represented his experience. He was not just any Israelite chosen to do this work; his staff represents his experience. It has been turned into a serpent and turned back into a staff. God has secured a Man in Christ; He has secured a Man in this way and He is all-powerful.
A.E.H. Does it work out in my experience that I learn what it is to come under the control of God, and thus know something of the features of manhood as seen in Christ, man taken up in Christ?
J.T. Just so. You are full of the thought when preaching the gospel. So that Romans begins: "Paul, bondman of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, separated to God's glad tidings, (which he had before promised by his prophets in holy writings) concerning his Son (come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead) Jesus Christ our Lord" (@Romans 1: 1 - 4). Your mind is immediately directed to Christ in the gospel, it is the gospel of God concerning His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
A.A.T. It says (verse 16), "And say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness". May we think of that service as the service of God eventually?
J.T. Certainly; it enhances all that He had been saying to Moses. Aaron coming into it represents the humanity of Christ more in His compassion and grace in the system thus set up, but what God has in mind is to have sons. At the Jordan He announced
{198}
from heaven, "*Thou* art my beloved Son" (@Luke 3: 22), and then again, "This is my beloved Son", @Matthew 3: 17. He is God's beloved Son, known to Himself, but known to others also. God is going to carry on in Him, and in carrying on in Him He is going to have sons, the service of sons; and that enters into God's delight in Christ. God is taking up humanity in sons. He has delivered them out of Egypt to serve Him. 
Rem. These sons must be brought into liberty.
J.T. That is the idea. He is going to take them out of the world, He is going to deliver them out of Egypt.
R.A. You mentioned that Pharaoh had just risen. What had you in mind?
J.T. A man would be at his best in vigour after his night's rest. "My river is mine", he would say, according to Ezekiel. What a man he was! How inflated he would be! He had already said to Moses, according to chapter 5: 2, "Who is Jehovah, to whose voice I am to hearken to let Israel go? I do not know Jehovah, neither will I let Israel go". That is the inflated character of the man, the god of this world. Satan is not only called the god of this world, he is called the prince of it. I suppose Pharaoh would be like a prince here; Egypt is his kingdom, the Nile is his river. He cared nothing for God, that is the position. Moses had to meet that, and this is how he is to do it. He is to stand in front of him with the staff in his hand that had been turned into a serpent, and the word is again, "And say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee". Moses is not calling attention to himself as God, he is calling attention to God, but he has it in his soul that he is made God to Pharaoh, and that he is for God to Aaron. "Let my people go", the word is, "that they may serve me in the wilderness; but behold, hitherto thou hast not hearkened. Thus saith Jehovah: In this shalt thou
{199}
know that I am Jehovah -- behold, I will smite with the staff that is in my hand upon the water which is in the river, and it shall be turned into blood". That is to say, the real power is going out through Moses¬ hand, but it is God's hand. 
Rem. God says to Moses, "Say unto Aaron, Take thy staff, and stretch out thy hand upon the waters of the Egyptians"; it is Aaron who used the staff.
J.T. That is what we have been talking about. There are three ideas: God Himself is using the staff, but Moses¬ hand is the actual hand, that is the second thing; the third thing is that Aaron is the immediate vessel or instrument for the use of the staff. He is the priest, as if God is modifying things. This is not the final judgment, it is not like the book of Revelation, it is grace. Christianity is grace towards men -- kings, or whatever they may be. It is Aaron that is lifting up the staff: "and Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah had commanded; and he lifted up the staff". That is Aaron. The point is that in figure the Trinity is in the operation. The "he" you have to follow; who is the "he"? Well, abstractly it is God, but concretely it is Aaron, because the actual vessel is to be gracious, and Aaron represents that side. He is a modifier; so the word of God comes through Moses in chapter 4, but it comes out in grace through Aaron. Grace comes through the priest, which thought would attach to Aaron in principle, and of course that is of great importance in our service. The more we come into contact with men, the more we realize the skill that is needed. We are to carry the sense of God's authority, but you consider the character of the man you have to deal with. The gospels and the epistles show how the service is to be carried oh. Take a man like Cornelius, see how graciously he was dealt with; while Simon Magus was dealt with harshly, no grace at all. "Thy money go with thee to destruction",
{200}
Peter said. So with Bar-jesus -- he was dealt with in the harshest possible way: "O full of all deceit and all craft: son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness; wilt thou not cease perverting the right paths of the Lord?". So that we are to learn how to deal with men. That is why we have Moses and Aaron; sometimes Aaron is mentioned first, sometimes God speaks directly to him. It is a question of levitical understanding, how we are to deal with men, to know what is there, to know what to say to them, how to speak to them.
R.A. This would be man in his bigness. You were speaking of Pharaoh in his full vigour rising up in his full power. I was thinking how the Lord overcame the Pharisees, the strength of the enemy in the religious man directed against the strength of God.
J.T. What has been said should be borne in mind. We are now here in the last days seeking to serve men; it is the gospel period yet, and we are to carry on the gospel service, however feebly. We are to bring into it the original principles that were inaugurated. Things come out in a modified way in a priest. Luke is the great priestly gospel and also the great evangelical gospel.
W.L. Would you say that God's dealings in Egypt are governmental rather than judicial, in view of what He has before Him in the extrication of the people?
J.T. Well, it is mingled with grace, as already remarked. The gospel is the approach by God to men; He approaches men in priestly grace. As I was saying, we get many examples in the New Testament of how men are met in grace.
L.E.S. Will you say a word as to @Isaiah 19: 25? "Whom Jehovah of hosts will bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance!" That chapter seems to deal with Egypt in the future.
{201}
J.T. Well, that would be a matter of understanding the passage. According to the quotation you made, God then had Egypt in mind as in favour. He was not going to destroy it then, and earlier He warned His people not to be ungracious to the Egyptians; they had been bondmen there. He had a gracious bearing towards them. So you find here that as the plagues proceeded the Egyptians themselves began to fear, showing that the plagues are accompanied by the administration of grace as well as of judgment.
L.E.S. I was wondering whether that would not work out in relation to the preaching of the gospel?
J.T. I believe it does. We must be historical in considering levitical principles; so that whilst the commission was to "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation", we must observe principles that came in subsequently as governing the service. The East was not much in mind, and yet it was part of the creation, but we have no record that the twelve journeyed towards the East. They laboured amongst the Jews and proselytes that came from there, but Paul went directly to the West; so that other principles came in and the gospel has been, we may say, entirely restricted to the western nations and their outgoings. But God has not forgotten the eastern nations; presently there will be a gospel to them, as we may see in @Revelation 14.
W.R. Stephen had history in mind in @Acts 7.
J.T. He had indeed, he proceeded on this line. He says, "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham". What a fine start in a spiritual historical account!
A.E.H. It is in God's mind that the knowledge of Himself should become general in the world; God is taking these people out of Egypt in view of that. Do
{202}
we in a historical sense get light on these plagues as linking on with the book of Revelation?
J.T. There is no doubt that the book of Revelation helps in the illustration of the signs, because they were effective. The Egyptians, that is, their leaders, were destroyed. The book of Revelation contemplates finality in judgment. The earlier plagues are more modified, applying to the present time. So that we have the plague of lice or gnats, representing life; they are not withdrawn. The flies and the frogs and the others are, but not the plague of lice, the plague that is called by the scribes of Egypt "the finger of God". They are living, they are not withdrawn, I believe they run right on to the end. It is a gracious thing that God has put a living people, only under reproach, right in the midst of the people of the world at the present time. I believe the rulers are all modified in their conduct by the presence of the gnats, who are not only despised but also very uncomfortable people to have around; yet their influence is good.
A.A.T. A brother who has a conscience, you mean, is a gnat?
J.T. I think so; we are very uncomfortable people for worldlings to deal with, but they would not be without us. I do not believe the leaders would be without the brethren though they may make them uncomfortable.
J.R.H. What does this turning of the water into blood indicate?
J.T. We cannot go into all the plagues, we have not time. But as seen here blood is a gruesome thing, a terrible thing; it is death as God allows it to come among men in this way. The book of Revelation alludes to it in this sense in chapter 16: 3.
S.McC. Would these plagues carry a certain form of teaching in regard to the truth and the operation
{203}
of the system, teaching that bears upon us, God's people, and our deliverance from Egypt?
J.T. They would. The waters are seen turned into blood. Water is refreshing in itself; Christianity is refreshing, but it is turned into blood according to the book of Revelation. The refreshing power of water is taken away from men and turned into a foul thing. I believe it alludes to apostasy. The Lord says, "Her children will I kill with death", @Revelation 2: 23. That is not physical death, it is moral death. 
Ques. "And has insulted the Spirit of grace", (@Hebrews 10: 29), would that be this idea? The blood instead of expressing vitality in men is turned into death.
J.T. It is something like that. What is refreshing and preservative and satisfying is changed. Possibly you might apply it to Christianity, refreshing to the whole earth, as it is now in measure, but to be turned into a state of moral death. It would be an apostate condition. The question of life is most interesting; God is continuing the idea of life throughout this whole dispensation, be it a gnat, or whatever it may be; but people are made to feel it as disquieting. It is not the finger of the devil; it is "the finger of God". People do not care about us; they do not care for the Christians, they are ashamed to be identified with them and yet at times they cannot help speaking well about them, in some cases very well.
R.H. Would Pilate's wife be representative of this? She suffered many things on account of Christ. She said, "Have thou nothing to do with that righteous man; for I have suffered today many things in a dream because of him".
J.T. Quite so. She was in accord with the Holy Sufferer; He was suffering, and she suffered many things on account of Him. I do not think people
{204}
today are suffering for that same reason, they are suffering because the gnats make them suffer. They are suffering from what the gnats do. They are on the people; the preposition is "on". "All the dust of the land became gnats" (chapter 8: 17). Think how many there were!
V.H.C. Is there any sequence in these judgments? First of all the staff is turned into a serpent, and then there is blood, which, as you say, is moral death; and then live frogs and gnats. Is there any connection?
J.T. The staff was turned into a serpent before Moses; that gave it its character. It did not remain a serpent. Moses took it back by the tail under divine direction and it became a staff again in his hand, and that is what it is now. It is man recovered, and Moses is operating on that principle with the Egyptians, that man is to be recovered. The Egyptians as a whole were not recovered, but some of them were, and many of them will be in a later day, as the passage read in @Isaiah 19 shows. The rod Moses and Aaron are using represents man taken out of Satan's power. The Egyptians are not yet taken out of Satan's power, but some of them will be. That is the principle of our dispensation. What I am saying is in chapter 4. The rod was turned into a serpent on the ground before Moses; it is that which is in his hand now and he smites the waters with it and turns them to blood.
V.H.C. What is in mind in chapter 7: 10, "And Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and did so, as Jehovah had commanded; and Aaron cast down his staff before Pharaoh, and before his bondmen, and it became a serpent"?
J.T. That was for a sign, but it had previously been turned into a serpent and turned back into a staff. It was a recovered man God was using, who
{205}
was His instrument. This sign here, the staff being turned into a serpent, was for Pharaoh's eyes. That is not a plague. The first plague was the blood.
V.H.C. That is what I want made clear: the blood comes in as moral death, and then come in the frogs and gnats -- life.
J.T. Frogs are repulsive things. It is suggestive of the condition in which man is. See how they go into their very rooms, into their ovens, how God could bring home to them what sin effects in a man. The rod had been a serpent, but as Moses carried it, it was representative of man recovered. So the frogs are number two of the plagues, the gnats are number three. Gnats represent life in the midst of the Egyptians, that is, the Israelites were really living, abstractly anyway; so in chapter 8, that plague is said to be "the finger of God". There is no preamble before the introduction of that plague. "And Jehovah said to Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy staff, and smite the dust of the earth, and it shall become gnats throughout the land of Egypt. And they did so; and Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff, and smote the dust of the earth, and there arose gnats on man and on beast: all the dust of the land became gnats throughout the land of Egypt. And the scribes did so with their sorceries, to bring forth gnats; but they could not. And the gnats were on man and on beast" (chapter 8: 16 - 18). It is a very big idea, as if God would say, I will keep life before men's eyes. These are men, they are living people, not only physically living -- in a sense the frogs were that -- but gnats represent life in a moral and spiritual sense, they are called "the finger of God". There is no suggestion of the finger of God in the frogs.
J.R.H. Anything on the side of moral death and uncleanness, as seen in the water turned into blood, and the frogs, could be imitated by the scribes; but
{206}
when it comes to life it was beyond them, they could not do anything.
J.T. They told Pharaoh that. And there is no removal of this plague, the gnats are left; that is grace. In the antitype God leaves living people among dead people, among apostates, or at least people who do not believe. Then in the next paragraph -- "And Jehovah said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh -- behold, he will go out to the water -- and say to him, Thus saith Jehovah, Let my people go, that they may serve me. For, if thou do not let my people go, behold, I will send dog-flies upon thee, and upon thy bondmen, and upon thy people, and into thy houses; and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of dog-flies, and also the ground on which they are. And I will distinguish in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no dog-flies shall be there; that thou mayest know that I Jehovah am in the midst of the land". He does not say, There shall be no lice there -- that plague is living, and the Egyptians know it; they called it "the finger of God". It is really a mercy that there are such people as this type suggests at the present time.
It is a testimony that there are living people moving about amongst those who are not believers, or only half-believers. We have real people in the gnats, so God says, I am making a difference, "And I will put a separation between my people and thy people; to-morrow shall this sign be". Notice that word "separation", as if to say, The gnats are not to be withdrawn. Why should they not be separate? And why should we not be so? Why should we not have fellowship meetings among ourselves? We want to be separate, we are not of them. "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord", @2 Corinthians 6: 17. God says, I am putting a distinction upon them by redemption;
{207}
He is identifying Himself with a living people.
L.E.S. There is constant testimony from God's people over against the world.
J.T. That is most important. They are not literally removed from the world, but God is identifying Himself with them.
L.E.S. So that the young men themselves, as having stood, maintaining a good conscience, become a constant source of concern to the authorities. 
Rem. A young brother kneels down in prayer in the camp and others are disturbed.
J.T. Yet someone might get light and help through that. I am sure that is the actual position.
F.M. It is something like the wheat and tares growing together?
J.T. Well, yes, as being together in the world, only that here God's people are separated in Goshen; there is no death there, the plagues did not touch them. 
Rem. Stephen's testimony to the Israelites made Saul uncomfortable. It was hard for him to kick against the pricks.
J.T. Just so.
{208}
DIVINE SYSTEM IN EXODUS (4)
@Exodus 12: 1 - 6, 2: 1 - 28; @Exodus 13: 17 - 22
J.T. Our subject is the divine system as set out typically in the book of Exodus, operating there for the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, and operating today for the deliverance of God's people out of the world. We noted particularly in our previous readings the component parts of the system -- Moses and Aaron in chapter 4, and in chapter 6 the personnel or elements enlarged on in the increase in the priestly family. Love was noted as entering into the system, seen in Moses and Aaron being brothers, and particularly in Aaron as being a man of affection. Aaron had the second place although he was older than Moses by three years; he was therefore at a certain disadvantage, which love would enable him to overcome; and in general it did overcome, although there was a certain rivalry seen later, not only between him and Moses but between him and Miriam and Moses. That is to say, Aaron and Miriam took issue with Moses in the spirit of rivalry, but love prevailed so that the service proceeded. We noted how the combined services of Moses and Aaron led to worship in the people in chapter 4. We see it here again in verse 27 of chapter 12, as Moses outlined the passover: "Ye shall say, It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses. And the people bowed their heads and worshipped".
Then in chapter 7 we saw how the system was augmented in Jehovah making Moses God to Pharaoh, and Aaron his prophet. The plagues are clearly introduced to bring out the power that was there in the system. God Himself is there, using through Moses¬ hand the very rod that had been
{209}
turned into a serpent and restored. This is the staff which Moses was to use, and Aaron too. God Himself also used it for the deliverance of His people. The deliverance of the people is kept in view throughout chapter 4; Israel is called God's son, to be released by Pharaoh to serve God. That is kept in view throughout, but Pharaoh is seen in chapter 5 as in opposition and in a defiant, rebellious attitude. He says, "Who is Jehovah?", utterly ignoring the God of whom Moses was speaking, the One who said, "I AM", God Himself. The light of God Himself is in Moses¬ heart and in Aaron's heart, and they are set up in that light in the power of God who is with them. The plagues are seen as signs but as conveying light too. They are not to destroy Egypt but to break it down, and at the same time to enlighten the people that they may get the benefit of the light in the plagues. They were intended to break Egypt down, weakening but not destroying it; at the same time there was an evidence of God's grace in that He allowed Moses to intercede for Pharaoh. There was thus a gracious side to the position, God having in mind that any who were at all affected by it might recognise Him and obey Him.
Ultimately the plagues reached their end and chapter 12 shows that end. It is the beginning of time for Israel, but not for Egypt; God is not beginning times and seasons for Egypt. He makes them for His people. He divides time for His people, especially in relation to service, not only into days but into years. These years are to be filled up in His service. So that what we have come to now in this chapter is constitutional. There are elements to build up His people, not only in food but in clothing. Their going out was not to be in poverty, they were to be set up in wealth. "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the
{210}
first month of the year to you" (verse 2). So that we are entering not only on deliverance from Egypt but on a new era, an era belonging to God and His people.
S.R.McC. Has this year in mind the festive year rather than the solar year?
J.T. Yes. It is a festive time and the year is to be full of feasts, governed by that idea, characterised by feasts that are governed by heaven. There is also the solar and lunar idea; and it is an agricultural year, governed by earth in the sense of vegetable life and fruitfulness. It makes way for the work of God in things.
A.E.H. John the baptist recognised the need of decrease on his side and increase on the side of what was coming in in lamb character.
J.T. From God's standpoint there must be increase in His people. John the baptist tells who must increase: "He must increase, but I must decrease", @John 3: 30. There is the increase of Christ in His people, and the increase of the body. That is an element that we must keep before us too, and it goes with the subjective or vegetable idea -- what comes from the earth. It is suggestive of what is subjective. The sun, moon and stars are objective. The earth sometimes has the mother character, the productive character. Our chapter begins with the beginning of months, the month Abib, which alludes to fruitfulness. The corn has just come up. That is in itself a guide for *time*, because certain cereals come at different times; and while the heavenly bodies are objective the earth is dependent on the heat and light of the sun for its functioning.
H.G.H. Does this chapter suggest that there should be a definite beginning to our spiritual history? "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months".
{211}
J.T. Yes, that is what I was thinking, leading up not only to relief through the Lord Jesus in the gospel but also to the work of the Spirit, which is collateral with it. It must be, or life would soon die out. 
Rem. God says, "Israel is my son, my firstborn ... Let my son go, that he may serve me".
J.T. People may multiply rapidly, but God's thought is the personal idea -- a whole nation viewed from the standpoint of family relations, implying sons and hence names. The purpose of God culminates in this; He has predestinated us unto sonship through Jesus Christ to Himself. That is in mind in chapter 4 and should never be lost sight of.
R.H. Does the "head" of months, according to the footnote in verse 2 (see the Darby Translation note in @Exodus 12: 2) have any bearing on this?
J.T. This month has a leading or first place, therefore it is the dominating month of the year. The sun does in a sense determine it, but rather the name "Abib", given to it later, which signifies, "The month the corn ripens" (see the Darby Translation note in @Exodus 13: 4). The name denotes vegetable life, especially at a time when the earth is functioning. Seedtime is when the earth functions in fruitfulness.
L.E.S. The collective position is in view here, denoted by the words "assembly" and "congregation".
J.T. The word "assembly" is to be noted. It has a great place here; it represents the unity of the congregation viewed as one whole.
L.E.S. There is a distinction between the two thoughts. 'Assembly' is the congregation looked at as a moral whole, a corporate person before God (see footnote, @Exodus 12: 3).
J.T. That is very expressive -- so many persons together to be viewed as a corporate person. It is common in political matters. The word "congregation"
{212}
is so many persons each having responsibility of his own. So that the assembly of God at Corinth is the idea of a moral whole; the assembly is taken account of by itself: "we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf", @1 Corinthians 10: 17.
J.R.H. Would 2 Timothy lead up to the thought of congregation? Our individual responsibility leads to the taking up of the position. The Corinthian position is the idea of the assembly.
J.T. It would, in a time like this. Where there is breakdown we must go back to the beginning and begin with a remnant, but the original divine thought remains. 2 Timothy enables us to reach it, so that we do not remain individuals but come back to a greater idea, or we could never have the breaking of bread or meetings like these.
W.L. Is it significant that Moses was able to talk to all the assembly of Israel? None are left out of this matter.
J.T. God has always all His people in mind. In the addresses to the assemblies, especially Philadelphia, God has all the saints in mind and always uses assembly terms. It is that they may "know that I have loved thee". 
Ques. Why is the ministry here for a household?
J.T. It is to work out the local position. 1 Corinthians contemplates the local and the general positions. The local position is in the opening word, "to the assembly of God ... in Corinth". That is the local position and it has to be reached in Corinth. The Lord said He had much people in that city. The household thought is hardly touched on in Corinthians in either epistle, but it is found elsewhere. Baptism enters into the matter, it is in mind in a universal way in chapter 10 where they are all baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea. Household baptism is to take place in view of the
{213}
local position. Corinthians contemplates not only the local but the general position; the local comes first, but how are the saints at Corinth to reach the universal idea? Paul says, "Christ has not sent me to baptise, but to preach glad tidings"; but, he says, I did baptise some. This means that Christians do baptise, but they are not baptists.
A.E.H. Would there be a weakness in the local position if there is not a united front in connection with baptism?
J.T. Yes. The household involves baptism, and so in Acts the first to introduce the household idea is Paul. It leads up to his doctrine. He was not sent to baptise, like John, but he used baptism. It was generally households he baptised. In the second scripture we read there is the explanation that is to be passed down to the children. They are to ask about this feast: "And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say to you, What mean ye by this service? that ye shall say, It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses", @Exodus 12: 26, 27. Paul brings that into his ministry at Corinth, not allowing baptism to cast a shade over his ministry; he was greater than a baptist. There is no such thing as a baptist in Christianity. John was the only one who was a baptist in his ministry, and baptism had its place; Paul recognized that, but like all Old Testament matters it was not perfect. There had been only the baptism of John hitherto, and that was not perfect, so Paul incorporated it into his own service in a limited way. The Lord did not send him to do it. However, he did baptize certain ones: "I baptised also the house of Stephanas; for the rest I know not if I have baptised any other. For Christ has not sent me to baptise", @1 Corinthians 1: 16, 17. The thought of worthy brethren is carried through in
{214}
the house of this man Stephanas; his name means 'crown'.
S.McC. Is this word in verse 3 as to the assembly of Israel to be viewed as abstract in the mind of God regarding them, or rather in connection with the work of God in them?
J.T. Both things are true. God has in mind that He would have a son. The word would be figurative, but it would mean they were not only to be delivered out of Egypt but set up in liberty inwardly by His own work in them. Deuteronomy brings out the thought in the statement, "ye are sons of Jehovah your God". Moses said they were going into the land as sons; it was to be the corporate idea.
J.A.T. Paul's exhortation to the Corinthians, "that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion", would bear on this point.
J.T. Quite so. He introduced the matter of unity immediately. The worst thing he had to deal with in Corinth was in the first chapter; it was disunity, broken conditions amongst the brethren. So that through the ninth verse what is presented is the objective side. You have the position set before them. It says in verse 4, "I thank my God always about you, in respect of the grace of God given to you in Christ Jesus"; -- that is objective only, abstract truth -- "that in everything ye have been enriched in him, in all word of doctrine, and all knowledge, (according as the testimony of the Christ has been confirmed in you,)" -- not 'to you' -- "so that ye come short in no gift". All this is abstract truth; it is a question of the Spirit bringing gift in. Paul goes on, "Awaiting the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall also confirm you to the end, unimpeachable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord".
Now that is an introduction to the epistle from
{215}
the divine side. Verse 10 begins an exhortation. Paul comes down to actual facts involving division among them, "Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and that there be not among you divisions" Where all the members have each its own place they make a whole, and those who have broken away are to be restored to the one complete whole by his word. And so the apostle proceeds, "But that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion. For it has been shown to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of the house of Chloe, that there are strifes among you. But I speak of this, that each of you says, *I* am of Paul, and *I* of Apollos, and *I* of Cephas, and *I* of Christ. Is the Christ divided? has Paul been crucified for you? or have ye been baptised unto the name of Paul? I thank God that I have baptised none of you, unless Crispus and Gaius, that no one may say that I have baptised unto my own name. Yes, I baptised also the house of Stephanas; for the rest I know not if I have baptised any other. For Christ has not sent me to baptise, but to preach glad tidings". Now this passage confirms what we have said, that divisions existed in the meeting and Paul brings in the matter of baptism. In relation to that, he says that he has baptised certain brethren and also the house of Stephanas. In his ministry baptism had a place, but in it Paul had the assembly in mind; the households of the saints are intended to contribute to the assembly; and this typical chapter that we have before us in Exodus is constitutional, to build them up in the truth and last throughout the dispensation in view of the children.
A.E.H. These two households mentioned -- those of Chloe and Stephanas -- would definitely link on with chapter 12 of Exodus. Both are on the line of bringing in the lamb. I was thinking of the moral
{216}
elements of the system that you are suggesting to us, as seen in the apostle himself, and the divine lamb-like characteristics that mark him in his relations with the saints. The households of Chloe and Stephanas would stand together in bringing Paul in to Corinth on this line.
J.T. That helps, showing how he persisted in his efforts to have local conditions right in Corinth. In this he was assisted by Chloe; and then we are told in the last chapter of the first epistle that the house of Stephanas is the first-fruits of Achaia: "(ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the saints for service), that *ye* should also be subject to such, and to every one joined in the work and labouring. But I rejoice in the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus; because *they* have supplied what was lacking on your part" (verses 15 - 17). Both households are supporting Paul in his efforts at Corinth.
F.M. Baptised households would produce a suitable atmosphere for the reception of Paul's ministry.
J.T. Quite so. These households were contributing to his efforts in bringing about right local conditions. This question of the local and general has already been raised amongst us and that is what we are dealing with now, how the one enters into the other. Chapter 12 of Exodus contemplates the need of constitution. You get food here.
S.R.McC. Would you link up the two households of the midwives (@Exodus 1: 21) with the households at Corinth?
J.T. Yes, they are on the same line; and there are others too. Even some of the Egyptians were affected, as we have already noted, and supported Moses. It is said that Jehovah directed Pharaoh to look after his cattle before the plague of hail. That is mercy. "And now send, and secure thy cattle,
{217}
and all that thou hast in the field: all the men and the cattle that are found in the field, and are not brought home -- on them the hail shall come down, and they shall die. He that feared the word of Jehovah among the bondmen of Pharaoh made his bondmen and his cattle flee into the houses", @Exodus 9: 19, 20. That is very beautiful; the plague is not altogether punitive. The plagues are typical of the present time in which God is seeking to deliver people out of the world -- those viewed as ready for conversion. God has that in mind.
L.E.S. In @Acts 16 the jailer and his house would be contributory to the whole idea.
J.T. Quite so; in a marked way he was taken out of the enemy camp. Paul preached in a most effective way, not simply to save the household but as contributory to the assembly. 
Rem. The third verse of our chapter says, "Speak unto all the assembly of Israel, saying, On the tenth of this month let them take themselves each a lamb, for a father's house, a lamb for a house". The words "assembly" and "house" are both in the same verse there.
J.T. Exactly. Follow that through to verses 26 and 27 already alluded to: "And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say to you, What mean ye by this service? that ye shall say, It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt". The answer is that God passed over the houses in Egypt; but when they came to the Red Sea the great thought of baptism, the universal thought, is seen. They are all baptised in the cloud and in the sea; so that we may see how the local character of the teaching became enlarged when they went into the land. Fruitfulness would have part in the matter of time. Time has not the same force in the wilderness as in the land, there is no objective in the
{218}
wilderness. It is a land not sown. There is no help toward meditation, no help toward life in a subjective sense. As soon as we get into the land the Spirit is contemplated -- something is going on and we can say, Something is happening here; we have better times than we used to have.
H.B. In @Deuteronomy 16: 9 it says, "From the beginning of putting the sickle into the corn shalt thou begin to count seven weeks". They could not count on that basis in the wilderness.
J.T. There was no sickle and no corn in the wilderness; there we have to count on the sun, but in the land we count on the subjective condition in the meeting.
S.McC. It was in abeyance in the wilderness.
J.T. Well, they had the passover; but there was little but death in the wilderness. Six hundred thousand people died in the space of forty years, and yet God never lost sight of His own thoughts for His people in view of their service to Him.
S.McC. In the antitype does that suggest that in the circumstances in which we are placed in the wilderness there is not much except as we lay hold of the purpose of God and His thoughts for us? That is the way life is rightly entered upon.
J.T. There was not much time for contemplation in the wilderness -- only eleven days if they had gone straight through -- not much time. Time is the most valuable thing we have and should be utilized. The extent of the journeying was lengthened to forty years, but it was a wandering time. They had no end in view, but God was with them nevertheless. There was no seed time and harvest. We get seed time and harvest in Genesis and this was never lost sight of. But what we are at now is a basic constitution, we have to begin building up a constitution as soon as we move out of Egypt. It was unleavened bread they ate; they were enjoined
{219}
to keep the feast of unleavened bread and by force of circumstances they did. That was their food. My constitution is not built up on the world. Unleavened means there was no sin in the food; that is the idea in this chapter.
A.P. The fact that "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us" should help anyone having difficulty as to household baptism.
J.T. The year of the passover is the beginning of time for the believer's constitution, and what good is time without constitution in men? So that the children are in mind particularly in this chapter, especially in the antitype; even literally they are in mind here. Unleavened bread means that they are not fed on novels or anything of that character. They are to be kept from such food assiduously -- by force of circumstances here; but subsequently by the command governing the feast of unleavened bread, enforcing it by authority. It is one thing to be held by force of circumstances and another to be held by the will of God directly. 
Ques. The question the children ask is on positive lines; not, Why cannot I do this or that? but, What mean ye by this service? Is that the way we should bring up our children?
J.T. That is so; the children are built up. The same type of questioning comes out in Canaan to show the scope of the truth.
L.E.S. Do you think that where faith operates in our households there would be the recognition of something there for God? It was "each according to the measure of his eating".
J.T. The manna contemplates constitution, not simply that we are kept alive. Being kept alive does not mean building up the constitution, but this is constitutional.
L.E.S. "And if the household be too small for a lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house
{220}
take it according to the number of the souls; each according to the measure of his eating shall ye count for the lamb".
J.T. That is remarkable. The word "neighbour" there is to help as to the local assembly; it does not suggest the universal character of the assembly. It is the local character that is in mind here. You go to your neighbour and ask him to share your lamb, that is, it is a question of the will of God, the mind of God. The neighbourly spirit is promoted in this. That would build us up constitutionally. The children are in what they are eating.
J.R.H. It might well be said, "*Our* passover, Christ".
J.T. Exactly, that is in mind here: "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed", @1 Corinthians 5: 7.
A.E.H. It is noticed in the social contacts of the brethren in their houses when there are no meetings going on, that it is very difficult to keep conversation and intercourse on right lines. Is that lack of constitution? Could it be traced to deficiency in connection with the passover?
J.T. That is perhaps how we reach the truth here. What does go on in our houses? Ultimately the children have to stand by themselves, and then it is a question of constitution. Things happening amongst the children are terrible; hardly a family is immune, and I think it is the want of the passover and the feast of unleavened bread. That kind of food is to become common, to be used all the time; it was seven days of unleavened bread. 
Ques. How do we partake of the passover in our households?
J.T. It is a question of where the children begin, they begin where the parents have been. One generation passes away and another comes. God is working something out and the parental and childhood idea is constantly in mind. The many terrible things
{221}
that are happening can all be traced back to the early youth of the persons and to the household conditions.
L.E.S. We need to hold our children right from the outset. It was "according to the number of the souls; each according to the measure of his eating". Right from the outset the children are to be held. Sometimes we make allowances because they are very young.
J.T. We need to account for the very youngest. In the use of the manna the very youngest were included; they are included today in the rationing.
R.H. When it says, "When your children shall say to you, What mean ye by this service?" does it imply that as we move on this line our children will say it?
J.T. Exactly. They will want to know as being built up constitutionally. Every parent knows you must build up the children by the food they eat.
F.K.C. The people bow their heads and worship as the children are brought into the matter -- the fact that the households are safe; God has passed over them.
J.T. That is how the matter stands. The elements of the system are outstanding in the ministers, and they are seen in this section as recognised and revered by the people. Their ministry is such as to affect the people. The ministry might be to blame on occasion, but it is not to blame here; God had given plenty of matter to Moses, and ability to Aaron, so both were supplied in the ministry, and in chapter 4 it is said the effect of the ministry through Moses and Aaron was that the people bowed their heads and worshipped. From verse 21 of chapter 12 it is not Aaron speaking but Moses, and the effect of Moses¬ speaking is that the people bowed their heads and worshipped. Notice that Aaron is not here as a minister, he is not mentioned in the
{222}
speaking. From verses 21 to 28 it is Moses¬ account of the setting out of the principles governing the passover and the feast of unleavened bread, but particularly the passover. It is what he says about it. This chapter from verse 1 down to the end of verse 20 is taken up with what God says, and verses 21 to 28 are what the minister says. He is viewed now as the minister. How well he can shorten what he has to say, so as not to make it too long! Prolonged discourses are not as a rule helpful, and Moses used only from verse 21 to verse 28 to state the matter; and it is said that the effect of his words was that the people bowed their heads and worshipped.
L.E.S. Would you say a word as to why Moses introduces the hyssop here?
J.T. It is not part of what Jehovah says, according to the record. It shows how a minister may vary what the Scripture says. He may paraphrase, or omit something, or add something, and yet be right in what he says. It is a question of levitical skill and understanding. It involves that these men could not only say things, but say them to affect the people, and yet not say too much.
L.K. Why does it say, "Each a lamb, for a father's house"? Is it that the idea of the fatherly element would be brought in in relation to the passover?
J.T. That helps in what we are remarking; it is a father's house. The father is sometimes shut out -- there is too much mother. We need more fathers amongst us.
S.McC. This bunch of hyssop should have a bearing upon us in relation to our houses and families because the love of what is big is prevalent in children, whereas ministry would emphasize what is small and perhaps obscure.
J.T. It is remarkable how they get the big ideas. So with young married people with means; perhaps
{223}
they inherit too much -- it is damaging. If they have earned it, it is another matter.
W.L. So Moses says in verse 21, "Seize and take yourselves lambs for your families, and kill the passover. And take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason". It goes with the family thought.
J.T. Quite so. It does not appear as though Moses excelled in his own house. He excelled as a minister, as an apostle, so to speak, but his sons never came to much. They were Levites, but I think the mother side was weak in Moses¬ house and that is probably the explanation of much.
M.B. @Esther 1: 22 says that "every man should bear rule in his own house, and should speak according to the language of his people". We bring much trouble upon ourselves in not taking on this place in our households.
J.T. We were reading the book of Esther recently. I hope the Lord will use what was brought out as to the development of the feminine side amongst the gentiles. Vashti, the gentile queen, failed in obedience. In the millennium God brings in the female side in its subjective character, typically seen in Esther, the Jewish queen. Paul makes a great deal of the house and practical instruction as to marriage, while at the same time the female side of the truth has failed in Christianity.
S.McC. It is interesting that the question of holiness is raised in @Leviticus 19: 2, 3: "Speak unto all the assembly of the children of Israel, and say unto them, Holy shall ye be, for I Jehovah your God am holy. Ye shall reverence every man his mother, and his father". The mother is put first.
J.R.H. How do you account for the female side being so much emphasised in Moses¬ preservation and upbringing, and then the weakness in his own marriage and household?
{224}
J.T. Zipporah did not contribute much. A great deal might be said about that. Moses¬ own mother was an excellent person, and his father was a good brother, and so was he himself; but so far as his own children were concerned, they were not a success, evidently due to the mother.
A.E.H. Could the failure of the gentile queen be attributed to the particular form that the world's system takes during the assembly's period here, and that the feminine side is more attracted by the world's system than the masculine side is?
J.T. I think so. Vashti would show that she had a coterie of women with her in the royal house which belonged to the king. Scripture says, "Also the queen Vashti made a feast for the women of the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus". They carried on by themselves, and the king sent his servants to ask her to come out, and she would not. There was absolute refusal. Many women would say she was doing right; but Ahasuerus, however bad, represents authority in the gentile monarchy as much, in a sense, as David does in his kingdom, and she is flouting it. She will not obey and so she is deposed and another comes -- a Jewess. In the beginning God made them male and female and said, "Let them have dominion" together, and that means that headship is acknowledged in the one.
A.E.H. Often in the subverting of the principle of headship we hear remarks such as, Well, if my husband was a different kind of a person ... . But the idea is of God establishing certain principles, and our blessing is in acknowledging them.
J.T. The divine principle is set out in the first of the four monarchies in @Daniel 2: 38: "Thou art this head of gold". The authority is of God and the female side has failed in it. That is the history.
{225}
W.R. Verses 8 and 9 deal with the preparation of the lamb: "And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; with bitter herbs shall they eat it. Ye shall eat none of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roast with fire". Roasting with fire seems to be insisted upon. I suppose both the father and the mother would be in the matter: the mother would prepare the lamb and it would be the responsibility of the father to see that all was rightly carried out.
J.T. That is so. The fire has direct action on the meat. Boiling is indirect, but roasting is direct; even a pan is not direct. The fire here comes in direct touch with the food. That would mean that our constitutions have appropriated the death of Christ; we appropriate what He endured. I may be indulging what cost Him so much.
S.McC. What difference do you see in the food Noah was instructed to take into the ark? It says, "And take thou of all food that is eaten", @Genesis 6: 21. There was nothing definite named as food there. The ark refers to our houses too, and salvation in relation to them, yet the food is not defined. Any kind is to be eaten, whereas here it is specifically defined.
J.T. Quite so, but there were no children in the ark. We are there supposed to be full-grown, and that would mean there would be understanding of the deluge, which was a terrible thing. Enjoyment in the ark would be of full-grown character. Our houses should always include children and they are in mind here. We say we can trust the brothers in the care meeting, and we can trust the brothers and sisters sitting down in assembly, but their children may not be behaving on the back seats and we cannot trust them. We are in mixed conditions in this chapter; there is the necessity of the fire, the evidence of the Lord Jesus dying on account of sin. What
{226}
the children are indulging in at the back of the room cost the death of the Lord Jesus.
S.McC. That is very helpful regarding mixed conditions in this chapter.
J.T. There must be some feature of the work of God in His people before they are reliable and you can trust them. @John 20 supports that: "Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you: as the Father sent me forth, *I* also send you. And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained" (verses 21 - 23). The Lord regards them as trustworthy. We must have that or we cannot have the assembly. We cannot trust young children, and even young grown-ups; it is one of the features of the flesh in youth -- untrustworthiness.
L.P. What are the bitter herbs for?
J.T. They have the same effect as the burning. It is bitterness. We should learn to taste bitter things that cause weeping in us. It says of Moses as a little child that he wept: he was no stranger to suffering.
L.E.S. In the word addressed to fathers in @Ephesians 6: 4 it says, "And ye fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and admonition of the Lord". Would that imply the action of the fire?
J.T. As a father you know the severity of the Lord's discipline. "*I* rebuke and discipline as many as I love", @Revelation 3: 19. The father and mother have learned that by experience and they pass it on to their children. 
Ques. Is the passover the burnt-offering aspect of the death of Christ?
J.T. It is really a sin-offering in character according to the burning. It is the death of Christ in its severity. In verse 21 it says, "And Moses called all the
{227}
elders of Israel, and said to them, Seize and take yourselves lambs for your families, and kill the passover". These are very severe thoughts. "And take a bunch of hyssop" -- that refers to what is small; we do not get any flattery from the levitical instincts of Moses, it is what is deflationary, humbling and small -- "and dip it in the blood that is in the bason" -- notice the word "bason" -- "and smear the lintel and the two door-posts with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out of the door of his house until the morning". All this is the delineation of the truth, and it is most solemnising. All is judicial outside and we are protected inside. The lamb was to be in the household four days before it was killed; the children should be affected by that.
The paragraph read from chapter 13 alludes to the continuance of the system in the light of these things. "And it came to pass, when Pharaoh let the people go, that God did not lead them the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, That the people may not repent when they see conflict, and return to Egypt". We do not want a Lot's wife, looking back. "And God led the people about, the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea; and the children of Israel went arrayed out of the land of Egypt". That is, the exodus was systematic, they went out in order, in rank. That is very important in this subject. "And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him; for he had made the children of Israel swear an oath, saying, God will be sure to visit you; then ye shall carry my bones with you hence. And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, at the end of the wilderness. And Jehovah went before their face by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them in the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; so that they could go day and night. The
{228}
pillar of the cloud did not remove from before the people by day, nor the pillar of fire by night". So that we have a definite order of march, and perfect guidance, God in the cloud guiding us. And then we have something historic. Children love history; they love to hear about their ancestors. The point here is faith, Joseph's long outlook into the land, so that he would have his bones go there.
A.E.H. This would help us in speaking to our children. Eve was built. Do the bones suggest the framework of the system, which in itself might be a cold idea, but they are to be adorned and set out by the wealth of what is connected with it?
J.T. The framework idea entered into Eve. She was built: "bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh", Adam said. The bone is the framework but the flesh is the filling out.
A.P.T. Would chapter 12 be the filling out of the framework, the constitution built up in a living body?
J.T. We are directed back to our fathers. And so as to the bones of Joseph, what were they like? What was Joseph like? The children would say, He is my great-great-grandfather. The children of Manasseh were born on Joseph's knees. That is, the bones are the framework, but there are not bones only, there is flesh. According to Ezekiel flesh came on to the bones, bringing in affections and warmth and beautification.
J.R.H. They were not led through the way of the land of the Philistines although that was near.
J.T. That would be God's provision for them, knowing how they would be in constant dread of the Philistines. Presently they would need powerful armies, but not yet. It is to bring out the consideration of God for us when we are young persons in the family.
{229}
H.B. I suppose the result of the constitutional thought would be seen in @Psalm 105: 37: "And he brought them forth with silver and gold; and there was not one feeble among their tribes".
F.C. Does the pillar idea -- the pillar of fire and the pillar of cloud -- enter into the system also? It is a formed idea.
J.T. Yes, it is a formed idea. The cloud is formed by some action of the air literally, but the pillar is what God forms because He is in it. God is there. We are told He worked out from that point and discomfited the Egyptians. He is before them by day and by night; they can go by day and night.
H.G.H. It was the cloud by day and the fire by night. Would that suggest His consideration for us in the circumstances in which we are?
J.T. I think so; we do not need to loiter. Moses had trouble at the inn; Zipporah made complaints and Jehovah was minded to slay him, a remarkable thing; but here they are to go day and night. God is there, and there is perfect safety; there is no danger of damage in the journey. They are now beginning to walk: "I it was that taught Ephraim to walk", God says. They do not go out like an unordered multitude, they go out in fives; each has his place. It is the early idea of being taught how to walk by God, and being taught how to follow a lead too. God Himself is the Leader.
S.McC. Five would suggest what is basic in manhood: five senses, five fingers, in contrast to six. They are in fives.
J.T. Quite so. It is man's constitution physically.
R.A. It says, "To give them light; so that they could go day and night". They are governed by light from heaven. Day and night are governed from heaven.
J.T. The light was in the fire. It said, "And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped
{230}
in Etham, at the end of the wilderness. And Jehovah went before their face by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them in the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; so that they could go day and night". And then it is touching, the consideration of Jehovah in that position; it is said that "The pillar of the cloud did not remove from before the people by day, nor the pillar of fire by night". It was trustworthy; you could reckon on it.
So that in summing up the position; the households are in mind, and the history of Joseph and the carrying up of his bones; also the number of years of Israel's captivity. It terminated at the very day of the predicted four hundred and thirty years. Everything was in order, moving by clock-work, as we say, carrying out the divine mind; and the little ones are reminded of that. If they show any interest in the testimony of God, then they will find there is history attached to it. Israel had entered into the four hundred and thirty years, it had been said they should be afflicted all those years; it is the history of our affliction; but now they are coming out, and the very day is mentioned. They are coming out with great property, and they are coming out in order by fives, and God is leading them.
L.E.S. It says in @Psalm 105, "Egypt rejoiced at their departure; for the fear of them had fallen upon them. He spread a cloud for a covering, and fire to give light in the night" (verses 38, 39). And verse 42 says, "For he remembered his holy word, and Abraham his servant; And he brought forth his people with gladness, his chosen with rejoicing".
J.T. So that if the children are not ready for the truth immediately, God will make it very delightful by putting it into poetry. That psalm is the history in poetry, an attractive way of recording historical things. The Psalms are poetic and touch the affections and you can remember them too; they are
{231}
sometimes written in acrostic form so that the mind is aided. You do not get the same assistance for the mind in these historical books. The book of Psalms gives you great assistance, so that you can carry the historical facts of what God has done with His people in your mind.
J.R.H. The next chapter seems to be the covering idea, the cloud coming in between the people and the Egyptians, the baptism of the cloud.
J.T. I should think baptism in the cloud would be the Spirit in principle as over against baptism by water. They were baptised in the cloud before they were baptised by water, so that properly the Spirit comes into our baptism, at least with adults.
{232}
DIVINE SYSTEM IN EXODUS (5)
@Exodus 19: 1 - 6; @Exodus 20: 1 - 6; @Exodus 24: 9 - 11
J.T. So far in our subject we have reached the household, and the thought of the household in Israel entering into the passover, which involved "the beginning of months". Israel had entered on what we might call another era of things referring directly to themselves, in which they were regarded by God in their households, and were basically set up by means of a constitution suited to their new place. We saw them in chapter 13 on their way out of Egypt in a systematic way, as it says in @Numbers 33: 3: "The children of Israel went out with a high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians". They went out in order, "arrayed", as the note says -- "five in a rank". They were militarily arranged, and were guided by God, too, in the pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire; so that they were actually on their way, being taught how to walk. Much followed -- the crossing of the Red Sea and all that it involved -- and now we see them in chapter 19 before the mountain of God where they take their place as a nation. It is now a question of a nation. The mind of God is unfolding itself and they have their national status. The next passage read, in chapter 20, contemplates the national order of things under legislation, or law, to govern them. Then at the end of that chapter there is a system of drawing near to God in an altar -- an altar of earth and an altar of stone -- and following immediately on that, laws of wisdom entering into their national existence, into their neighbourly and social relations. Every exigency is taken account of in the details of instruction or law such as no other nation ever had.
The last passage read shows how they have been elevated into relations with God above in His own sphere. The system in its elements has increased, for
{233}
added to Moses and Aaron we have Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders of Israel. God is calling them up and they go up and see the God of Israel; that is, they are there in holy liberty. It is thought that in these three verses in chapter 24 we have reached the end we had in mind -- the divine system is operating and God has secured His end in it in having His people with Himself. They are not only brought to Him in the wilderness, but above in His own sphere, where He is seen in His glory and where they have, you might say, social liberty before Him, the liberty of love, eating and drinking. They are called *nobles*. It is thought that this final setting would leave with us the impression of what God is in His love; taking us out of this world and setting us up in liberty with Himself and with one another, and yet provided for in His system. They see Him, it says: "and they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness. And on the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: they saw God, and ate and drank", @Exodus 24: 10, 11.
A.E.H. Have you any thought as to why such a glorious climax should be reached before the instruction or the pattern is given in regard to the tent and the tabernacle, and before the establishing of the tribes in their settings around it?
J.T. I think the suggestion is that God has now brought them to Himself, not under legal bondage, or what would provoke resentment of the flesh, as we see later. He has them in liberty and dignity. They are elders, a good many of them, and there is the priestly family; but before it is regulated and ordered, He has them just as He would wish to have them in themselves. What follows would point to what He could do with them and could make out of them for Himself, according to His own counsels.
{234}
J.R.H. Would it be right to say that in chapter 24 they are, in spirit, brought in and planted in the mountain of His inheritance?
J.T. In spirit, yes. God had said in chapter 15 that He would bring them in. While they are not in the land literally, they are with God in His own sphere; that is, it is a spiritual situation. And now from chapter 25 to the end of Exodus, and in Leviticus and Numbers too, God is intimating what He can make out of them; what the material is capable of, and how it fits in with His own counsels of love.
L.E.S. Would there be some correspondence to @Ephesians 1: 4, "that we should be holy and blameless before him in love"?
J.T. I think so. Ephesians is what answers to this because it is elevation -- not, as you might say, the literal heavenly position. In verse 12 there is not a word said about what took place in the mountain, it is just that they, Moses and Joshua, went up: "And Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me into the mountain, and be there". But as to the people, the position is a spiritual one; the physical thought is left out. It is a question of what is reachable in the Spirit, "in spirit", as was said. They have already reached finality, they were with God and they saw Him. He had already said, "I have ... brought you to myself"; but now you have the thought of elevation, of His own place, His abode or sphere. Then these chapters which follow, from 25 to the end, and Leviticus and Numbers, all involve what God can make out of them so as to reach His own counsels of love, beyond anything that might be conceived.
A.E.H. Do you think that as we come under the power of the gospel and come to know God, He would encourage our hearts by bringing us in spirit to the climax of His greatest thoughts? Then that would help us to enter into the more onerous work
{235}
in learning how to be together down here and how to fit into the Numbers and Leviticus setting.
J.T. Yes; our greatness is in mind. God would impress them with Himself and what was under His feet. He was going to come down and walk with them on the sands and He wants them to see, in liberty, what He is up there; "they saw the God of Israel"; and they are called nobles. They are without restraint, as it were. Now these succeeding chapters are to show what God can bring about according to His own formative actions, influence, principles and workmanship; how He can bring about what was in His heart from all eternity. It is a question of the material which He has in His hand. We are told in the prophets that He made the earth out of nothing; but He is not going to make the new world out of nothing. There is material that love can use, out of which love can construct and form what will be for His own satisfaction.
A.E.H. Young brothers in the morning meeting can apparently touch very exalted heights in speaking to the Father and to God; but this is something more in the way of weight and substantial formation.
J.T. We are introduced into the world above. We have that hymn, "Lord of the worlds above"; well, there are there wonderful regions and formations of glory and enjoyment. Jehovah, of course, is there; that is in the verses read: "They saw God, and ate and drank"; "there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness". These are unknown things, it is a scene above -- worlds above! Well now, Moses goes into that and he goes in alone. Joshua is his attendant, who here would not be more than auxiliary, not entering into the antitype. The idea is that the mediator goes up alone. In the antitype Christ has gone up, and the worlds above
{236}
are under Him; He has gone beyond all principality and power. Not only so, but He has gone *beyond all the heavens*.
S.McC. You have been referring to the greatness of Moses in Egypt; and it would seem as if in this new environment God would enhance the glory of the Mediator in a peculiar way before our souls.
J.T. I thought that. He remained up there for forty days; he is said to have literally gone up into the mount: "Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me into the mountain, and be there" (verse 12); and in verse 15, "Moses went up to the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain. And the glory of Jehovah abode on mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days; and on the seventh day he called to Moses out of the midst of the cloud. And the appearance of the glory of Jehovah was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain, before the eyes of the children of Israel. And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mountain. And Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights". We have to notice the frequency of the word "mountain", whereas the earlier part of the chapter is more moral elevation, the physical mountain is not stressed at all. Even in the first verse He said to Moses, "Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship afar off". He does not say, Go up the mountain; it is the moral side. Elevation in that sense is open to us, of course only by the Spirit. We are enabled to go there, and I think that enters into the service of God; but Christ has gone there literally, or physically. He is there corporeally and He has gone beyond all the heavens; but He is not forgetting the system down here, because it is from that point He sends the gifts, according to @Ephesians 4.
{237}
A.H.P. Does that indicate that what comes out in chapter 25 and onward is to take its character from what we see here -- what God is above?
J.T. What He is above, and from Moses being there. The thing is shown to him on the principle of pattern. So that what goes on up there beyond our reach, the immensity of the sphere, is suggestive of the sphere into which Christ has gone. Paul was caught up to the third heaven -- that contemplates creational limitations; but the heavens contemplate Deity in Christ. A divine Person has gone up, and He has liberty there beyond anything that a creature could conceive save in the Spirit's power. Nevertheless, He is operating there and from there in relation to what is down here, to effect everything here that God has had in His mind. Paul says that he went into paradise, he was caught up into paradise. There are two prepositions in @2 Corinthians 12, as no doubt many of us have noticed: "to" the third heaven, implying 'as far as'; and "into" paradise, meaning that he went *in*. He said, "I ... heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter". Now Moses here is suggestive of that, only he is merely a type of Christ; Christ has gone *beyond* all the heavens; He is with God. He has "sat down at the right hand of God", and He is operating from there; not simply from created conditions but from uncreated conditions. That is beyond the heavens. The heavens are the limit of created conditions, but beyond them is the uncreated; it is the realm of God.
S.McC. What difference do you see between "above all heavens", and what we have in @Hebrews 9: 24, where He is said to have entered "into heaven itself, now to appear before the face of God for us"?
J.T. "Heaven itself" would be where God is in relation to the creation. The heavens, however they may be designated, are created: "In the beginning
{238}
God created the heavens and the earth". They are all included in that. Therefore Christ, in His official capacity, as I understand, entered into those conditions: "whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began". But personally He goes beyond that. Being a divine Person He can go beyond that, so that Hebrews also says in chapter 7: 26, "For such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens". It is important to keep it in mind that heaven in itself is not the dwelling place of God; He is beyond all the heavens. Christ has become higher than the heavens.
S.McC. Verse 14 of @Hebrews 4 says, He "has passed through the heavens".
A.P.T. Referring to what you quoted in @Ephesians 4, that He has "ascended up on high", is that connected with @Psalm 68: 18? I was wondering what the final clause, "and even for the rebellious, for the dwelling there of Jah Elohim", refers to.
J.T. @Ephesians 4 alludes to that, but we get the thought of the psalm enlarged in Paul's words in verses 7 to 10. The addition there that Paul's ministry brings out is noteworthy -- the uncreated position into which Christ has gone, and has a right to go, in His own Person, whence He is operating in the system down here. He has "ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things; and *he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers", etc.; it is the system operating down here from that exaltation.
A.P.T. The gifts would be for the continuation of the system, and to bring the saints to the completion of the mind of God for them.
{239}
J.T. And the system is operating down here from that exalted point. It is not simply what @Psalm 68 says, but what Paul says, as to Christ having gone down to the lower parts of the earth; and then he says, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens"; above them.
J.R.H. I suppose Paul used the scripture in the Psalms which applies to Israel, and applies it to the assembly in @Ephesians 4.
J.T. That is it, to bring out what God has to dwell in down here, but it is effected from above, from that exaltation. The gifts allude to the system; they are operating to bring about this abode of God, as it says in verse 16, "from whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love". That is what is going on. It is a wonderful thought, "its self-building up in love"; but the system in operation is aiding, in that it is "for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ".
A.P.T. In this scripture there is an allusion to 'system' (verse 14).
J.T. Yes; it is the only place we get it -- "systematised error". There is a lot of that around.
L.E.S. Would you say another word as to paradise and what Paul heard there? The footnote says, 'The things said ... were not suited to this lower world and our mortal condition'.
J.T. It is wonderful that one of us -- for it was our apostle, Paul -- should have had such an experience. It does not say he was caught up as an apostle; he was caught up as "a man in Christ", and he heard these things. Surely, as Mary kept the pound of ointment, Paul had kept this knowledge for fourteen years until he knew it would be effective; it would humble the Corinthians in their partisan
{240}
conditions. So that the brethren will understand that what we have been speaking of is no diversion from our subject; this last passage read in @Exodus 24 is the culmination of it, really. Even now we are connected with what is above; but Christ -- that is, our Mediator -- has gone beyond all that, He has gone beyond all the heavens. But not only is He our Mediator, He is God Himself, the Son of God; nevertheless He is connected up there with priesthood, with the official working of it down here, not only in Hebrews but also in Ephesians in giving the gifts.
A.E.H. Are you free when addressing the Lord in a marital atmosphere in the assembly service, to speak to Him of His deity?
J.T. Well, I do not see why we should not, except that there may be a danger of bringing God in too soon in the service, the brethren perhaps not being able to follow your thought. But Christ's deity should be in view in the marital relation. Why should it not be in view? It enhances what He is to the assembly, that this great Person is Head of the assembly.
J.R.H. Is that not seen in @Psalm 45, where so much of the marital relation is in view? The deity of Christ comes in there in verses 6 and 7.
J.T. Quite so; the word "God" is used. You see how His deity is introduced, and then the Spirit of God passes on to His humanity: "God, thy God".
J.R.H. Would verse 11 of the psalm enter into it?
J.T. It is the same thing, "thy Lord"; He is a divine Person, God. Why should the assembly not have Him in mind as a divine Person?
L.E.S. Would @Isaiah 62: 4, 5 fit in with this too, where it says, "But thou shalt be called, My delight is in her, and thy land, Married; for Jehovah delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married. For as a young man marrieth a virgin, shall thy sons
{241}
marry thee; and with the joy of the bridegroom over the bride, shall thy God rejoice over thee"?
J.T. Yes. The marital thought runs through the Old Testament, beginning in @Genesis 2. @Ezekiel 16 enlarges on it, how the Lord Jehovah finds Israel in the wilderness and how He beautifies her and she becomes His. The matter of espousals is established. And so the marital thought is becoming to Christ's deity, entering into His marital relations with the assembly. Why should it not be? Why should we not honour Him because of all His greatness? Only there would be a tendency to confusion unless the brethren were careful not to bring God in too soon, that is, God as God and as the Father, which belongs more to the second part of our service, involving the parental side.
S.McC. There would be holy concern as to the order of the economy, that we might be preserved in assembly service: "To us there is one God, the Father".
J.T. That helps. It would seem that the order of the economy is what should govern us in assembly service; and so the use of `181:1 ('Glory Lord is Thine for ever, ... Wonderful the Godhead glory Shining, Saviour, in Thy face!'), as we were noticing yesterday, may be a little confusing to brethren generally, as failing to see that while deity is properly applied to Christ in certain connections, yet in the passage to which you allude in @1 Corinthians 8 it states that "to us there is one God, the Father". God is presented as the Father in the economy. The passage goes on, "and one Lord, Jesus Christ"; that is, the economy involves the mediatorial state of things which I think should govern our service Godward. But then, hymn 181, certainly ought to be usable amongst the brethren in assembly service, and all such hymns or scriptures.
Having touched on this exalted part of our subject, we should come back to @Exodus 19 to see how
{242}
the truth progressed in the mind of the Spirit in the writing of the book. After the passage of the Red Sea, we have the service of God introduced in chapter 15 with the word, "Then". "Then sang Moses and the children of Israel" (verse 1). As the adverb of time is introduced it shows that time has a great deal to do with the service of God; it is governed by time. So today in the assembly service, in touching the lordship of Christ, the headship of Christ, and the assembly's part with Him, there is a time for all that. Ecclesiastes says there is a time for everything, so this word "then" alludes to time -- it is a time for song. It is the first song we have in the Scriptures, and time has a great place in it. So that we should always recognise time in the service of God -- what a particular time requires. Of course I am not speaking of eternal conditions, but of the present provisional period.
A.P.T. Would the time of assembling together be important in relation to the system -- to be on time?
J.T. Well, that is how Luke speaks of it. He says that "when the hour was come" the Lord sat down with the disciples. He took His place. Is that what you mean?
A.P.T. Yes. It is an important matter, one feels it oneself, the possibility of holding time loosely as we come to the service of God. We would not do it in relation to human appointments; why should we be loose in divine appointments?
J.T. The Lord appeared to the women after His resurrection as they were on an errand, sent by the angel to tell the disciples that they should go into Galilee and there see Him. That would be an appointment: "there shall ye see him". Not the Lord saying, *I* will see them, as in John; but Matthew quotes the angel as saying, "Go quickly and say to his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and behold, he goes before you into Galilee, there shall
{243}
ye see him. Behold, I have told you". And the Lord confirms that in verse 10; but it says, "And as they went to bring his disciples word, behold also, Jesus met them, saying, Hail! And they coming up took him by the feet, and did him homage". This was not a right act on their part, it was an interruption to their errand; but they did not remain in that attitude, they went and carried the message to the apostles. That was a great appointment, and the disciples were doubtless there where He expected them. He surely kept His side of the matter. 
Ques. Are you referring to this time matter as productive of movement?
J.T. The Lord is making use of time, God is making use of time; He made time, and He uses it Himself first; the first day was used by God. So in the New Testament we find that time has been used. We have already alluded to the Lord sitting down at the time of the Passover; He was there when the hour was come. Then in @Acts 2 it says, "And when the day of Pentecost was now accomplishing" -- or running its course of fulfilment as a feast -- "there came suddenly a sound out of heaven". It was time for it and the Spirit came in that way. So it is that the first day of the week involves time; Paul was in Troas on that day, and Luke was there, and he says, "We being assembled to break bread"; it was that day and that involves time too.
W.L. Would you say, that the matter of time in the beginning of @Exodus 15 was resultant on certain things having been arrived at in the end of chapter 14? It says there that "the people feared Jehovah, and believed in Jehovah, and in Moses his bondman".
J.T. Quite so; it is "*Then* sang Moses". So that we might notice in this passage how the service of God begins in Scripture; the time had come for it. Then we proceed in the history to chapter 19. Much
{244}
intervenes, but chapter 19: 1 says, "In the third month after the departure of the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai". "Into the wilderness" -- it is the position they are in, but it is "before the mountain", the position, under divine ordering, for listening to God in His place of authority. Chapter 19 tells us what He said; He is dealing with them now as a nation, and He says in verse 6, "Ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation". That is what is in His mind. It is to be a holy nation, but a nation that is to be governed by laws, ordinances and statutes; showing that it is to have all the advantages you would look for in any nation, with the addition of holiness as being God's nation. So that now instead of a household being in type before us, it is a nation -- a national idea.
H.G.H. What is the suggestion behind "a kingdom of priests"?
J.T. It is the word "priests" added to the idea of the kingdom, implying intelligence. "The priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they seek the law; for he is the messenger of Jehovah of hosts"; that is what is stated in @Malachi 2. We have not yet the actual inauguration of the priesthood; here there is only a suggestion of it; but prior to its inauguration we have the love of the Hebrew servant in chapter 21. He has love Godward -- perpendicularly -- and love horizontally, toward his wife; and love toward his children. That is, God is saying, Love must have full scope: to come up to Me and to go out to the wife and down to the children. Then after chapter 21 we go on with laws and ordinances till we come to chapter 24 of which we have been speaking; and then in chapter 28 we have the Priest. I believe the love of the Hebrew servant underlies Aaron's appointment; it is one who can say, "I love": "I love my master, my wife, and my
{245}
children". It is a present love, not that I *have* loved; it is a present, active love in all its phases.
S.McC. Why do you say it underlies Aaron's appointment?
J.T. Because of the place that Aaron has henceforth in Exodus. He is the brother. He is the brother from the beginning, when he went to the mount of God to meet Moses, which made him glad in his heart. He becomes a servant, as it were, to his brother, for Moses is as God to Pharaoh, and Aaron is ready to take the place of Moses¬ spokesman. So that it is established in regard to Aaron that it is a matter of love. All this that we have been speaking of as to elevation and the law comes in from chapter 20 to chapter 24. Then in chapter 28 we have the word of Jehovah to Moses saying, "And thou shalt take thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may serve me as priest -- Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons". Aaron loves his sons, according to the type of the Hebrew servant. It is a matter of spiritual inference that I have liberty to refer to the idea of love in Aaron; he is one characterised by it; and the history running through to chapter 28 depicts him as valuable to Moses under the direct hand of God. So now the word is, "Take thee Aaron thy brother". He is to be the custodian of the law and of all the divine service; he is to take care of everything for God and for the people too, and it is a question of love; he is trustworthy, for love never fails.
S.McC. Looking at Christ as the antitype of Moses and Aaron in this section, are we to view Him in Moses as having His own special rights -- able to go where we cannot go; but in Aaron as having associates, that we have a link with Him?
J.T. Yes; in Aaron He is on our side. That is what I understand. And therefore it is wise, I think,
{246}
to keep the economy in view in the ordering of the service of God; first as engaged with the Lord in the Supper, the mediatorial relation to Him, and the assembly's relation to Him, in which @Psalm 45 helps us, and also the Song of Songs; and then His deity, enabling Him to take us on, to take on the sons -- for it is God who is leading many sons to glory. It is God who is doing it: "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings", @Hebrews 2: 10. He is there on our side, but still He is a divine Person. The priesthood is pursued in @Hebrews 7 and 8; in chapter 7 He has gone beyond all the heavens, and in chapter 8 He has set Himself down at the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens. He does that, He has title to do it, and we must not forget that; but in all He is on our side. So that He is not ashamed to call us brethren, saying, "I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2: 12. I think we are safe in pursuing the service in relation to the economy.
S.McC. I think that is important. Hence when God is referred to we might not know or might not be able to distinguish what Person is before us if we do not have the economy in view.
J.T. Well, we do not want to imply that the brethren are not intelligent. @Psalm 45 suggests that Christ might be addressed as God Himself, but that He is also addressed as having a God. They are both in the same psalm and the psalmist knows what he is saying. "Incline thine ear", in verse 10, means that the persons who are using the psalm ought to be able to do that. We should read our hymn books intelligently and know what hymn to give out.
L.E.S. Do you think 1 Peter would help as to this matter? He says, "Blessed be the God and Father of
{247}
our Lord Jesus Christ" and then, referring to the revelation of Jesus Christ, "whom, having not seen, ye love"; and then following that he refers to the holy priesthood and the royal priesthood.
J.T. That brings us back to what our brother just now suggested. Why is Israel said to be a kingdom of priests? I think that would mean that there would be at all times among the brethren a kingdom of priests -- that we are *ourselves* a kingdom. We have that in @Revelation 1: He has "made us a kingdom" -- we have power to rule. We know rule, but we also have power to rule. Authority is vested in the brethren, and priesthood is added to that. That makes us holy ourselves and in our words, what is on our lips -- the priest's *lips* keep knowledge.
F.M. How far would association with Christ take us?
J.T. Well, we were just speaking about that in @Hebrews 2, where He sings in our midst. He is not ashamed to call us brethren. Why is He not ashamed? Because we are of Him: "For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren". We are of the same order, so that we are fit to be associated with Him. And then as regards this kingdom of priests, it is authority vested in us. So that a brother stands up in assembly, and he is in dignity; he has authority; he speaks as the oracles of God, but then he speaks intelligently too. The priest's lips keep knowledge, and they seek the law at his mouth. We may need a word just now on the law governing the assembly as in service, and it is important to take account of it, because we are likely to be diverted from the principles governing the service.
A.P.T. Would that be indicated in the Lord's words to Mary, "Go to my brethren and say to them" -- that they might be on the up line in the service?
{248}
J.T. They were to be instructed by the message. She did not teach the brethren, but still neither did she tell the message verbatim. She said "that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her". They would probably be her own words to a large extent.
A.P.T. Do you think a word of ministry is always needed at the Lord's supper?
J.T. So far as I have observed it is needed and usually helps. It is a priestly matter, and the Spirit would help, stimulating the assembly. 
Ques. What do the eagles¬ wings represent in @Exodus 19? God says, "I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself".
J.T. They are a symbol used alluding to the characteristics of the eagle. In alluding to the "wings", God is thinking of what an eagle would do for its young. The book of Deuteronomy tells us in chapter 32: 11 how an eagle acts with its young, and God condescends to use that symbol to show how *careful* He is with us; not only is it the power but also the *care* of the eagle. "I have borne you on eagles¬ wings" -- they are powerful -- but Jehovah adds, "and brought you to myself". He has brought them to *Himself*; but now the *mountain* is involved.
F.C. He calls to Moses out of the mountain. Does this involve the kind of economy?
J.T. In chapter 3 you will remember Moses led the flock to the mountain of God. The Spirit of God tells us in regard to Abraham, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". @Genesis 22: 14. Well now, the people here are moving on instinct. @Exodus 17: 1 says, "And all the assembly of the children of Israel journeyed ... at the command of Jehovah"; they are moving under His commandment. It does not say in chapter 19 that they are moving under that commandment, but the thought is carried through. So it is said, "In the third month after the
{249}
departure of the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai: they departed from Rephidim, and came into the wilderness of Sinai, and encamped in the wilderness; and Israel encamped there before the mountain". It is as if they were saying, Jehovah, we are here; as if they were where He would have them. That is the idea. So they are under orders, they are moving under divine orders and God takes up this attitude in the mountain; and it says, "Moses went up to God, and Jehovah called to him out of the mountain", meaning that the people had come to the place where God intended them to come, because He wanted them there. He did not say this on the banks of the Red Sea; it is in His own place -- the mountain. The mountain refers to the resources of God; if He is going to furnish us as a nation, He will draw on His resources so that we shall be fully equipped for His service. Already they were wealthy themselves, because it says they came out of Egypt with great wealth, and now they are brought to *His* wealth. That is what the mountain symbolizes -- His wealth, His resources.
J.R.H. You refer to the national existence, -- "a holy nation". How is that idea carried out today in the assembly?
J.T. @1 Peter 2: 9 refers to it; we are said to be that. It is the idea of a nation. The idea arises from the position in Shinar, God supporting the nations, having in mind to keep them in reserve for the gospel. Each nation has its own particular characteristics; we were speaking of that, and of the importance of history in regard to the gospel -- of knowing to whom you are preaching. The history goes back to Shinar. The several nations have to be understood: the Babylonians were so-and-so, and the Egyptians were so-and-so; you have to keep in mind their history. But God is going to have a
{250}
nation, a nation of His own, different from all the others. It is designated here in @Exodus 19 as "a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation". When God assigned the nations their inheritance, He set their bounds according to the number of children of Israel, for "Jacob the lot of his inheritance", @Deuteronomy 32: 8, 9.
A.E.H. The word Peter adds to it is, "That ye might set forth the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his wonderful light". That is connected with the idea of a holy nation.
J.T. Yes. The idea of a nation is greatly stressed now. Of course it has been in Shinar, but it is particularly stressed now in the four monarchies of which Scripture makes so much.
F.M. "A holy nation" -- would that be connected with the royal priesthood, the Melchisedec order of things?
J.T. Quite so. In the Melchisedec priesthood the deity of Christ is particularly contemplated. Aaron is the type of the holy priesthood: Aaron is a type of Christ in His *present* priesthood. Melchisedec covers the deity of Christ -- His Person. How great a Person He is! But Hebrews enlarges on priesthood according to what was typified in Aaron; hence the great stress on holiness.
F.M. Can we contemplate anything further than priesthood in the Lord's day morning meeting?
J.T. Priesthood is an office; it contemplates a condition in which we are down here. I do not think it will be needed in eternity. It is a protection -- that is, against ignorance, unholiness and the flesh generally. It is seraphic in character, maintaining what is suitable for the presence of God.
S.McC. In what part of the assembly service do you view the Lord in His functions as Minister of the sanctuary, as before us in this particular glory?
J.T. I would connect it with what follows our
{251}
addressing Him as Lord. We view Him henceforth on our side in conducting the service. The allusion in @Hebrews 8: 2 is to Aaron: "minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man". Peter had it in mind when he said to the Lord, "*Thou* art the holy one of God" (@John 6: 69); we apprehend Him as "the holy one of God". Indeed, Aaron is alluded to in Scripture as God's holy one. The title "Son" remarkably covers the Lord's position in office as our Priest.
S.McC. In the service of God in the assembly, what distinction is there between the Lord's leading on the lines of His headship, and His influence as Minister of the sanctuary?
J.T. Headship is towards us. It is how He affects us, our intelligence, our spiritual understanding being involved, not only through words, but through spiritual influence. He is Head of the assembly, as we see in Colossians. The Minister of the sanctuary is God ward; He is God's Minister for everything that God is seeking in the service. That is how I look at it. There is what is towards God, and what is influencing us in a subtle way inwardly, so that we move in relation to Him according to His mind. 
Ques. Would verses 5 and 6 of chapter 19 be normal Christianity? "If ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my own possession out of all the peoples -- for all the earth is mine -- and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation". I was thinking of Balaam's prophecy, "Lo, it is a people that shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations", @Numbers 23: 9.
J.T. I think so. We are taken *out* of the nations. Peter, as quoted by James, says at the meeting in Jerusalem that "God ... visited to take out of the nations a people for his name", @Acts 15: 14. While
{252}
he does not call us a nation in that passage, the idea is there, for he calls us "a people"; we are to be separate -- set up in relation to God, a holy nation. Peter follows that up in his first epistle.
J.R.H. In @Matthew 21: 43 the Lord in speaking to the elders of Israel says, "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you and shall be given to a nation producing the fruits of it". Is the assembly in view there?
J.T. Yes. There the Spirit of God uses the word "nation"; the nation would bring forth the fruits of the kingdom which was taken away from the Jews. So, clearly, it would be what Paul says, "Lo, we turn to the nations". God works out His thoughts in a separate people, a people taken out from among them. 
Ques. Would @Deuteronomy 14: 2 help? "Thee hath Jehovah chosen for a people of possession unto himself, out of all the peoples that are upon the face of the earth".
J.T. Just so. The Scriptures have a great deal to say about that, and I thought it might be impressed upon us. So at this point it is not a question of the households of the saints, but of the saints viewed as a nation, viewed from the mountain, the place of resource; and of God calling them a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. He is telling them how near they are to be. Later He imposes restrictions, evidently that they might value nearness. But in the early part of this chapter He is telling them that this is His mind for them, that they are going to be near to Him in holiness as a kingdom of priests.
W.L. Would this idea of a nation be the public setting as in the wilderness?
J.T. The idea is that it would be intelligible to all nations. People know something about nationhood; it has acquired a place in the world. Egypt, for instance, took it on. God is setting out the
{253}
national idea in His own people, and we are to understand what it is and the principles that He has set out to govern it. All that we have been saying is a part of the truth that was in mind in these meetings; and then the heavenly associations that belong to it: how we are set up in relation to one another and have access to what is above. And then God is saying, I am going to work out great things in you; My counsels are going to be worked out. That is what the following chapters imply.
S.McC. So that the types from chapter 25 onward involve the knowledge of Christ as He is known above. We feel we are very deficient in that.
J.T. We are given to understand we are a heavenly people. The sound (@Acts 2) has come out of heaven and the light has come out of heaven; the truth, through the ministry of the apostles, including Paul, has come out. We are on heavenly ground and we are being formed according to that, and it should be constantly in our minds. We have in Ephesians that God has ordained certain good works that we should walk in them; He has ordained them, He has got them, they are ready for us, as it were.
J.R.H. Has chapter 20 in view the supremacy of God in the affections of His people?
J.T. I think that is implied in the stand that He takes. The chapter begins: "And God spoke all these words, saying, I am Jehovah thy God, who have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make thyself any graven image, or any form of what is in the heavens above, or what is in the earth beneath, or what is in the waters under the earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them; for I, Jehovah thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons to the third and to the
{254}
fourth generation of them that hate me, and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments". That is, He has lovers, and He is at liberty now to speak to them in this way. He knows His people will be glad to hear His words and be ready to carry out His behests.
A.E.H. Nations are built up, I suppose, on the idea of rallying to certain ideals and seeing them through. This is a holy nation, and it has ideals to which we are rallied and which are to be carried through. They are the showing forth in a moral way of what God is. But before that can be really carried out it has to be taken in. Is that what this means, do you think?
J.T. That is so. Take the American Commonwealth: Washington and others had ideals that were carried through; so that the States came together forming a nation, and wrote its constitution. The one idea was there to be carried through, but the adjuncts were there just to cause the thing to be carried through. If a European came in he would be given to understand that in due course he would become a citizen. I am not suggesting that anyone take citizenship, I am speaking illustratively. For this he has to know how to read the constitution and to subscribe to it, and many other things; it is the primary idea, and everything is to move in that connection. The whole system of the legislature and its execution is to carry these features through, and the person is given to understand that he is coming to a wonderful system here. So in @Hebrews 12 we have come to the divine system: "Ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven; and to God, judge of all". Why not subscribe to it and take advantage of all that belongs to it? But see to it that
{255}
you are fitted, and know how to serve in it. Typically, these chapters are to bring in heavenly ideas; it was for Israel to come forward and carry them through, which in principle they did.
A.P.T. So that mercy is shown to us in this system. Is that right? We all need mercy.
J.T. And hence mount Zion, which represents sovereign mercy, is the first item mentioned in @Hebrews 12. That chapter helps us as to this matter, because we read in @Exodus 20 that God is standing on the mountain, which speaks of His resources which are infinite. The people are wealthy too; they did not come to Him in poverty; they came out of Egypt with great property. God says, I will use that, but I am also bringing in other things, unsearchable riches. God has these; they are all available to us and He is going to form us according to them. What our brother says in regard to ideals is good to keep in our minds, and then to see that we can work them out.
L.E.S. So @Deuteronomy 33: 26 - 29 says, "There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, Who rideth upon the heavens to thy help, And in his majesty, upon the clouds. Thy refuge is the God of old, And underneath are the eternal arms; And he shall drive out the enemy from before thee, And shall say, Destroy them! And Israel shall dwell in safety alone, The fountain of Jacob, in a land of corn and new wine; Also his heavens shall drop down dew. Happy art thou, Israel! Who is like unto thee, a people saved by Jehovah, The shield of thy help, And the sword of thine excellency? And thine enemies shall come cringing to thee; And thou shalt tread upon their high places".
J.T. Very great and beautiful! So we can understand here how lovers of God would rejoice in all that. He speaks of thousands of those that love Him. God must have said that exultingly -- lovers
{256}
of God, available for the working out of all these thoughts. So at the end of this chapter we have two altars, one of earth and one of stone. God says, "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee". Lovers of God would value that; wherever it is, they would come there. These altars would be connected with that. The first is of earth and the second is of stone. But in due time God will have His great altar in a magnificent system where not only the right material but skill is involved; the greatest skill, as seen in the following chapters, will be employed for the construction of the various things for the tabernacle.
A.E.H. Would you say a word more about the altars of earth and of stone? With the altar of earth it is, "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me"; but with the altar of stone it is, "*If* thou make me".
J.T. I think the altar of earth *imperative*; we should not be Christians at all if we had not that. We *must* have an altar, meaning a place of sacrifice. But the altar of stone would be Christ risen, involving the saints as risen with Him.
A.E.H. In the "if" I suppose it is a question as to whether we shall reach it.
J.T. The "if" does not mean that without the altar of stone we should not be recognised as Christians, but that we are not full-grown, that we have not entered on the heavenly side of the truth.
A.E.H. We might be Roman Christians without being Colossian Christians.
J.T. That is right; we have to make allowance for that. It is encouraging how far God is ready to go with us. The man contemplated in @Leviticus 5 has trespassed; typically he is a Christian in a low state, with very little spiritual wealth. Well, he is
{257}
allowed to bring a handful of meal for a sin-offering. That is God's readiness to meet a man who is sincere in his confession. He is no sham; he is sincere, but unintelligent.
J.R.H. Would you say the man in @Deuteronomy 26 goes on from the altar of earth to the altar of stone in worshipping Jehovah? I was thinking of the basket of firstfruits.
J.T. Quite so. The altar of earth alludes to manhood in Christ; whereas the altar of stone would be permanency, Christ in resurrection and in heaven. The man brings the basket of firstfruits, but the priest is there. He sets it down by the priest and makes his confession; but he is a priest himself as presented in verses 10 and 11; he carries on the service himself. He *advances*. It would take another meeting to go into that, bringing out in the book of Deuteronomy what God's service is in the land. The chapter contemplates a man in the land: "When thou comest into the land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and dwellest therein", etc. The man puts the firstfruits in a basket and goes to the place that Jehovah had chosen to cause His Name to dwell there; and goes to the priest there and professes to Jehovah that he has come unto the land that Jehovah swore to give them. The priest takes the basket out of the man's hand and sets it down before Jehovah -- the priest is mentioned no more. But the man makes a statement to Jehovah covering briefly the history of the fathers, including the long and painful experiences in Egypt, but also the glorious deliverance from that country accorded to them by Jehovah, culminating in their being brought into Canaan, "a land flowing with milk and honey". And now the firstfruits are set down before Jehovah, with the words, "And now, behold, I have brought the first of the fruits of the land, which thou, Jehovah, hast
{258}
given me". And then the man worships before Jehovah his God. It is Deuteronomy worship, that is, in the land, but in accord with what we have been saying as to @Exodus 19 to 24.
{259}
*Pages 259 - 504 -- 'Man as Presented in Christ and the Assembly', Meetings in Great Britain, 1945. (Volume 166 - Old Series)*.
MAN AS PRESENTED IN CHRIST AND THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@John 1: 4 - 18, 43 - 51
J.T. The thought is to consider man, or manhood, in Christ and in us. Hence we began at verse 4 because it directly introduces the subject; that is, that life in Christ was the light of men. The mind has been directed to the beginning of Genesis, where it will be observed nothing is said of other beings save man. Angels are introduced later in Scripture and of course Satan is introduced somewhat early, undoubtedly, under the character of an animal. That is, the thought of man is kept clearly in mind, and John takes it up according to this chapter (verse 4), that Christ was life; that is, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men". Then it is pursued as to the whole race, that He has lightened everyone that comes into the world. "The true light" (verse 9), having in mind this dispensation, and man is clearly in mind; however he may be viewed in detail, it is *man*. So the full thought of the dispensation should be kept in mind, it is Christianity; anything referring to Israel having to be viewed prophetically although in mind in the promises. At the beginning of Christianity the truth turned on man, Paul saying that "God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2: 5. That is, that there is nothing less than Christianity at the present time and that Christianity implies man.
H.H. When you refer to "In him was life" (verse 4), would you say a little as to the word *life*, what you have in mind?
{260}
J.T. Well, the sense of substantiality; the book of Genesis, of course, treats of life, but not of life in the sense of being light, it waited for the Son to become man for the idea of life to become light. The idea of the sun, moon and stars, is not life in the sense that John speaks of it; and, of course, this brings us to the truth of Christianity. We are dealing with the substantial matter, a positive, substantial thought of life among the brethren, and that light is contingent on it, whether in Christ or in us. That is what I thought should be clearly in view. 
Ques. Is that the great objective in @Ephesians 4: 13, "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man"?
J.T. Quite so, I would say that. That chapter, of course, treats of the ministry; earlier, it is more revelation. The ministry is contingent on gift, not of course in Christ, but it is in us. Hence Christ is viewed as on high, gone "up above all the heavens" (verse 10). The idea of gift is in mind; and hence it is "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" (verse 13). 
Ques. Does the thought of life in John go further than the thought of the breath of life in Genesis?
J.T. The breath of life that God breathed into Adam would not go beyond physical life in man as he was. It is more the moral thought that we have in John's gospel. What we have in John's gospel runs through into Christianity really worked out in man.
W.C. Is that what John says in his first epistle? "The life has been manifested" (chapter 1: 2). Does that bring life and light together?
J.T. Quite so; it was the manifestation in man of life as God had thought for man. It was manifested
{261}
in Christ personally but it was confined to Him until He went into heaven and the Spirit came down.
H.H. Would that have special point in regard of Christ's life in resurrection or does it bring in the gospels too?
J.T. It would include the gospels. The life was manifested and is immediately connected with Christ, running on doubtless to the resurrection.
W.C. "Has been manifested" would cover everything, would it not, looking back on all that they witnessed in Christ here and His manifestation to them in resurrection?
J.T. I would say it goes on to the resurrection; the full thought in mind that it is from the beginning, and then the tangibleness of it in @1 John 1: 1 - 3 "That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life; (and the life has been manifested, and we have seen and bear witness, and report to you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and has been manifested to us): that which we have seen and heard we report to you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ". The fellowship is contemplated; that is, full Christianity in its practicalness here, the life manifested, inclusive of the fellowship. It is a question of the position of the apostles, as is said in @Acts 2: 42, "They persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". That is the point. There is nothing less than that. It is God's mind for the present dispensation involving the Spirit here. There is no operation subjectively save as by the Spirit.
A.W.G.T. Does Paul's reference to "the life of God" (@Ephesians 4: 18) link with what you are speaking of?
J.T. That is an expression that is very little understood. It is a reference to heathen darkness;
{262}
the life they are alienated from was the life of God. It is a life to be understood; it must be God in Christ. That is what is in mind. Of course, Christianity must be that; it is the life as the light of men: it is exclusive to man.
E.T.S. "The true light already shines" (@1 John 2: 8) -- would that come in?
J.T. That is the thought exactly. To make it simple, the true light is Christianity. Hence we have in John's epistle: "This is the message which we have heard from him, and declare to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not practise the truth. But if we walk in the light as *he* is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin", @1 John 1: 5 - 7. Now the next chapter tells us: "And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. He that says, I know him, and does not keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; but whoever keeps his words, in him verily the love of God is perfected. Hereby we know that we are in him. He that says he abides in him ought, even as *he* walked, himself also so to walk. Beloved, I write no new commandment to you, but an old commandment, which ye have had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye heard. Again, I write a new commandment to you, which thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing and the true light already shines. He who says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in the darkness until now. He that loves his brother abides in light and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. But he that hates his brother is in the darkness, and walks in the darkness, and knows not where he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes", @1 John 2: 3 - 11.
{263}
I apprehend that what we are saying is involved in this passage, that the Lord's life here was the old commandment, and the new commandment is what is in us by the Spirit. Hence, Christianity is in mind.
W.S. That being the substantiality to which you have referred?
J.T. Quite so. Christianity is a real thing; not like what you have in heathen religions, which are usually abstract, but a real thing, first in Christ Himself, and now come down by the Spirit in the assembly. 
Rem. We have the wonderful reference as to this gospel: "These are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20: 31.
J.T. So that we might understand that life is in us. What we are aiming at now is life by the Spirit in man.
J.A.P. When it says: "The eternal life, which was with the Father", (@1 John 1: 2); would that include all the Lord's movements when He was here?
J.T. I should think so, "the eternal life" would be the whole idea of what God had in mind for men. Some might think that it refers to Him above but it does not. "The bosom of the Father" (@John 1: 18), refers to Him where He is now; but "with the Father" refers to what He was down here as witness: it was simply man's place with God, all working out from that.
H.H. Would you apply that also to the last chapter of the epistle, "This is the true God, and eternal life", @1 John 5: 20? It has been said to be true of Him as glorified.
J.T. It is too. It is the true present position: "He is the true God and eternal life". It is how He is known above and to make it anything less would be derogatory. That is, to bring Him down into what His circumstances were here below, to make
{264}
that applicable to Him above has to be watched, because "He is the true God" is a full absolute statement, and the eternal life is additional. That is true now; and to bring anything into His circumstances now such as prayer and the like would be wholly derogatory. He is in a wholly new position to which the title of Deity belongs. 
Ques. "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", @Colossians 2: 9. Is that the position?
J.T. Quite so. In @Colossians 1, it is more dignity, pointing to His glory, His person in the Deity; "of the Godhead" is not in the original. It is the fulness. We have to view the word fulness, it seems to me as expressive of Himself. In the second chapter it is "the fulness of the Godhead", which brings Him within our range.
W.C. Does @John 17: 5 correspond? The Lord saying, "Now glorify *me, thou* Father, along with thyself, with the glory which I had along with thee before the world was"?
J.T. It certainly does. It is His deity. He has entered on it according to the Father's will, He requests it: "Glorify *me*, ... with the glory which I had along with thee before the world was". The Spirit of God intends to guard the Lord's Person. We are not to speak of Him and apply terms which did apply to Him prophetically in His humiliation. The humiliation of the Lord Jesus has to be rightly understood. He even says, "I am a worm, and no man", @Psalm 22: 6. Who would have dared to say it? but there it is. We have to understand the humiliation of Christ and what Scripture does say, but to say anything beyond that is not right.
W.C. You mentioned the word prayer, was that in the Lord's humiliation?
J.T. Suppose anyone asked you to pray for the Lord Jesus; what would you think of that? You would say, It is not right.
{265}
I believe the Spirit of God would impress upon us that He is always guarding the Person of the Lord Jesus. In John's gospel He brings out wonderful things beside that, but the whole truth of His Person is there at the start. I believe there has been in some minds the idea of praying for the Lord Jesus. I am speaking of it now to correct it, so that the brethren should be preserved. 
Ques. Would it not apply to any limitations that the Lord took on down here, to force them upon Him up there now would be wrong?
J.T. His humiliation enters into it; what His humiliation really was. How are we to be imbued with it? The Spirit of God would imbue us with it to guard the humanity of the Lord Jesus, such a humanity that certain things can be predicated of it; but He is not in that now. 
Rem. So the glory of His Person now would but enhance what He took on when here.
J.T. You just marvel at the things the Lord says of Himself in the book of Psalms. 
Ques. Is it first of all the thought of the Hebrew servant and then the ark of the covenant in its proper setting?
J.T. Just so. In Numbers the ark of the covenant went out of its place, left its place deliberately, so to speak, to take the lead in seeking out a resting-place for Israel. It enters into the present time. The Lord is ready to serve His people in any such way; He "humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth!" (@Psalm 113: 6); but it generally works out in the assembly, as Paul says; "I rejoice in sufferings for you, and I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly", @Colossians 1: 24.
{266} 
Ques. The expression as to the Lord leaving the status of Deity or leaving the form of God, would not now be accepted, I understand?
J.T. I should not say those were scriptural remarks. We cannot restrict a divine Person as to what He can do or must do. To bring in the word *must* is not right. The position remains, His position in glory: "we shall see him as he is" (@1 John 3: 2); and when we shall see Him we shall be like Him. So that is the truth of Christianity, but the heavenly side of it, and I think any statement which limits the Lord is wrong; because divine Persons retain Their liberty and we cannot impose things on Them.
E.C.M. Does @Philippians 2: 7 have any bearing? He took "a bondman's form", but it does not say, He left the form of God.
J.T. We cannot say He left the form of God. We cannot restrict a divine Person, but we must bow to what He does and accept it. 
Rem. Mark says "that he appeared in another form", @Mark 16: 12.
J.T. That has to be noted. The same word is in @Philippians 2. We are not told what form that was. Divine Persons are not subject to limitations. 
Ques. Does the holy mount remind us of that?
J.T. Quite so: when they were with Him on the holy mount.
E.T. The Lord speaks of Himself to Saul from heaven as "Jesus the Nazaraean", @Acts 22: 8.
J.T. Quite so. He is entitled to do these things. Why is it the *holy* mountain? Because *He* was there. 
Ques. Would you say a word as to the Son in subjection at the close of the kingdom?
J.T. It is fitting to be observed that the Son is to be subject. 
Rem. He is taking the thing on Himself.
{267}
J.T. Yes, that is what it is: He is taking that place, "that God may be all in all", @1 Corinthians 15: 28. We cannot exclude the idea of God from Him, even if He accepts subjection. When we come to @John 1 we shall perhaps be helped further on that point. What is in mind now is the general thought in the subject; life in Christ for man and exclusively for man. "There was a man sent from God, his name John" (verse 6). That is how John the baptist came in to call attention to the light. "*He* came for witness, that he might witness concerning the light" (verse 7). That is the point in this chapter so far as we have gone. "*He* was not the light, but that he might witness concerning the light. The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man" (verses 8, 9); or sheds its light on every man. "Every man", so that whether it be a heathen, or Jew, or a nominal Christian, the light is for him and there is nothing lower than that. That is what is contemplated. What John presents runs through: so, "He was in the world, and the world had its being through him, and the world knew him not" (verse 10). That is, here in the world He is the Creator. That is the plain statement indicated here. "He came to his own, and his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God, to those that believe on his name; who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God" (verses 11 - 13). That is, the idea of children is brought in apparently to enhance the position. The relation is not a heavenly position, but is the relation down here and belongs to manhood.
W.S.S. "As he is, so are we in this world", @1 John 4: 17. Does that summarise what is in mind?
J.T. "As he is, so are we in this world", is very remarkable; it is as He is now, illustrating the abstract character of John's first epistle.
{268}
W.S.S. Hence the importance of apprehending the word *children*, so that there may be correspondence to it.
J.T. So I think the idea of children of God fits in with that. It is a family relationship down here, *where Christ was*.
W.S.S. In Christendom generally there is very little idea of this.
J.T. Quite so. The idea of children John keeps in view right through; it is what we are as suffering with Christ; the right is given to us, as born of God, and as believers on Christ's name.
Eu.R. Does @Philippians 2 bear on it? "Irreproachable children of God in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation; among whom ye appear as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life", @Philippians 2: 15, 16? We get light and life there.
J.T. Very good! It applies fully; truly a Philippian idea too.
A.H. In that way we would be "sons of light".
J.T. Quite so; in keeping with Luke and John. "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light", @John 12: 36. It is "*sons* of light". 
Ques. Is the point that God is not operating on any lower level?
J.T. He is not. The principle is Christianity, and it applies universally. Christ is light for everyone that comes into the world; He is light for men and there is no ground for regarding that light as any other than the light of Christianity. 
Ques. Do you think they had that in mind on the day of Pentecost? Peter says, "Men, brethren" (@Acts 2: 29), and Paul says, "Men and brethren", @Acts 13: 26. (See the Darby Translation note to "brethren" in @Acts 1: 16).
J.T. The original pattern; it had the idea of men there. That bears it out, men, but as brethren.
{269}
W.C. Does the word 'men' bring in responsibility as well as privilege?
J.T. Quite so. Christianity is the last word in testimony from God; it applies to all, whether Jew or gentile or nominal Christians.
J.S.E. Is the fulness of it seen at Athens? He commands "all men everywhere to repent"; @Acts 17: 30.
J.T. Quite so; and in the early scriptures man is introduced as above other creatures. Even Satan is brought in on a very low level historically in Scripture. It is a very remarkable thing; "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion", @Genesis 1: 26. Then man is taken up again in chapter 5: "the book of Adam's generations", @Genesis 5: 1. Our wisdom is to keep to it and get the gain of it in our souls; what a wonderful place men have, and what a terrible thing it is that any should exclude themselves by rejection of the truth! John is a witness of how terrible is the end of men who refuse the truth, those he calls "the dead" in @Revelation 20: 12.
P.H.H. Do we need to keep the truth in an abstract way before us? There is sometimes a difficulty to name persons who have not got on very far in their souls, and allocating a certain place to those who have not the Spirit.
J.T. We must go by the truth. What can God not do? We assume that what we see externally is so, but we are leaving God out. What can He not do at any moment of time?
Eu.R. We must clothe the work of God with the light of the dispensation.
J.T. Quite so, that is the idea, "the true light". 
Ques. Is light as you are speaking of it God's great answer to what came in at the fall of man? "The day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
{270}
die", @Genesis 2: 17. Does the tree of the knowledge of good and evil now make way for the tree of life?
J.T. Hence we have the glorious truth that comes out in the Lord's address to Ephesus. I believe the Lord has in mind the primary thought of God as to man in @Revelation 2: 7: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. To him that overcomes, I will give to him to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God". That is what I was thinking of, it is not simply the Old Testament, it is the book of Revelation. The tree of life as in the midst of the paradise of God; and it does not appear that any outside the heavenly city have part in the fruit of it, showing how great are the privileges of the assembly. The paradise of God takes form in it. Hence the facts we are now dealing with refer to Christianity, and only Christianity, nothing less than Christianity. We may have to take notice of the context, but God is showing that His greatest thoughts are to be applied at the present time.
W.C. The man in Christ was caught up into paradise.
J.T. Quite so; that is the idea, a *man*. The overcomers are the only ones who are said to have part in the tree of life in Ephesus. What God is presenting here is His full thought. Anything less than that may develop in the millennium, or perhaps before or after. These thoughts are set out in Christ personally and in the saints, as in Paul, "a man in Christ", @2 Corinthians 12: 2.
Eu.R. So in the last chapter of Revelation there is both "the water of life" and the "tree of life" connected with the heavenly city.
J.T. Quite so, and there is an allusion later in @Revelation 22: 16: "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. *I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and
{271}
morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come". That is, the full thought of the assembly is expressed in this: "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". Then it goes on, "And let him that hears say, Come. And let him that is athirst come"; (verse 17). This is the last word you might say to anyone in this dispensation, to appeal to anyone, *Come*. "And let him that is athirst come; he that will, let him take the water of life freely" (verse 17). These are the things that are now attested in Christianity. "I testify to every one who hears the words of the prophecy of this book, If any one shall add to these things, God shall add to him the plagues which are written in this book. And if any one take from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part from the tree of life", @Revelation 22: 18, 19. That is to say he is cut off from this greatest thing, "the tree of life"; "and out of the holy city, which are written in this book" (verse 19). The holy city and the tree of life are both in mind here as a last testimony in Christianity. 
Ques. Does the thought of the children of God involve the full thought of life?
J.T. I think so; what we are down here as sons of light. The Lord speaks of the overcomer being a son in @Revelation 21: 7. That relation is in keeping, I would say, with the relation of children in @John 1, where we are given the right to take the place of children of God. Now there is not much time to deal with this second part of the chapter. What is in mind to call attention to is the gathering of Christ in this closing part and Nathanael. Nathanael is a suggestive man, so to speak, in this gathering time and things are to be real. He is "an Israelite indeed" (verse 47), but that would be quite in keeping with what we are saying as to man. Things are open to him; he is to see greater things, and he is capable of understanding
{272}
the Psalms: showing he is a real person in this dispensation and learning quickly, not at the expense of correctness, but learning well.
P.H.H. Referring to what you say as to substantiality of life in Christ, does Nathanael represent life becoming substantial in the saints by way of learning?
J.T. I think so. He represents quick learning, and it is a time for quick learning or we may not learn at all. There is not much time left. The Lord confirms it all to him by saying that he is to see "greater things". "Thou shalt see greater things than these. And he says to him, Verily, verily, I say to you, Henceforth ye shall see the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man" (verses 50, 51). "Henceforth ye", the Lord turns to the plural in verse 51, His mind running on to man as represented here, the kind of man we know; and the gospel finishes with a similar thought -- "great fishes, a hundred and fifty-three" chapter 21: 11. 
Ques. Would the man in @John 9 be one of those hundred and fifty-three?
J.T. I think so.
J.J.T. "A man in whom is no guile". Is that the thought that there is no hindrance to development?
J.T. Quite so; like the Lord in that sense.
H.H. Going on to @Psalm 8 and leaving @Psalm 2, is that going on to the other greater things? I was thinking: "Thou art my Son; I this day have begotten thee", @Psalm 2: 7. Nathanael quoted that Psalm, but the Lord connects the greater things with @Psalm 8.
J.T. In verse 47 the Lord says, "Truly an Israelite". That is the kind of man that is wanted: if you are dealing with Israel, get a real Israelite; if you are dealing with Christianity, get a real man. "Before
{273}
that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee. Nathanael answered and said to him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. Jesus answered and said to him, Because I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things than these. And he says to him, Verily, verily, I say to you, Henceforth ye" (the plural) "shall see the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man" (verses 48 - 51). In other words, it is the Son of man glorified in the greatest sense. The "greater things" would be that; leading the soul beyond the millennium into eternal things.
W.S.S. I wondered whether "greater things" is a kind of key to the gospel involving the change of dispensation?
J.T. Well, it is: only, "descending on the Son of man", making Him the greatest, links up with the third chapter of the gospel where the Lord speaks of Himself as Son of man. I think the Spirit of God has in mind to keep man, although God's Son, the King of Israel, to keep man in mind -- man in son-ship, you might say -- sonship in man, but rather man in sonship. 
Ques. Would you say that God is fully with His Son in the Son of man being glorified, is that the full thought?
J.T. I would say that, probably what Stephen saw. What is called 'the book of the opened heavens' opens it up. Hebrews gives us the glories of Christ peculiarly, even more than Peter's epistles, more of "the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow", @1 Peter 1: 11. What Stephen would see! the glories opening up to him! He is "an Israelite indeed", but an Israelite capable of expanding into the greatest things, into the assembly, into the greatest thoughts of Paul, "and the Son of man standing
{274}
at the right hand of God", @Acts 7: 56. I think that is what we may arrive at, in our present enquiry; the greatest things.
W.H. Does Nathanael represent the only kind of man suitable for the present time, really filling out the period?
J.T. Quite so; he is the real man of his kind, but he is to be greater than that, and Christianity is greater than Israel. Anything that may be predicated of what men are capable of today in science and the like, we are greater than that. All this is remarkably opportune for the brethren to learn fully, and I believe Nathanael works out in Stephen and Paul.
E.G. That makes it a very solemn thing to be "always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth", @2 Timothy 3: 7.
J.V. If a man learns quickly should he also act quickly according to the word that he learns?
J.T. Quite so: that is the thought for every one of us, to get out of our nationality, and all that brings us down, to go in for the greatest things, and to know that is God's thought for us. The Ephesians were to have "full knowledge", according to the apostle's desire in @Ephesians 1: 17. 
Ques. With regard to the three sabbath days at Thessalonica, is the special learning seen in that they move quickly in response to the ministry of Paul?
J.T. I think so. I think there is a suggestion in those three sabbath days at Thessalonica. Sometimes we hear of persons going on ten or fifteen times preaching in a place. I do not know that they gain in that; they might go on somewhere else.
J.A.P. Paul acted quickly after the Lord had spoken to him.
J.T. Quite so; but he was a little slow at first, "Why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptised, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord",
{275}
@Acts 22: 16. He learned quickly afterwards. 
Ques. Does that involve that we wash away the stain?
J.T. "Wash away thy sins", it is not the Lord washing away, it is ourselves. "The washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit", @Titus 3: 5. The two things go together.
{276}
MAN AS PRESENTED IN CHRIST AND THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@John 3: 1 - 21; @John 4: 13 - 30
J.T. It is thought well that attention should be again called to Nathanael as representing the progress made in the truth so far, that is, the end of chapter 1. He says to the Lord, "Rabbi thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. Jesus answered and said to him, Because I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things than these. And he says to him, Verily, verily, I say to you, Henceforth ye shall see the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man" (chapter 1: 49 - 51). That is, he is learning quickly, but he finished with what applies to Israel; but the Lord said, "Verily, verily, I say to you, Henceforth ye shall see the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man" (verse 51). That is, the Lord led him on to the "Son of man", to the idea of man, which is the point before us. The Lord proceeded to @Psalm 8, whereas Nathanael remained on @Psalm 2. It is thought that there is an application to our present circumstances in this, that we are to proceed in our learning steadily higher, apprehending man's place in the counsels of God; not simply His special dealings with Israel, but man, and as the object of heaven, and we might say, of earth. "Angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man". So that it is higher and higher, at the same time having in mind the place man has in the counsels of God because it is the Son of man here, and the Lord enlarging on the matter in using the plural, as if the truth was stated in what He said Himself and including what Nathanael said. The truth was stated and should be expounded and would be expounded;
{277}
for the Lord Himself expounds it in the plural as if it goes beyond Nathanael, beyond Israel. This leads to what we have now in chapter 3, where we have, not simply an Israelite indeed, but "the teacher of Israel" (verse 10), but very slow to learn, very slow to give up old thoughts. Chapter 2 is passed over simply because the time requires that we should proceed somewhat speedily to reach the end in mind, that is, chapter 20 and perhaps chapter 21. So Nathanael is in the mind of the Spirit now, and the Lord holds to the rising principle of the teaching, although beginning at the very lowest, namely, new birth. 
Ques. Would you say a word as to the distinction as to manhood as seen in Christ here in humiliation, and manhood as above according to God's counsels?
J.T. We can see that in humiliation He took up a lowly position and yet an authoritative one. In chapter 2 He distinguishes between His listeners. It says, "when he was in Jerusalem, at the passover, at the feast, many believed on his name, beholding his signs which he wrought. But Jesus himself did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men, and that he had not need that any should testify of man, for himself knew what was in man" (chapter 2: 23 - 25). That is the point to have before us I believe, and that the Lord distinguishes between persons who are affected by outside signs and the like and fail in the basic truth, especially life. It is a question of new birth, of a new beginning in man. It is not the generations of Adam as in @Genesis 5, but a wholly new beginning. 
Ques. Do I gather from your remark as to the end of chapter 1 that you regard the glory of the Son of man as the objective?
J.T. Yes; the "greater things", because the idea of the Son of man goes back to the counsels of God.
{278}
Wisdom had its delight in the sons of men (@Proverbs 8: 31) showing that it is there from the beginning. 
Rem. Before Caiaphas the Lord said, "Henceforth ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming on the clouds of heaven" (@Matthew 26: 64); and they could not stand that.
J.T. Quite so.
A.J.G. Is it leading up to what is heavenly? "If I tell you of heavenly things?" (verse 12).
J.T. I think so; that is what is in mind. It was important there should be an Israelite without guile. That is the principle, to be truly the thing, but not to stop short of the divine counsels, for these are in regard of men.
P.H.H. What is the thought of birth? It already says in chapter 1 "born ... of God" (verse 13); here it is "born anew" (verse 3), and "born of water and of Spirit" (verse 5).
J.T. I think it is the great basic thought, that it is not simply the family, but born throughout. It is the basic thought that we are to have before us now; what the race really means, what is in mind in it, and that certain things cannot be reached or touched aside from this fact of the new birth. Being "born anew" setting aside all professions of humanity from the natural standpoint, what is in mind at the end of chapter 2. He does not commit Himself to that at all. Nor does He commit Himself to human things today, what man thinks he is discovering or effecting. We are dealing with the thing itself, not in its abstract sense but what it really is. A wholly new thing covered in the word *new*, which is not merely new but born throughout.
H.G.H. Is new birth the indication of manhood according to Christ?
J.T. Hardly that, but it is an entirely new beginning. Nicodemus was a specially slow learner. He was hindered by what was accepted and that is
{279}
what is current today. People are so engrossed with what they think they have and are, and we have something new here applying to man throughout. 
Rem. The greater the man was naturally the more difficult it was for him to accept that he could not carry anything over into the realm of new birth.
J.T. Just so; hence the claim generally to add something to Christianity. That was the great baneful thing at the outset, but what is claimed in John's reference to "from the beginning" (@1 John 1: 1) shows that man can add nothing to Christianity.
H.W.S. Why is the thought of man linked thus with the kingdom of God?
J.T. It is because of what had taken place through man, involving the breakdown in him through sin coming in. It is obvious that God being God, if He is acknowledged at all, must have a kingdom, in order to meet the conditions brought in by sin. "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God"; @1 Corinthians 15: 50.
E.C.M. Have you a thought as to Jehovah's answer to Rebecca's enquiry? "Two nations are in thy womb, And two peoples shall be separated from thy bowels; And one people shall be stronger than the other people". Would that illustrate the thought?
J.T. Yes; and the working out of the two as it culminated in Malachi; "Jacob have I loved"; which is the true idea; Rebecca's idea really was Jacob. "But Esau have I hated", @Romans 9: 13. That is how matters stand, I think, in the working out of the truth in John, leading up to the lake of fire; showing how little we can build on natural birth, because nothing for God came from Esau morally.
P.H.H. Are the thoughts in @John 3 as to new birth progressive? that is, "born anew" and "born of water and of Spirit" (chapter 3: 5)?
{280}
J.T. I think so. I think the water comes in as necessary. It is just touched on here, whereas Paul in Titus speaks of "the washing of regeneration and the renewal of the Holy Spirit" (@Titus 3: 5), leading us on to the ground of Christianity.
E.G. Does verse 8 refer back to verse 3? "Thus is every one that is born of the Spirit"? Is that the same as being "born anew"?
J.T. It is fuller, you know. "Born anew" is not very conclusive, it does not terminate in anything definite, but "born of the Spirit" does. It is a great operational thought; it means a divine Person is operating.
J.S.E. Does this thought of entering the kingdom of God involve the enlargement of the thing in its spiritual wealth, or is it merely a positional suggestion?
J.T. I think the moral element must be there from the outset, because the idea of God must be taken according to what is found in the beginning of Genesis. It is God, a plural word being used, as if to convey the fulness of the idea, the operative thought being in mind here; it is divine operation additional to what Genesis presents. It is a new and distinct matter that must enter into all that follows in man. Now it is not creational, but as in Titus, "the washing of regeneration". The thought of washing being attached to it, is that we might have the real idea that God has in mind, brought into being.
J.S.E. All that I had in mind was as to the trend of the narrative that the saints might be brought into the intelligent enjoyment of all that the Lord had in mind. "Born anew" is in order to see the kingdom; but when it is a question of entering it, He uses these two subjective ideas "of water and of Spirit".
J.T. The idea of God was there. The Lord does not at all minimise the thought that Nicodemus was
{281}
a teacher, neither the thought God had that He must have a kingdom. If it be the vegetable kingdom, or any other kingdom that belongs to nature, God has to do with that; but "the kingdom" is specifically stated, and evidently works out from what God is morally. Hence the need for those born anew so that man might come into what God has in mind. He has a kingdom; the kingdom of Israel did not come up to the fulness of it, it is "the kingdom of God".
W.C. The idea of birth and new creation are brought in in @James 1: 18, "Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures". Do they bear the one on the other?
J.T. Quite so: "firstfruits of his creatures". It is clear that the word 'creature' and the word 'generation' must run together. They have a great place, of course, in the language that is known to us. But now we are dealing with birth or generation, the family being in mind; that man is to be in relation with God as a family, not simply as a number of creatures. Then the great fact that the Son has become man, and all leading up to the thought of believing on Him, as stated later in the chapter.
H.H. You have referred to the word 'regeneration', the Lord said in @Matthew 19: 28, "Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel". I thought the link of the Son of man with what you are saying is interesting.
J.T. The idea of man runs into the millennium, of course. Regeneration is a provisional matter, involving a certain change in man, and intended to work out what God can do and be to him, though still in flesh and blood condition. It is what God
{282}
can work out thus, that is simply a provisional situation measured by time. The apostle says, "Flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom" (@1 Corinthians 15: 50); hence the teaching here runs into Paul's teaching. 
Ques. Would you say a word as to Peter's view of the matter where he refers to the instrumentality, "born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the living and abiding word of God", @1 Peter 1: 23?
J.T. That is in advance of what we have here, "the living and abiding word of God". Here we lead up to the greatness of what God has in mind on the life line, and how the Lord changes over when He finishes with Nicodemus. He has been speaking of earthly things, but now He speaks of heavenly things and connects the Son of man with heaven. As in Chronicles, the Spirit of God was in haste to reach David. Heaven is introduced very early in the narrative; and here in chapter 3 the Son of man as in heaven is in mind. If Nicodemus does not understand earthly things, how is he going to understand the Son of man in heaven? It is a question of using our purified mind to understand what God is saying to us.
H.H. How do you understand what is spiritual? The Lord moved on. Do you connect the kingdom of God with what is heavenly?
J.T. With regard to the designation, "kingdom of God", I would add to that, "the kingdom of the Son of his love", @Colossians 1: 13. Then we also have the "heavenly kingdom" of the Lord Jesus (@2 Timothy 4: 18), and several other expressions of the same kind, all linking with this. 
Ques. Is not a universal kingdom as presided over by the Son of man, essentially a universal kingdom involving heaven and earth, and are not all the great thoughts of God seen in that setting?
{283}
J.T. Well, Stephen saying that he saw the Son of man standing at the right hand of God would suggest all that, because Stephen indicates the change over from the twelve to Paul's teaching, which, of course, is absolutely necessary to arrive at the full truth; until we arrive at it, we are just making for it. The idea is to move on in order that we may arrive.
Eu.R. Did you say this ran on into Paul's ministry?
J.T. I would say so; only we are dealing with John. Stephen saw "the Son of man standing at the right hand of God" (@Acts 7: 56); and that would be a universal idea. God was there working out the universal idea of man.
T.A.P. When it says, "the Son of man who is in heaven" (verse 13), is it analogous to "the bosom of the Father", @John 1: 18?
J.T. Well, heaven is a place, and you might say the bosom of the Father is a place, but it is a place of affection. "The Son of man who is in heaven" is a mysterious statement which we ought to be ready for, too. What does it mean? He is here on earth, seen by human eyes, but He is in heaven. So He says later, "What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" (chapter 6: 62). We have to seek to get to the meaning of these things. Therefore, I would think that the position of the Lord as in the Father's bosom is a suggestion of the place of supreme love. The expression is found in chapter 13 in the sense of being receptive in a supremely attractive way. Heaven has to receive Christ, "until the times of restitution of all things", @Acts 3: 21. That is another matter. He is there now. The Lord's position in heaven is that of waiting. It is the same idea in that sense, heaven is open to Him, but not final; but He is there as pending the time of the fulfilment of prophecy, until
{284}
things come about which have been spoken by the prophets since time began. Therefore, the prophetic period has not yet begun at all in the full sense of the word; it is a waiting position, but a receptive position: "Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things". The idea of "the Father's bosom" is also a receptive position only in a fuller and more blessed sense. 
Ques. "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit", @Acts 7: 59. Does Stephen understand that?
J.T. Just so. He would have full place there; and, I suppose, Paul too as he entered the third heaven, at least he went as far as that. Paradise is a receptive idea; he entered *into* paradise. I suppose the idea is, the higher the creature is allowed to go the more he realises how welcome he is. It is the Lord's thought to have him there.
W.C. John in the Lord's bosom (chapter 13), is that not final, a similar thought applying to ourselves?
J.T. You are speaking of "in the bosom", @John 13: 23? The bosom is receptiveness, I think. Where love is. "The Son of his (the Father's) love" (@Colossians 1: 13), is a beautiful expression.
A.M. There has to be receptiveness on our side too. "As many as received him", @John 1: 12. That involves the affections, does it not?
J.T. What is contemplated is that those that are born of God afford all that to Christ. Luke contemplates the time "of his receiving up" (chapter 9: 51), It was a period that had certain characteristics; and so on the mount Moses and Elias speak of Him and His exodus out of the world. Heaven was wide open to Him. That is the position now: He is waiting there for the "restitution of all things"; and now a privileged family is peculiarly in evidence; that is, the assembly.
{285} 
Rem. "Received up in glory", @1 Timothy 3: 16. Is that the idea?
J.T. Quite so.
W.S. With regard to the thought of flesh and blood not inheriting the kingdom; does that refer to the end of human life?
J.T. Well, if it does not inherit the kingdom what else is there? It is the thought of domination; it is clear that flesh and blood does not continue into eternal conditions. 
Rem. I should like to be clearer as to the Lord using the present tense, "who is in heaven", to a man like Nicodemus, because "his receiving up" was not yet.
J.T. The mystery of His Person enters into that statement, but the passage, "the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified", in chapter 7: 39, refers to the Lord's ascension consequent on His death. That is, there was a time "of his receiving up", @Luke 9: 51. Moses and Elias were to understand that. Great things were pending then and great things are pending now; all that the prophets have spoken of and all the millennial conditions. And so we have to confine ourselves to get at the truth of what the Lord Jesus is engaged with at the present moment, and what is meant by the passage, "whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things".
P.H.H. Is your thought that the Lord being in heaven, the heavenly things have their place in the ministry at the present time?
J.T. If we are really ministers we are always concerned as to what is current in heaven. That is how I look at it. Not that it is a question of anything being told to us outside our dispensation, but it is a question of waiting on the Lord. There is "joy in heaven for one repenting sinner", @Luke 15: 7.
{286}
Repentance is current in heaven and joy is current in heaven at any given moment.
P.H.H. I was just wondering about the "heavenly things", what that covers?
J.T. That would cover the features of the truth that refer to heaven. But we should especially note the statement, "whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things". What is occupying the Lord there now? He is now on His Father's throne. It is a question of what is current in heaven at the present time. The Spirit here, and the gospel going out, so that it is a *living* state of things all the time; what is proceeding up there and what the Holy Spirit is doing down here. What is up there is what Christ is going on with; what is down here is the Spirit's work.
J.H.T. So @Colossians 3: 1 refers to seeking "the things which are above, where the Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God".
J.T. That is it, where He is "sitting at the right hand of God". What is going on up there, and correspondingly what is current on earth in the power of the Spirit.
H.F.N. Would that link up with what comes out in Hebrews? He has "passed through the heavens" (chapter 4:14); and He appears in heaven for us, (@Hebrews 9: 24). Then in @Ephesians 4: 10, it is said, He has "ascended up far above all heavens".
J.T. They are great facts relative to His ministry, what He is engaged with now. The epistle to the Hebrews opens up what He is doing now. He has an office, High Priest over the house of God, and what enters into that! But His going beyond all heavens would show that all this service that is carried on is by such a Person. You cannot limit Him at all. We cannot limit divine Persons. *We* are limited, They are not. Hence, if the Lord Jesus is
{287}
gone beyond all heavens what opens up flows out of the position He has taken. The greatest things are being opened up to the assembly now. It is not merely a kingdom matter, but a *bride* matter. Hence the liberty the Lord has in our service down here. Christ and the assembly enters into it as well as the Father and the Son and makes the most precious subject possible amongst us, including the Song of Songs. 
Rem. I like what you say. Is it right to view Paul, Peter and Stephen as entering into what heaven is? I was thinking of the sheet let down from heaven; and Paul entering into the third heaven, and Stephen seeing what is actually current in heaven. Is that the possible link at the present time instanced in these three men?
J.T. All that suggests much. Take Peter, what happened at Caesarea in the house of Cornelius, and what happened in the house of Simon the tanner. What things are opened up! What vastness! All coming within the cognisance of Peter. There is personal contact between the Holy Spirit and Peter as there was between the Holy Spirit and Philip. Then going on to Paul, what he experienced in his relations with the Lord after he was converted! What he experienced, for instance, at Jerusalem! What he experienced himself in the desert. And the fourteen years before he recounts that he was caught up to the third heaven, caught up into paradise. Then what he heard "which it is not lawful for a man to utter", @2 Corinthians 12: 4! But then there *was* something to utter. Undoubtedly it was to come out. To be simple, we are living in the currency of heaven. Heaven is not static, it is active. Angels and divine Persons are active and impressions are coming in constantly, the Spirit being here. Hence, the greatness of our position, and what is possible.
{288} 
Rem. It is said of the Spirit, "he shall not speak from himself; but whatsoever he shall hear he shall speak", @John 16: 13.
J.T. What is the Spirit saying down here? Reflecting what is going on up there; because there is "another Comforter" here. One up there and one down here. 
Ques. How does @Ephesians 5: 26 fit in? "Washing of water by the word"?
J.T. That proceeds all the time, only we have to remember there is our side as to what is being done. What heaven is doing has correspondence here. What the Holy Spirit is doing corresponds; but there is our responsibility entering into all that and on all possible occasions this inward work proceeds. All these have to be taken account of so as to get into our souls what we are in, what is going on all the time. The Lord here is referring to what He had been saying to Nicodemus. It says, "Jesus answered and said to him, Thou art the teacher of Israel and knowest not these things? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that which we know" (@John 3: 10, 11); that is plural, and it conveys the authority with which the Lord spoke. "We speak that which we know, and we bear witness of that which we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If I have said the earthly things to you and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe? And no one has gone up into heaven save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up, that every one who believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal. For God has not sent his Son into the world that he may judge the world, but that the world may be
{289}
saved through him. He that believes on him is not judged: but he that believes not has been already judged, because he has not believed on the name of the only-begotten Son of God. And this is the judgment, that light is come into the world, and men have loved darkness rather than light; for their works were evil. For every one that does evil hates the light, and does not come to the light that his works may not be shewn as they are; but he that practises the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought in God" (verses 11 - 21). All that contemplates continual activity both as to believing and not believing; and as to judgment and salvation. 
Ques. Would you say a word as to eternal life? When the Lord comes to the "heavenly things" He brings in the thought of eternal life.
J.T. I think it is to be noticed that He speaks of heavenly things as the thought of eternal life is reached. The truth of eternal life has some link with the heavenly.
W.S.S. I was wondering whether what is said about the "Son of man who is in heaven" would bear upon what Christ is personally and intrinsically. It was not necessary for Him to die to go to heaven; but it was necessary for Him to die because of others being associated with Him, and the woman of Samaria would represent the character of the persons secured.
J.T. Now we come to chapter 4; and the thought in mind is to see what chapter 3 leads to, the *subjective* side of the truth. The introduction of certain persons helps us to understand. We have Nicodemus, we have Nathanael, we have John the baptist and we have Peter; and now we have the woman of Samaria. Undoubtedly the thought as to the woman of Samaria includes what she would
{290}
come into as a result of the light of God coming into her soul. She would become a vessel in the system the Lord was inaugurating. She represents that in a peculiar way because she leaves her water-pot, meaning that she would be herself a vessel; and we have to consider what her vessel would be useful for. Hence the importance of the subjective side in chapter 4 as to the question of life. Chapter 3 gives the highest point, I would say, the Lord referring to what is in heaven. But now we have Him here in an administrative way. Chapter 3 finishes with the fact that the Father loves the Son; the great feature as to the administrative side. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand. He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him" (chapter 3: 35, 36). That is what I was saying, the idea of judgment proceeding as well as blessing, salvation and life. But now the Son is seen in an administrative position, and I think the woman comes in as linked on with the system in which the Lord is administering, into which each of us is to come; and if we are ministering in the things of God we are in it.
F.S.M. Is every person in this system a potential worshipper?
J.T. It is very remarkable that the Lord speaks of worship here and tells the woman that "God is a spirit". That is another great matter to be understood. The question is whether we, in ministering the truth, understand these great things; for there is much ministry, there are many ministers. The idea of a vessel is opened up in this chapter. On the Lord all the vessels, great and small, hang (@Isaiah 22). Paul was specially a vessel, "an elect vessel to me" (@Acts 9: 15); and I think he is a pattern for all of us as to service and administration generally.
{291} 
Ques. Would such a vessel be available for ministry?
J.T. That is what I was thinking; whatever is current. We have certain things stressed in the testimony at a certain time and it is a question of what is being stressed now and how much one is in it, how one can be used. 
Ques. Is the system the assembly?
J.T. The assembly must involve a system. Israel involved a system and the universe involves a system. It is going on all the time in a systematic sense. Hence, we cannot but believe that the assembly involves a system and she is coming into it here. The woman of Samaria knows what to do; she left her waterpot and went into the city, and went to the men, and she had something to impart.
J.J.T. "Is not he the Christ?" Did she have anything further than the present before her?
J.T. She did indeed! She represents the *subjective* idea in the system; what she can bring into it as being subject. She is the only one, I think, who is told by the Lord in a personal way that He is the Christ. She was informed by Himself that He was the Christ. The feminine side of the truth must fit in with the Christ (see @Psalm 45: 9). In the New Testament the bride undoubtedly refers to the assembly.
E.C.B. What is the position as to the many believers who apparently do not come into the full truth of the dispensation?
J.T. Well, the fact that they do not come into it is, of course, sorrowful; for it is open to all. This woman came into it in principle; she represents those who come into it as redemption was accomplished and the Holy Spirit given.
E.C.B. God has only one thought for the saints at the present moment, and one has wondered much
{292}
as to those who apparently have not the Spirit, to what family do they belong?
J.T. There is no such *family* recognised. The persons who are in God's family are those who are of the assembly. The only family contemplated in this dispensation is that in the first chapter of this gospel: those who receive Christ. They have title to become children of God; they belong to the family of God. Therefore, they have to judge themselves to get right with God; and the ministers who are amongst us should make this fact clear to all. There is no family but the assembly on earth now. 
Rem. It says, "and the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved", @Acts 2: 47.
J.T. "Those that were to be" -- those that are to be saved are added to the assembly every day. There is no other family.
H.H. Would @Acts 19 show how the thing is to be put right? There were persons who had been without the Spirit and Paul puts it right. Would that show how the minister is to put right a faulty ministry?
J.T. Quite so; that is the point there. Note the number twelve which is an administrative number. In chapter 18 we see a man and a woman engaged in putting another man right. He is a good preacher, an eloquent man, not that he did not have the Spirit; I would say he did. Aquila and Priscilla regarded it as their business to put this man right. He preached and they evidently enjoyed his preaching, and they "took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly". You may say, But may he not belong to another family? There is no such suggestion in any part of the New Testament. The family is designated in chapter 1 of our book: the full thought of Christianity. Aquila and Priscilla put Apollos right; and then Paul finds twelve persons at Ephesus and they do not have
{293}
the Spirit. There is not the slightest suggestion that he would relegate these to another time, the time is now. The Spirit is available *now*.
W.C. @Isaiah 54: 13 refers to "all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah", and the Lord quotes that in chapter 6: 45 of this gospel: "They shall be all taught of God".
J.T.S. Does what you have been saying connect with the scripture, "He that believes on the Son has life eternal", and, on the other hand, "he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life", @John 3: 36?
J.T. That is the only alternative now. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand. He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him", @John 3: 35, 36. That is the only alternative. 
Ques. Is the work of divine Persons now to bring persons into their own distinctiveness?
J.T. That is what the ministry is for: "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man", @Ephesians 4: 13. The aim is to get all into this standard.
E.C.M. John in his gospel speaks of gathering "together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad" (chapter 11: 52).
J.T. Quite so. That is the only family owned of God as on earth now.
P.H. Should we be exercised as to what gospel we preach?
J.T. I would certainly challenge anyone who suggested anything of another family, as to what gospel *he* is preaching. There is only one gospel. 
Rem. The word in @Galatians 1: 8 is as strong as here: "Let him be accursed".
{294}
J.V. The eunuch in @Acts 8 when he is asked if he understood said, "How can I, except some man should guide me?"
Eu.R. Do the brazen serpent in chapter 3 and the springing well here involve an upward move towards the inheritance?
J.T. The springing up is that. The Lord indicates an upward move in chapter 3 objectively, but here in chapter 4 it is a well in the believer -- a subjective thought; a well "springing up into everlasting life".
Eu.R. That is how we would reach the heavenly things.
J.T. So chapter 3 and this chapter agree. The woman indicates what is subjective and how she came into it! She went to the men; she is not afraid of them or liable to be damaged by them now. It is complete deliverance. She is delivered; she goes to the men and the truth goes on. Christ is believed on as "the Saviour of the world". 
Ques. Is this woman born anew and born of water and of the Spirit?
J.T. She is in the gain of more than that; she is *delivered*. What she is implies the Spirit; that is the truth the Lord ministered to her. Not the Spirit as in new birth but as sealing her, the anointing, the sealing. She thus typifies full Christianity.
W.S.S. Would she represent the assembly as apprehending Christ?
J.T. Quite so. It really works out in Paul's ministry, "I have espoused you unto one man", @2 Corinthians 11: 2.
H.F.N. Does the attack of the enemy on the unity of the Godhead underlie this thought of another family? "One Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all", @Ephesians 4: 5, 6.
J.T. I should say so.
{295}
W.M. It says in chapter 3: 26: "All come to him", and then John the baptist says: "He that has the bride is the bridegroom" (verse 29). Does that show that the assembly is the exclusive thought?
J.T. Quite so; we can read it into the passage. Paul says: "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly", @Ephesians 5: 32. Really the woman is in mind in this; she represents the subjective side. The Lord does not call her *woman* until she owns the truth. "The woman answered and said, I have not a husband. Jesus says to her, Thou hast well said, I have not a husband; for thou hast had five husbands, and he whom now thou hast is not thy husband: this thou hast spoken truly. The woman says to him, Sir, I see that thou art a prophet. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship. Jesus says to her, Woman ..." Can anyone, who has considered the matter, doubt that the Lord used the proper word governing her position! She had discredited it before, but she is entitled to it now and I am sure the Lord is emphasising the assembly and what it is to Him; not shrinking from telling us what God is Himself, that "God is a spirit" (verse 24).
{296}
MAN AS PRESENTED IN CHRIST AND THE ASSEMBLY (3)
@John 5: 17 - 30; @John 6: 60 - 71
J.T. The allusion to @Exodus 24 in our prayer is opportune; it is said there that the seventy elders "saw the God of Israel", and we may hope that the present reading in @John 5 will correspond -- where we may see God. It is a question, however, of our state as to whether we can see God in such a sense; for the chapter affords an opportunity in the work of the Father, and the work of the Son; both being viewed as in the economy into which They have come, not in which They were in abstract Deity. The chapter contemplates the Son in the most remarkable way as in obedience and in subjection, and yet asserting at the beginning of the section that He is equal with God: "He had not only violated the sabbath, but also said that God was his own Father, making himself equal with God". That is to say, it is Christ in subjection; there is the most remarkable evidence of it, but yet in equality in the holy mutuality into which divine Persons had come. We finished yesterday with some remarks on the subjective side of the truth; that is, chapter 3 being the objective side of it as to eternal life, and chapter 4 being the subjective side of it; that is, in the Spirit. Hence, the woman of Samaria is brought into it. One who was unworthy of the name of woman but who acquired her place in the discernment of the Lord when she perceived that He was a prophet. That is to say, she began to *see* things and hence qualified in due course for the system set up according to chapter 3: "the Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (verse 35). The system is thus set up in love, and open to those who believe, persons qualified to enter into it, not simply as believers but as workers, as witnesses. So
{297}
that, as was remarked, the persons of the saints are represented in her as discerning, available in their bodies; as coming into the system which God had set up, the Spirit operating in them: "springing up into everlasting life" (verse 14). She was able to administer, at least, in the sense of light; for the Lord honoured her peculiarly in telling her that He was the Christ. So she would be a worthy type of the assembly. The assembly is clearly in mind. John the baptist having suggested the thought of the bridegroom and the bride, undoubtedly the Lord had this woman in mind, and had the assembly in mind in her.
Now this chapter opens up with the raising up of the impotent man at the pool of Bethesda; but the point is not to rest on that but rather what is in the Father and the Son. Although the sign must enter into the chapter; the sign of the Son, acting by His word, what He said to the man: the Son, therefore, is working, but on that principle. 
Ques. Just for a moment, with regard to your remark as to this woman being a worker; did the disciples fail there as being only observers? The Lord says: "Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for they are white already to harvest" (verse 35).
J.T. Quite so. They were really employed unnecessarily there. Employment in going into the city to buy bread by so many was superfluous, I would say; one of them could do it. The minimum should be resorted to when material things are in question, they are relatively insignificant, for they "perish with the using", @Colossians 2: 22. But *persons* are in mind in the administration; they should have lifted up their eyes to see the persons coming in. The woman understood that. Hence, she went to the men and told them -- imparted what light she had. She did not go beyond her measure. She would be involved in the waterpot. Paul says he had "a measure to
{298}
reach even unto you", @2 Corinthians 10: 13. Therefore, we have to test ourselves as to the "measure of faith".
H.G.H. In connection with the chapter we have read: "The Son can do nothing of himself save whatever he sees the Father doing" (verse 19). Does that suggest the Father is behind all the movements?
J.T. Quite so; it is a great operational chapter, divine operations by the Father and the Son. But, evidently, the Father, as He is introduced, is the Source of all that is coming out; which, of course, is the idea of the dispensation. The Father and the Son give character to the dispensation. The Son has taken a place above, and He has His own interests; but the thought here is the general divine system of which the Father is the Source. Hence in Ephesians we have: there is "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all" (chapter 4: 6). He is the Source of all, with the Son in absolute subjection. Subjection in equality is the thing to be understood, if God is to be seen in the dispensation. In chapter 4, the disciples were not in the work, therefore their remarks were beside the point. The feminine side was being stressed at the moment. They did not see anything at all in that. The teaching had been understood by the woman and the men come in in their own place.
F.H. "Others have laboured, and ye have entered into their labours" (verse 38). Would you include the operations of divine Persons in that?
J.T. Hardly. "My Father worketh hitherto and I work" (chapter 5: 17), shows that divine Persons are to be regarded by Themselves. The *others* mentioned in verse 38 of this chapter are spoken of honourably, as the real labourers.
Eu.R. In chapter 4 the Lord speaks to the woman about God and the Father; do you think that He would bring God into the consciousness of her being as told out in love in chapter 3: 16?
{299}
J.T. Quite so: God has to be apprehended as God. 
Ques. Would what the woman is doing answer the exercise you were raising with us last night as to the matter of occupation?
J.T. Quite so. It has been a real question with me for many years as to my occupation. I never found my way clear to give up my actual physical occupation, finding it helpful and practical in one's exercises generally; but the question now is as to whether the Lord is calling men to what we call the work. Clearly He is. At the same time we have to come to Paul really; as if the Lord would say to us from time to time, 'Consider Paul', because he is the last word in these matters. He stresses the fact that he worked with his hands; this is to be noted, but yet Paul says too that "they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel", @1 Corinthians 9: 14. We have to provide for that. There are considerable financial resources amongst the saints now and the question is whether it will last in the ways of God; and we are to regard the matter. The question is: "What is your occupation?" @Genesis 46: 33. When Peter and Andrew were called the Lord said: "I will make you fishers of men" (@Matthew 4: 19); which meant a change from their then occupation, which looks as if we should keep all these things before us and think of the measure of faith which is necessary to go wholly into the service. The need is great, but there is need of those who are nominally in the service to be placed on the principle of weight and measure: that is also great.
H.F.N. How does what you are saying as to the opening up of this wonderful economy bear on the thought of life and manhood?
J.T. It is the level to which the subject rises in this chapter. We are taken up above the ordinary level. It is a question of the Father and the Son.
{300}
We had John the baptist; and we had Peter, and Andrew, and Philip, and Nathanael, then Nicodemus, and then the woman of Samaria. All these are introduced in the gospel so far; but here, while the sign introduces an impotent man, a man wholly dependent on others, yet it is just a sign and does not enter into the actual remarks of the Lord in these verses. He is confining Himself, one may say, to the mutual relations of the Father and the Son in the economy. The Son in absolute dependence and subjection and yet in equality. The mind has to take in all that; it is a question whether we can rise to that. Our brother who prayed alluded to @Exodus 24 and it was there a matter of ascension. "They saw God" (verse 11) but on the principle of ascension. They were to go up, and as has often been remarked, Moses was to go up *into the mount* in addition; though they were all to go up, Moses only is told to go up higher; that is, to come up into the mount. Therefore, it is a question in the first part of moral elevation. That is the great thing we have to apprehend in this chapter. 
Ques. Does the thought of the woman in chapter 4 suggest the assembly in the thought of worship, and in this chapter is it divine Persons in the economy active in securing the worship in the system?
J.T. Well, yes; if the idea represented in the woman is just that, I would say the waterpot is the basis of the allusion, and what answers to that is herself; that she is the vessel. I would say that, although worship was brought up by her, what she had in mind was the light that had come to her, the Person speaking to her was no other than the Son. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water" (verse 10). That is the light she had although
{301}
there was further progress in the fact that she said, "I perceive". I believe the Lord uses the word *woman* rather as a type of the assembly here below in *testimony*; and she immediately goes out because He tells her He is the Christ, the Person who does things for the Father, the great official Actor under the Father. A divine Person, but nevertheless, in absolute subjection and obedience; and I think the woman would work out here, as already remarked, as a type of the assembly.
A.J.G. Is your thought that it is a feature of manhood to be working with the Father in what He is doing?
J.T. I would think so. Adam was not to be idle, he was not to be a man of leisure; he is to be in the garden "to dress it and to keep it", @Genesis 2: 15. Then we have in the divine mind his having a helpmate, and I believe that this comes into these chapters.
A.J.G. Is that working to be carried out in the consciousness of sonship? Does that enter into it?
J.T. Perfectly; and the moral side added to it: for the Lord speaks of His judgment being righteous in verse 30: "I cannot do anything of myself; as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is righteous, because I do not seek my will, but the will of him that has sent me". That is, it is sonship in obedience, equality in obedience; the moral side entering into it, but His judgment is righteous, a cardinal thought in the service in the economy.
G.S. Would you say a little as to how the truth of the Son of God relates to the truth as to the Son of man which you have stressed? The knowledge of the Son of God seems to be the height.
J.T. Of course we have to compare the difference between the terms Son of God and Son of man. Son of God is His relation with God; Son of man is His relation with men. Sonship of God in man, but then
{302}
it is sonship of man too, which, it is clear, has a part in divine counsels; because sonship is the great thought in mind, all the others are simply accessories: the divine mind is man. 
Rem. @Ephesians 1 would show that the great thought is association with the Son of God but union with the Son of man. The church is seen united to Him there. The One whom God has set to be "head over all things" the saints are united with Him. "Head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all", @Ephesians 1: 22, 23.
J.T. The church His fulness; "the fulness of him who fills all in all". Your idea is that it is Man in mind there. I would say that.
H.F.N. In relation to the Persons working, what is distinctly the Father's working? He is said to raise and quicken. I think we would all like to get a little help as to the Father's working.
J.T. Well, I think the chapter is to bring that out; "My Father worketh ... and I work" (verse 17). It is to bring out the Father's place; and for that we must go back to the beginning. After the seventh day, the Father had been working from the outset, I would say. The Son did His bidding and yet is His equal, so that the work goes on between the Father and the Son. Hence the importance of the word where we have the suggestion, "from the beginning it was not so", @Matthew 19: 8. We have to go back to the beginning for what was so. The Father takes things up after Adam's failure, and carries them on provisionally. Even so, the Lord came in on that line that the work of God could go on provisionally with the Jews. Now, it is a question of new creation, or rather, a new generation, as we had yesterday. Things have to begin over again. We have to come to that. God would go on patiently with Adam and with Israel; but there has to be the new start in the
{303}
new birth. That is what John stresses; and that the Father and the Son are working on that line in this chapter. 
Ques. "The Father loves the Son and shews him all things which he himself does" (verse 20). Does that bear on the extension of the service?
J.T. It shows the height to which we have come in the service. Whether we can bring that down to our ordinary service is a question, I think. We should be safe in keeping it to the divine operations.
C.O.B. Would you explain the use of the word used in expressing the Father's affection for the Son in @John 5: 20? The note at @John 21: 15 says *it implies attractiveness in the one loved*.
J.T. The Greek word is *phileo*, so that the love is active; the Person being the object of the affection at the moment. The other Greek word *agapao* would refer to a settled disposition of love. The point here is active affection. In this section the Son is drawing out the Father's affection.
W.C. Would the Hebrew bondman be the counterpart? "I love my master, my wife, and my children, I will not go free", @Exodus 21: 5.
J.T. It would, if we turn aside to the type from what is here. Here it is a question of the Father and the Son. Chapter 3: 35 has the other word; that is, *agapao*, the settled love of the Father for the Son. 
Ques. Would "in like manner" (verse 19) indicate the fulness of the response of the Son to the Father?
J.T. Quite so. The charge was that He was making Himself equal with God, which is true. "Jesus therefore answered and said to them, Verily, verily, I say to you, The Son can do nothing of himself save whatever he sees the Father doing" (verse 19). A marvellous statement! It seems to be something to be taken into our souls as to the divine Persons; "For the Father loves the Son" (verse 20), the Greek word for *love* conveying that the Son is the Object of
{304}
affection *immediately*. "For the Father loves the Son and shews him all things which he himself does; and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye may wonder" (verse 20). How is that to come out save by contemplation! 
Ques. Would you say that quickening is the characteristic line of divine operations in John; and is quickening necessary to bring us into the appreciation of the Father and the Son in this manner?
J.T. I would think so; it is a stronger word relating to the Spirit's operation. We have in John compared for us the acts and workings of divine Persons; which is a great matter if we can follow it out. They are all taken account of: the actual doings and services of divine Persons. So, here, it is the function of the Father, but also the function of the Son. It is given to Him to have that function; and the Spirit is said to quicken too, so each divine Person is seen as doing it. 
Ques. "He came to his own, and his own received him not" (chapter 1: 11). Does that give God the opportunity to work by His divine power? Faith would lay hold of what is done by divine Persons.
J.T. This chapter 5 views the divine workings in the economy; the economy did not begin with Adam. It was in the Son become Man. It is a question of the relations of divine Persons functioning in the system. It must be in the Father and the Son, but the Spirit is referred to very strongly in the epistles as quickening.
H.F.N. Is your great point that we might lose sight of ourselves and service and all that, and the whole gist of it is to be wholly taken up with these operations of divine Persons, and that would work out in manhood?
J.T. That is the way. The Son is the great Operator, and that comes out in the woman's testimony.
{305}
The assembly must come into it and in this sense the operations are by the Spirit now subjectively in the assembly. That is where the work goes on now. So this chapter must be taken as inaugural; what has been inaugurated and carried on in the Son, both in manhood before He died and after He was risen. From heaven the operations go on through the Lord, but in the main it is a question of the Spirit and the assembly, whilst divine Persons can never be restricted: only we have to understand the divine Persons respectively through whom they are carried on. In chapter 4 the woman implies all that.
J.V. "Come, see a man ... is not *he* the Christ?" (chapter 4: 29): first "a man" and then "the Christ".
J.T. That is good. It is a question of attraction, I think. "Come, see a man"; how she admired Him! But then, is He not the Christ? But the Lord had told her He was. She has the light of Christ in His manhood, in His perfectness and in His operative power. That is the Christ.
J.J.T. "The Father raises the dead" (verse 21); why does it not bring in the thought of the Son raising the dead as well?
J.T. It says: "Wonder not at this, for an hour is coming in which all who are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall go forth; those that have practised good, to resurrection of life, and those that have done evil, to resurrection of judgment" (verses 28, 29). I would think that that covers the matter of the Son raising.
J.A.P. Would that be the Son of God in verse 29?
J.T. The line begins: "He who honours not the Son, honours not the Father who has sent him. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me, has life eternal, and does not come into judgment, but is
{306}
passed out of death into life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that an hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God" (verses 23 - 25). That is the point, "Son of God"; and the question of the Son of man arises because of the matter of judgment. The Father does not judge. That is another matter. The operative thought as to the Persons; what One does and what One does not do. The Father does not judge anyone; He "has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is Son of man" (verse 27). But in verses 28 and 29 the resurrection refers to the operations of the Son of God I would say; because that is what is in mind. 
Ques. "Marked out Son of God in power, ... by resurrection of the dead". @Romans 1: 4. Does that bear on it?
J.T. The Son of God raises the dead; the Son of man executes judgment, because He is Son of man.
J.S.E. The instruction seems to be given in chapter 5: 16 to those who seek to kill the Lord, but in chapter 6: 24, 25, it is to those who followed.
J.T. That is good. What you say conveys the truth; it is a question of following. It is important to see the height to which the truth rises in this chapter 5, bringing before us the economy operative in the Father and the Son. The Son in complete subjection to, and yet in equality with, the Father, so that the truth of the Deity is - preserved in the economy. It is maintained at its true height between the Father and the Son. Only the Son has taken a place of obedience here, it has not been imposed upon Him, He takes it. He has taken a place according td the psalm, "a body hast thou prepared me", @Hebrews 10: 5. He has come into that position and He is true in the position, according to what governs it. So we have the absolute subjection of the Son, and the obedience of the Son, and yet His
{307}
equality with the Father in that position; and so our souls are kept balanced as to the Lord's deity. 
Rem. The Lord says: "My Father is greater than I" (chapter 14: 28).
J.T. That all enters into this position the Lord has taken. He speaks according to that position, but you cannot impose it on Him; He retains His place in equality. 
Ques. Does that not bring out the wonderful love of Christ?
J.T. The passage is wonderful! As has been remarked, it is a question of God, it is a question of divine Persons operating in the economy but retaining Their place in the Deity.
J.H.T. Is the retention of that place seen in His statement, "Before Abraham was, I am" (chapter 8: 58)? And again when they come to take Him, and He says, "I am he", and "they went backward and fell to the ground" (chapter 18: 6)?
J.T. That is important. The mind is so treacherous; we are apt to say things that are degrading and derogatory, and which are not true. Divine Persons act of Themselves and therefore retain Their place in the Deity in all circumstances.
W.S.S. Is it important to have an apprehension of the grace of the position the Lord has taken?
J.T. Quite so; you are impressed with the grace, and He is true in it. At the same time we are able to perceive that the economy is functioning, and functioning in regard of the place each Person has taken. The Father is working and has always been working, and the Son joins in as Man; and the Spirit joins in too.
W.S.S. That is exceedingly beautiful. "The Father loves the Son" (verse 20). This is the only occasion in which this particular word is used of the love of the Father for the Son. The Son has become so attractive to the Father in that position.
{308}
J.T. That is well worth thinking of: the active love of the Father here in the system or economy. The Lord is always attractive to the Father.
W.S.S. Would it link up with: "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them", @John 17: 26?
J.T. Yes.
R.D. Are we to understand that all divine Persons are included in God being "all in all"? @1 Corinthians 15: 28.
J.T. It is mystery; we cannot say more. There are three Persons in the Deity; They have come into the economy, but in general retain Their places in the Deity, the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit. 
Rem. "I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father" (chapter 10: 18).
J.T. Quite so; that is another expression of it -- we have sidelights. The general position of it is here in this chapter, but we have sidelights: "This commandment have I received of my Father"; as if the Lord would stress that at this particular point. 
Ques. Why does it say: "Then the end, when he gives up the kingdom to him who is God and Father", @1 Corinthians 15: 24? That is prior to the later verse, "That God may be all in all" (verse 28).
J.T. It is still God in the true sense of God; but in the economy there are distinctions. Therefore, the Son takes a place below, He takes a place of subjection in that chapter; but the general principle is that the Deity stands. But what we are speaking about is inscrutable; who would define it? We must be guided by the letter of Scripture.
Eu.R. The Deity stands, but the economy continues right on.
J.T. That is what we have come into.
W.S.S. Hence the importance of connecting the Son's title with manhood.
{309}
J.T. So that balances everything. We are shut up to inscrutability. We have to say we do not know anything but what Scripture says, and we keep to that. 
Rem. What we are speaking of now gives emphasis to that word "wherefore" in @Philippians 2: 9. The Lord Jesus emptying Himself, and the "wherefore", the consequence -- "highly exalted".
J.T. Quite so: because of the descent. Years ago we went through all that; but we are now dealing with another matter; the relations of the Father and the Son and their operations in the present dispensation, having specially in view manhood in Christ. Of course, Deity has to enter into this, and the question of the Son of man; but we have arrived at the altitude, the height of the matter, and we are entitled to speak of it as Scripture speaks of it here. This is the very summit of our subject. Notwithstanding the Lord has taken a relatively lower place with the Father, He yet retains His place in the Deity. So we are enabled to go back to the beginning and what is in mind is man. God has come into the sphere of operations, doing things, first in creation and then in redemption, then in new creation, but He has man in mind. The Son has come into that and glorified it, and we have come into it on the principle of entering into an economy in which God is apprehended; the same God that we had at the beginning (@Genesis 1: 1); but this chapter enables us to dwell on the economy, the operations of the Father and the Son as in the economy; and to retain in our minds that that economy although operating does not change the positions of the Persons: that the Father and the Son are equal.
Eu.R. In this thought of manhood, have you in mind that the woman is essential to it?
J.T. That is what we said a moment ago. It is evident that she must come in. John had already
{310}
spoken of it: for where the bride is there is a bridegroom; so where there is a bridegroom there must be a bride. I believe the woman comes in here designedly so that we may get the thought of the assembly as necessary to fill out what we are dealing with.
P.D. It is the witness of the Father in verses 32 and 37, and the witness of the works in verse 36. Would that apply exclusively to the Lord or does it come in where manhood is manifested?
J.T. We have not read that part, but it is quite right to speak of it: "If I bear witness concerning myself, my witness is not true" (verse 31). A remarkable thing! "It is another who bears witness concerning me, and I know that the witness which he bears concerning me is true" (verse 32). I would say that is the Father. Then He speaks about John. "Ye have sent unto John", -- the "ye" is emphatic -- "and he has borne witness to the truth. But I do not receive witness from man, but I say this that ye might be saved. *He* was the burning and shining lamp, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light" (verses 33 - 35). That is John the baptist. "But I have the witness that is greater than that of John; for the works which the Father has given me that I should complete them, the works themselves which I do, bear witness concerning me that the Father has sent me" (verse 36). Now we might bring in chapter 9, because the man was born blind in order that the works of God might be manifested; but it is the Father here in chapter 5, the Father's witness to the Son.
H.F.N. Might we have a word as to chapter 6?
J.T. We do well to take notice of the fact as to the order of these thoughts. We have come to the top here as to the order of the truth, because we are dealing with the individual side of our subject, but the point is the Father and the Son.
{311}
Now, to come to chapter 6. The chapter is very long, has 71 verses and deals with the subject of eternal life, especially the food needed for the entrance into it. The Lord is ascending. His ascension is alluded to, but He has come down to give life to the world. We should see the one side in the verses read; that it is a question of departure. It was a time of complaint as in the book of Numbers. We should see whether there is anything of that kind amongst us. Moses even fell into it himself: he complained; we are all liable to it although dealing with such great matters. So it is a question as to going away. Peter answers the question, "Will ye also go away?" (verse 67), by replying "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God" (verses 68, 69). As much as to say the Lord Jesus is apprehended as the High Priest. That side of the truth evidently enters into this position. Chapter 6 contemplates the food essential to life.
J.H.T. Does @Numbers 15 come in in that sense? I was thinking of the rebellion in chapter 16 and how in chapter 15 you have the food in the offerings.
J.T. I think it is especially the balancing of the things that are brought in accompanying the offerings; such as fine flour and wine, the accompanying of the necessary things, that we should be balanced in holding the truth set out both in principle and in general in the book. There is the need of balance as in @Numbers 15.
W.D. Is there the antidote in @Numbers 21? "The princes digged the well, and the nobles of the people hollowed it out" (verse 18)? Would that be the antidote for complaining?
J.T. Quite so; the princes and the nobles are working with the lawgiver.
{312}
H.F.N. What is your thought in regard to this chapter? Are the garners of the economy opened up to us? What is your thought as to life and manhood? Is the food the support of manhood?
J.T. That is what I think. The side that is opened up in the chapter is the question of food; and of course it runs through as in chapter 5 -- the Father and the Son -- but chapter 6 is the food that man needs in view of being raised up in the last days. We are to be carried through provisionally by this kind of food until the time of resurrection.
Eu.R. How does eternal life link on with manhood?
J.T. Life is the light of men. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men" (chapter 1: 4). Man was in the divine thought in innocency; that was tried, but of course man was in the divine counsels, that is man in Christ. Adam is regarded as a figure of Him that was to come (@Romans 5: 14). 
Ques. Would verse 19 have any bearing in reference to the progress they had made to arrive at the new position?
J.T. "Having rowed then about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they see Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the ship; and they were frightened. But he says to them, It is I be not afraid. They were willing therefore to receive him into the ship; and immediately the ship was at the land to which they went" (verses 19 - 21). What is in your mind? 
Rem. I thought it bore on the question of spiritual progress, arriving at things quickly, and the question of food here. Finality is reached here as Christ is received.
J.T. "They were willing therefore to receive him into the ship; and immediately the ship was at the land to which they went" (verse 21). They reach their end: that would help them in view of spiritual instruction. We are now dealing with the way the
{313}
mind is intended to travel spiritually; and the end is, "Thou art the holy one of God" (verse 69). Peter is saying that, and I think it alludes to the service of God.
E.G. Would you say a word on "Thou hast the *words* of eternal life" (verse 68)?
J.T. It is just details. The Lord coming down to our minds in detail, because we "know in part", @1 Corinthians 13: 12. We have been at this question of eternal life for fifty years and we have not arrived at it yet. In that we are all slow learners; but there is so much in this question of the man God had in His mind and the kind of life.
E.G. Does it involve the Lord's ministry?
J.T. It involves the ministry we have now too. The ministry is that in which the truth is brought to us. The objective idea is in revelation, but the gifts are needed to bring the thing to us as power, and that is where the Spirit's power appears. It is well to apprehend the power in which the truth is brought to us, not an abstract thing but brought to the saints in power by the gifts.
P.H. The words being "spirit and ... life" (verse 63), is it intended that as coming under His divine teaching we should become spiritual and enter into this matter practically?
J.T. Well, just so. We have alluded to the need of detail. Sometimes we break them up too much and the saints are kept too long in childhood or babyhood. God has given us minds to work things out ourselves and not always be asking.
W.C. With regard to the service of God and the question of manhood; the service is to go on, but the test comes apparently in the hard sayings, whether we can take them in in view of enrichment in the service of God.
J.T. Quite so. It was at the beginning; this disengaging of the truth from the Jewish system,
{314}
what a struggle it was as seen in Galatians. This setting aside of the truth by itself as Paul does in the Acts; "Lo, we turn to the Gentiles" (chapter 13: 46), and they receive the truth. Right through from then till now there has been a struggle. There is a struggle now in this thought of eternal life, whether we are accepting the humbling in the defections that are coming every week. "Will ye also go away?" (verse 67); we are all challenged, and the segregation of the truth as in Peter's word, "the holy one of God", is the point. There is the need of apprehending Him in holiness in the sanctuary at the present time in incorruption, loving Him in incorruption (@Ephesians 6: 24).
P.H.H. Why does the Lord refer to "the Son of man ascending up where he was before?" (verse 62), in answer to their murmuring?
J.T. I think the Lord is not shrinking from the highest truth. We are all to think. We say that we are the Lord's people; let us think. We have to come to that: keep to the truth at all costs. He had said wonderful things in chapter 3 but He had not spoken of ascending. He is laying the basis of the idea of ascension, which is enlarged on in chapter 20. Of course, heavenly truth is never received by the natural mind, and therefore we are bound to lose people all the time because of the disciplinary ways of God.
P.H.H. Does that mean that the trend of the truth is more heavenly from the present time?
J.T. I think that the Lord is resolved to keep to the things He has ministered to us, to arrive at the distinction we are on in the truth. 
Ques. Does that emphasise the value of walking with Him in the way you are speaking of, but to go on to the most heavenly side?
J.T. That would lead us to move to the heavenly side of the administration. "Lo, I am with you",
{315}
(@Matthew 28: 20): John says, "Part with me" (chapter 13: 8), but in Matthew the Lord says, in effect, Stand by the truth whatever it cost and I am with you. But then "part with me" takes in the heavenly side. He has part in heaven according to this chapter; He has part with the Father, and it is our privilege to move on into that. I believe the Lord is entitled to our continuance to go in for the whole matter. 
Ques. Why do we have, "We have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God" (verse 69)?
J.T. We are not just recent comers; we can say, "We have believed and known". I have been speaking to one quite lately, he has come in but he could not say much about what he had seen; and now we have new comers we must provide for them. But, in principle. Peter is an old brother -- not that he was, but there is that principle of believing things and knowing them. Old brothers, as we were saying, know more than the young ones practically and experimentally.
C.L. So is our outlook to be constantly towards the economy and divine Persons in a day like this?
J.T. Quite so: this chapter involves inscrutability, but the Persons are there. Even though you do not understand Deity, you are in proximity to it.
C.L. Is there a danger with us of having our thoughts on a lower level than on the great Persons of the economy?
J.T. Quite so. Peter's answer is the point for us. "Will *ye* also go away?" This is to the twelve. Notice, the twelve are administrative, viewed in that light. The truth must go on. One knows one thing and one another; perhaps we do not all know enough, or each as much as another, but the truth is to be before us as introduced here. The Lord had in His mind that the truth has to be administered. It is a long chapter full of holy truth; but it is to be
{316}
administered, brought to the brethren, and the gifts ought to do that. As in @Ephesians 4, the gifts are brought in so that the truth might be brought to the brethren: as the apostle says: "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man" (verse 13). The gifts are to do that. So the Lord says: "Will ye also go away?" The "ye" is emphatic. Peter replies: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". Then the Lord says: "Have not I chosen you the twelve? and of you one is a devil" (verse 70). An evil thing among the administrators; one capable of such treachery. Hence, all the struggle and conflict we have had, and we shall have. Not that we would be prognosticators of evil; but, "Have not I chosen you the twelve? and of you one is a devil. Now he spoke of Judas the son of Simon, Iscariote, for he it was who should deliver him up, being one of the twelve" (verses 70, 71). He is not let go, nor are the twelve let go. He had been allowed to be there. Why are things that are not true allowed amongst us? We have the Bible, and the Spirit; why cannot they be exposed? Judas was allowed to be with the twelve: that is a solemn matter.
{317}
MAN AS PRESENTED IN CHRIST AND THE ASSEMBLY (4)
@John 14: 15 - 26; @John 20: 14 - 23
J.T. It is thought, having reached the highest level this forenoon in chapters 5 and 6, ending with the individual side of our subject, that is, life seen in individuals, it is in mind now to look at chapter 14 which opens up the subject of the Spirit in a collective sense, and life in the Spirit. There is also the feminine side of the subject; for the word man covers both male and female from this point of view. For us, the feminine side comes into chapter 20 in a very special way, opening up the truth of the assembly, although not formally stated; and also, the importance of teaching, which Mary Magdalene would stress. We have already had it in mind in chapter 1, and in chapter 6 it is stated: "They shall be all taught of God" (verse 45); meaning that spiritual teaching must enter into any subject, especially the subject of life, the subject of man.
The teaching evidently came in early in the history of man, in the history of the testimony in man; for it is said that Enoch was "the seventh from Adam" (@Jude 14), his name signifying possibly teaching through discipline. It would point to the idea being introduced early: the idea of teaching. Of course we know it has come down and is greatly stressed in the New Testament by the Lord Himself, and Paul also takes it up in a very special way. It is the same line of thought, and "the seventh from Adam" would mean that (if the name Enoch implies discipline, which is likely) God would stress it amongst the saints of this dispensation. Man is being taken up in the highest possible sense: as it is said in chapter 1 of this gospel, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men" (verse 4). It is clear that the teaching enters into that position. So we had it as to
{318}
Nathanael, then Nicodemus, and now Mary Magdalene. Teaching is prominent in all these settings, and learning; not ever learning and not coming to the knowledge of the truth, (see @2 Timothy 3: 7) but learning in a real way. I believe in this particular chapter we have it; namely, in verse 26: "The Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, *he* shall teach you all things, and will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you".
P.H.H. Is there something special in the Spirit receiving the designation Comforter in these chapters?
J.T. As to the primary meaning of the word I would say it is very special: that is, One by us, or with us; some One always here, called "another Comforter" (verse 16); and He is definitely said to be "the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive" (verse 17). So that that thought is important, and enters into our lesson this afternoon.
H.G.H. Does the thought of "another Comforter" link the Holy Spirit up with the teaching of Jesus?
J.T. Quite so: so the thought is that the idea of teaching enters into the Lord's word and the Holy Spirit would take it up.
H.G.H. Would continue it?
J.T. That is quite clear. The idea of continuance would be One come in to replace the One who has gone; so that divine thoughts are to continue, whether in Christ here or the Holy Spirit here.
A.M. Would you say something about knowing the Spirit objectively? As it says here, "Ye know him" (verse 17).
J.T. Well, it raises the whole question of revelation and whether we have taken it in. The knowledge of God implies the Spirit; for the Spirit is to be known objectively as God is, and so we have "ye
{319}
know him", and the following, "For he abides with you, and shall be in you". The idea of abiding with us would continue the idea of Comforter; that is, that He is with us, alongside of us.
Perhaps it is intended by the Spirit that John, as running on to the end of the dispensation, and much error being introduced since Pentecost, would necessitate the idea of teaching being stressed in the revival of the truth. Hence the great evidence of research during the past 100 years or so, and the result thereof in teaching in print amongst us, come through persons fitted by the Spirit to carry on such a service. Hence, in Matthew we have the idea of a scribe "discipled to the kingdom of the heavens" being "like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old", @Matthew 13: 52. The thought of a scribe would help us as to what we are saying and John's reference to books.
W.C. Is there any distinction between the Spirit's teaching and "what the Spirit says to the assemblies", @Revelation 2: 7?
J.T. Well, what the Spirit says in Revelation is the opening up of the Lord's words to each church, to each assembly. I suppose each of the Lord's addresses must be regarded as a brief though divine communication to the company as from One above. The Spirit's sayings would be somewhat the opening up of what the Lord said. What the Spirit says to the assemblies is a test to us: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies", @Revelation 2: 7. What the Spirit says is a test to us as to whether we take in what is meant in the Lord's communications. 
Ques. In what way would the teaching of the Spirit be a comfort to us?
J.T. Well, the word comfort of course is not quite strong enough as to teaching. As we remarked, in
{320}
verse 26: "The Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, *he* shall teach you all things, and will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you". That is somewhat stronger than comfort. The Spirit is seen in these chapters, i.e., 14, 15 and 16, as bringing all things to us: "he shall guide you into all the truth" (chapter 16: 13). That is another trait of John's writings needed at the present time, in view of the much error that has been allowed, and is being allowed, and of which we are always in danger unless we keep to the truth of the Scriptures and the Spirit's teaching. It is not simply that we learn, but we learn from the Spirit; that kind of teaching. 
Ques. The word "all" is mentioned twice; does that suggest that everything He knows is made available to us, and it is for us to be subject to the teaching?
J.T. "He shall guide you into all the truth", for instance; it is remarkable how we are all in the divine mind in this section. In the first chapter, when the Lord adds to what Nathanael had said, He turns to the plural, meaning that He would like to have all brought into whatsoever is communicated. No one gets light for himself alone but he would usually get it with others; and the Lord means in the change over to the plural in the light furnished to Nathanael that He wishes what He is saying to spread out: "Freely ye have received, freely give", @Matthew 10: 8. So that the whole church should be in mind in any ministry which the Lord takes up, running out to all to whom it should come.
J.H.T. Standing at the foundation, so to speak, of the Acts of the Apostles we read: "All things which Jesus began both to do and to teach, until that day in which, having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles", @Acts 1: 1, 2. Would that be to keep them within the confines of "the Spirit of truth"?
{321}
J.T. Very much, I would say; especially where it is placed. The doing of anything, the carrying it out practically, should in some way precede the communicating of it to others; and the Lord is said to have charged the apostles *by* the Holy Spirit at that time, and told them to wait till the Spirit should come (see @Acts 1: 2 - 4).
Eu.R. In the epistle the apostle encourages the little children that "the unction which ye have received from him abides in you, and ... the same unction teaches you as to all things", @1 John 2: 27. Does that link it up?
J.T. "All things"; quite so. The unction teaches all things: it is a peculiar word as bringing in the activity of the Spirit in the little children.
J.A.P. Why does He bring it down to the individual in verse 23 of this chapter?
J.T. It is common in all divine communications, one would say, to bring in the individual, because, although we are in the assembly, the individuality of the believer must remain at all times and will remain eternally, I believe.
H.F.N. Help us a little as to the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, and then the Lord's movements, "I will come to you" (verse 18). I think the brethren would be very thankful if you would open up to us the place the Spirit has, and then the place the Lord has as coming to us.
J.T. The Spirit is viewed here in a very special way as Comforter; and His presence as the abiding One down here makes all possible in regard to what has been said. "Another Comforter" (verse 16) contemplates His position down here. There are not two Comforters in heaven: there is One there, and One down here. But then, to suggest or say that the One there is dependent wholly on the One here will not do; because we have evidence that the Lord
{322}
acted apart from the Spirit in His communications, in His comings, even after He went to heaven. So that we must not impose anything on divine Persons. If in general He speaks through the Spirit and makes His communications through the assemblies, that is quite simple; but then, to say that He must do that, is here error lies, because divine Persons can never be put under restrictions. We have to leave divine Persons free in all these things. Then the love of the disciples is proved in keeping His commandments; that is the question of obedience. The section opens with obedience; and then the Lord proceeding on the mediatorial position: "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but *ye* know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you".
Now the position is made clear; the Spirit of truth is here, and the world cannot receive Him. That is to say, that all that belongs to the world, religious or otherwise, is shut out from all that is of the Spirit. Viewed as being the world, it cannot receive Him; and hence, what can be expected from the world? It cannot receive the Spirit of God. "But ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you": these are the plain facts. He abides with you; He is to be apprehended objectively as abiding with us; and hence we get illustrations in the Acts of the Spirit acting Himself, and even speaking to Peter. Therefore, we have the Spirit here in an objective sense, also He acts generally subjectively. A divine Person apprehended here and near to us, thus in us and with us. Then verse 19 says: "Yet a little and the world sees me no longer; but ye see me; because I live ye also shall live". This is where our subject easy to tell that it is the Father there in what has lives, so we live. Our life is contingent upon His
{323}
living. A very precious thought: "because I live ye also shall live".
H.F.N. "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you"; can we substitute the Spirit for Christ, when He says, "I am coming to you"?
J.T. That is just what I was saying; the Lord comes to us Himself. We cannot say He must come by the Spirit, because we have positive proof that He came to Paul before he was converted so we cannot say He came to Paul by the Spirit.
E.J.McB. You mean He comes personally.
J.T. Quite so. The great subject opening up now is of the communications of divine Persons above to the assembly below; and divine Persons are viewed here as moving in that sense. Hence, what an area we are brought into, and that continues.
Eu.R. "He himself stood in their midst", @Luke 24: 36. Would that confirm it?
J.T. Just so. Before He went up, that happened several times according to @1 Corinthians 15; but it also happened after He went up to heaven, introducing what we are saying; the dispensation affording liberty to divine Persons to move in relation to the assembly. 
Ques. Is the Spirit the power to apprehend divine Persons?
J.T. I should not deny it if a person felt the presence of God before he was converted, say, before he had the Spirit. The divine Persons make Themselves felt in the assembly. One not indwelt might feel the divine Presence. The unbeliever in @1 Corinthians 14 comes in and hears the prophetic word, and he falls down and reports "that God is in you of a truth" (verse 25). He is affected by the presence of God. That is a wonderful fact, that on the earth at the present time there is the divine presence.
A.J.G. In what sense does God the Father come: "We will come" (verse 23)?
{324}
J.T. In the same way, I think. We are told God is here by the Spirit: "in whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", @Ephesians 2: 22. He is God Himself here in the Spirit. The Spirit is God, but we have already been noting the difference in the actions of divine Persons. The differences noted are to be observed, that therefore we may hope to arrive at discerning each Person as He acts. I would say that is a very difficult matter to say much about, but we can cite instances in the Scriptures where the Father is seen acting or speaking; where the Son is seen acting or speaking; and where the Spirit is seen acting or speaking. So we have to take account of what actually happened. You would arrive by careful analysis at who it was that performed any particular act. You would arrive at it by the context in which what happened is related.
J.S.E. In this gospel the Lord spoke to the Father; "Father, glorify thy name" (chapter 12: 28). "The crowd ... said that it had thundered" (verse 29). It was the Father's voice.
J.T. Quite so. What a study it would be for any of us to look into the facts to see whether we can discern whether it is the Father or the Son speaking!
J.H.T. In @1 Corinthians 12, the apostle says; "I do not wish you to be ignorant" (verse 1) and then later he refers to "the same Spirit; ... the same Lord; ... the same God" (verses 4 - 6). Would that have any bearing on what you are saying?
J.T. That would bear on it, I would say, generally; but what I was saying about facts reported, or facts that may occur, whether we can attribute them to the Father, Son or Spirit; not going into detail as to what is said in the Scriptures, if facts occur such as should be attributable to the Father, then it is easy to tell that it is the Father there in what has happened. If terrible things have happened, if a
{325}
governmental check has come in -- I am not saying the Spirit might not act in that sense -- I could easily determine that is an act of God. That makes you restful. But then, if it were a person suddenly converted, and manifested the sense of definite life, that is, the effect of the new birth: of course, that is the Spirit. I could tell who does that. Then, as to what the Lord Himself may do; that can be recognised. We can definitely say, such and such a thing was done by the Lord. The gospels afford abundant evidence as to that. 
Ques. Would @Acts 13: 2 be an illustration of what you have in mind? "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them"?
J.T. That is so; the Spirit is seen acting definitely Himself; more particularly in view of service, the Spirit is seen acting in it: and so in Philip; and so in Peter; and so in Saul and Barnabas. Therefore, we can conclude that any actions of that kind can be attributed to the particular Person who generally acts in that way.
W.J.W. With regard to the manifestations of Jesus, would the reference to "already the third time" in chapter 21: 14 show there were many such occasions?
J.T. I think number three is final there. Number one is in chapter 20; and number two referring to the Jews; and number three to the gentiles, the hundred and fifty-three great fishes. Eliminating the dispensational side in @John 21, and bringing in experience in the service of God, I would say we may expect the Lord to act in the close of the dispensation in the sense of catching big fish; important persons spiritually coming into fellowship. It may be saying much, but why should it not be so? The net did not break. There is recognition of the work of God in the net, that it is held intact. The fellowship is held
{326}
intact by principles, and great persons, great spiritual persons, may be located; for the work of God is being recognised in what is being done publicly. The fishing expedition was not inaugurated by the Lord, but the Lord ultimately took a part in the matter; and so it is. The Lord has joined in the revival, we may say. He has said, "Cast the net on the right side" (verse 6). The brethren have been told what to do and there is a great catch. The net did not break and there are one hundred and fifty-three great fishes. One was speaking of it lately in a certain locality where the meetings are being reduced somewhat steadily; the way to expect a remedy or replenishment is indicated in that action in @John 21. That is how the Lord would meet a situation like that. Also the claims of the government which affect the young people, the young men and women. We can pay it off, we can meet it by the fishing expedition of @Matthew 17: 27. That is to say, the stater was enough to pay the tax required. The Lord will take the matter in hand: we shall be able to meet the claims of the government and the claims of the wear and tear of the fellowship. We can expect the Lord to come in and replenish the losses. Hence the position is that we can go on in assurance that the Lord can stand by us to the end. The claims of the government will be met by the one fish, the actual liability being stated, and then the hundred and fifty-three great fishes, not the actual value stated, but said to be great fishes.
Eu.R. Then the end of it, they know by observation that it is the Lord.
J.T. The loved one knew that it was the Lord operating; and what a comfort it is!
W.W. It is said by Paul, "The Lord stood with me", @2 Timothy 4: 17. He recognised the Lord.
J.T. Very good; "and strengthened me".
{327}
A.W.P. Will there be a stronger revival in the latter days of kingdom principles? Peter lands the catch but John recognises the Lord.
J.T. Peter knew what to do, but the Lord says: "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken" (verse 10). The Lord graciously accredits it to them. 
Ques. Would you make a remark as to "the Lord is the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3: 17?
J.T. The Lord Himself would be that. That is another thing to be noted in our enquiry: "the Lord is the Spirit"; it is what He becomes in certain circumstances, I would say, showing how divine Persons can act of Themselves. It is the action of the Lord.
F.W.K. Does @Acts 16 bear that out, where the Holy Spirit forbids the apostle to go into Asia, and then it is the Lord is forbidding it?
J.T. Quite so. 
Ques. "There are distinctions of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are distinctions of services, and the same Lord; and there are distinctions of operations, but the same God who operates all things in all", @1 Corinthians 12: 4 - 6. Would that be the general line of these operations?
J.T. That is a general statement that would help us as to discerning divine Persons. We have it in one case in @John 21; how they discern it is the Lord. 
Rem. In @Genesis 6: 3, God says: "My Spirit shall not always strive with man"; and Peter referring to the same days in @1 Peter 3: 18, 19, says it was Christ, "being put to death in flesh, but made alive in the Spirit, in which also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison".
J.T. That is to say, it is a matter of retroaction. The Lord's preaching is viewed as retroactive. He went and preached to the spirits which are in prison, Peter says. 
Ques. Was it seen in Noah's preaching?
{328}
J.T. That is just what is meant. Noah was the preacher all the period of the time. Until the day that Noah entered into the ark the preaching was there and there were no converts. It is not to say the preaching was not perfect, it was by the Spirit. The Spirit was striving, until Noah went into the ark. He signifies a man who does things. What God signifies is to be done. Noah does that, he is distinguished in @Hebrews 11.
H.H. The Spirit of Christ in Noah?
J.T. Quite so; and in that Spirit "he went and preached". We have to bring a thing down to the actual facts. It was the Lord's preaching, for the Lord had to do with the preaching of Noah. Peter is speaking about the Lord, that He preached, and that He preached through Noah. He preached in the Spirit. Hundreds of years intervene, but divine Persons can easily be understood to cover that.
H.F.N. Might we get your thought as to these two scriptures as to life in manhood?
J.T. The first chapter we have covered; that divine Persons have opened up a way in relation to persons, in relation to the disciples, as we see it in @1 Corinthians 15. Then in Paul's case, who confirms that divine Persons may thus act, and even with persons who have not the Spirit. I hope we are all of one mind about that, because it is very clearly taught in Scripture. Then the other scripture is introducing the idea of teaching in Mary; but the idea of woman, as the Lord says in verse 14: "Having said these things she turned backward and beholds Jesus standing there, and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus says to her, Woman". I am alluding to the word "woman" as we have already alluded to the Samaritan woman. That is, it is a woman, the feminine side, and she is seen here in view of the assembly. That is why
{329}
it is put this way. "Whom seekest thou?" What person? "She, supposing that it was the gardener, says to him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. Jesus says to her, Mary". That is personal; not sex, but personal. The personal name, all entering into what is before us. "She, turning round, says to him in Hebrew, Rabboni, which means Teacher". That is the *Spirit's* comment, meaning that Mary had been learning; which means, I understand, she has so designated the Lord her own particular Teacher. That is, she acknowledges nothing less.
W.D. Paul heard Jesus speaking in the Hebrew tongue; and Mary also spoke in the Hebrew tongue here.
J.T. There is no doubt that in both cases the Jew was in mind. Both persons had the Jew in mind. Mary undoubtedly had. She was not at all clear of Judaism. Therefore, the Lord says: "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God". She would be delivered by that. The Lord is recognising her strong links with her own nation and the Lord is delivering her, leading her on to the heavenly side of the truth which she is to be used to communicate to the brethren. I would think, therefore, that she is like Nathanael, a quick learner. She had only just spoken to Him, and she concludes that Rabboni is the suitable word by which to designate Him.
S.R. Would the power of her ministry be seen in the word she brings, "that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her"?
J.T. That is, we might say, her word. Jesus said: "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God. Mary Magdala comes bringing word to the
{330}
disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her". But how much had she learnt from Him? How long did it take her to learn? It was a matter of minutes; and that brings up the matter of how God can act in that way, what He can do, even in a "twinkling of an eye" (@1 Corinthians 15: 52); what God can do!
H.H. God took a rib and builded a woman (see @Genesis 2: 22).
J.T. You mean we have been speaking of the quickness with which Mary learns? What we have said as to quick learning is there. She may have seen Him before and the reference she made alluded to that, but He is her Teacher. I would say the Lord's words to her are to detach her from the Jewish system. How are we to be brought into all these things? And how quickly we may be brought into them!
H.H. We may have this same kind of message in our own souls; is that your thought?
J.T. Her remark, "Rabboni", meaning as it evidently does, what He was to her, that is, to show us how quickly we may learn these great truths, and need not be a lifetime on it. Learn quickly. 
Rem. The Thessalonians are said to be "taught of God to love one another" (@1 Thessalonians 4: 9); and then in the next chapter it says, "But of the times and seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you. For yourselves know", @1 Thessalonians 5: 1, 2.
J.T. Yes, I am glad you have brought it up now. We have indicated there that three times would be enough for a preacher to limit himself to, "three sabbath days" (@Acts 17: 2); that is all they had, and how quickly they learnt! We can understand, therefore, the apostle's comment as to them and what they were to the Father. "The assembly of Thessalonians" (@1 Thessalonians 1: 1); that kind of persons, the persons who had been there when Paul visited the
{331}
place three sabbath days. They are "in God the Father": a remarkable thought.
Eu.R. Will you say how the thought of His brethren is linked with manhood?
J.T. I think it is how things are worked out in the divine teaching when the family really began to take form. There was the idea of a family in Adam, and this is mentioned in @Genesis 5; but we have to await the divine family, and how quickly they may be formed! We have it, I think, in chapter 1 of John's gospel; the Lord gives us the right to take that place of children of God, as "born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God" (verse 13). So the idea of the family evidently comes into the teaching in John in a peculiar way; that man is to be understood in relation to his place in the family.
P.H. Why is the Father spoken of first? The Lord says: "My Father and your Father, and to my God and your God".
J.T. Well, what I am concerned about for the moment is what the family is in regard to our subject, and why it is that the man is viewed as in the family; and it looks as if God is honouring man in patterning him after Himself. For the Father is the source of all, and His thought is that man is to be with Him on the principle of a family. Hence, the great importance of the family as coming into this matter; Abraham is a man who is our father and he is marked off as loyal to God, commanding his house after him; and so the race has come down to us on the principle of Abraham. But now it is a question of the Father and the Son; our relations with God in the economy. How God has come into the economy in order to be with us and that we should be with Him; and I believe all this enters into this remarkable chapter. Bearing on that, the Father comes first in the message, not God.
{332}
P.H.H. "My brethren"; is that what we are to the Lord more than what we are to one another?
J.T. I think whatever we are to one another must originate with God. Whether it be to the Lord, what we are to one another is in the light of what we are as His brethren; and that gives dignity to us in one another's eyes. Am I understanding you?
P.H.H. I was wondering how we might speak in the Lord's day morning meeting relative to this matter of the Lord's brethren as on the ascending scale in the service of God? Is it right to refer first to our relation to one another, and then our relation to Him?
J.T. Well; we can say we are the Lord's brethren, and that brings up how much time we leave open for the Bridegroom's relation with the bride. How much time can we give to it? It is quite right to speak of these allusions now, because we are dealing with the assembly in our subject and we are about to finish it. Isaac, as offered up by Abraham, is not said to come down to Beer-sheba with Abraham, which is a figurative allusion to Christ. The voice from heaven announces great things as to Abraham's faith and devotedness. The second time there is a voice from heaven and God swears as to what He would do for him, and he and the young men went to Beer-sheba (@Genesis 22: 15 - 19). Isaac is not said to be among them. Mary is told in @John 20 to go to the Lord's brethren; these are mentioned first: "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father" which would mean a delivering word for her from her Jewish, original connections. "I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God"; that is the order in which the Lord mentions the truth.
{333}
What I am referring to now in regard to Isaac is the fact that he does not come down, but immediately we get Rebecca in the genealogy, or in the relations of Abraham and Isaac; "Bethuel begot Rebecca". Following on that, in chapter 24 we have Abraham, the great father, seeking a wife for his son; and where is that son? Well, that is what @John 20 teaches. Mary is to have in her soul that the Lord had gone up. He had been into death, as in type Isaac had, but He said, "I ascend to my Father". So there is something in her soul in view of the assembly; the thought was in the Lord's mind: the whole thought of the assembly. If He has gone up, He has gone up; and if He comes back it is to have the assembly, His bride. Therefore, the message is to be delivered and known amongst the assembly, known amongst the brethren; known amongst those who are now regarded as the brethren of the Lord Jesus Christ. In the light of Mary Magdalene's place here, what is said of her; the feminine thought here, that is in mind: if man is to be apprehended we must have the feminine side. The word was included in the first reference to man: "Let them have dominion", @Genesis 1: 26. She fits in; it is a question of the persons and what they mean; what is in the Lord's mind in bringing them in here. We must have Christ and the assembly. Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly", @Ephesians 5: 32. It is a question of man; how man is to be eternally with God as man, and a family. Not so many persons, but one Man and one woman. The whole of our instruction is brought up in the apostle's word: "*I* speak as to Christ, and ... the assembly".
W.C. "My brother, and sister, and mother", @Mark 3: 35. Is that the extension?
J.T. That is just what fitted because of the coldness of someone in the company who said, 'Your
{334}
mother and brethren are outside waiting for you'. The Lord met that by saying: "Whosoever shall do the will of God, *he* is my brother, and sister, and mother". It is a question of the will of God in the chapter you have referred to. 
Rem. They said to Rebecca: "Thou art our sister; mayest thou become thousands of tens of thousands; and may thy seed possess the gate of their enemies!" @Genesis 24: 60.
J.T. Just so: the whole matter of numbers merges into one great idea, Christ and the assembly; it is a question of man. 
Ques. Would you say a word as to the difference between the assembly viewed as a woman, the answer to the Man, a part of the divine counsel, Christ and the assembly, and the personnel of the assembly being the brethren of Christ? Does not the one underlie the other? Is there ability to take up our place as with Christ and His brethren if the assembly is not apprehended?
J.T. Just so; that is what we are engaged with now.
W.C. Does not brethren as comprehensive, include the feminine thought?
J.T. Yes: but take Open Brethren, they have not the faintest idea of what we are speaking of; that the final counsel of God merges into the one idea of Christ and the assembly. It is not a matter of females being in heaven as women, but what is certain is that the feminine idea finishes in the assembly viewed as an entity. 
Ques. Is what you have in mind that in the garden at the very beginning. God's thoughts are seen in the man and the woman, and that is finally brought in in Christ and the assembly? I think Mr. Raven once made the remark that everything brought in for the pleasure of God is the fruit of Christ and the church.
{335}
J.T. I remember one saying to him in America, in my hearing, 'Why do you say so much about the assembly?' And he replied: 'What is there to speak of unless we speak about the assembly?' That is the idea: every divine thought centres in Christ and the assembly.
G.C.S. In @Hebrews 2 we have the thought of "bringing many sons to glory" (verse 10); and then, "not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" (verses 11, 12).
J.T. She is the vessel that He has in mind; everything merges into Christ and the assembly. It is what is to be in eternity, pending the final thing coming in when the assembly comes down from God out of heaven (@Revelation 21: 2). She comes from Him, and she is the bride of His Son: a marriage for His Son; and who is the wife? She is the wife, adorned, as a bride should be, for her husband. So we come into the eternal state of things from that point.
E.C.M. The final thought is that God should tabernacle with men.
J.T. Quite so.
E.G. "The assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of his own", @Acts 20: 28.
J.T. That is a well known term: "the assembly of God"; Jew, and gentile, and the assembly of God -- a very well known term. It is really a question of owning. We always quote it: "the blood of his own", meaning it is the blood of Christ, but put in that way, One so dear to God.
Eu.R. In assembly service, having reciprocated the love of Christ for His bride, do we then pass on as His brethren to the position of being alongside Him with His Father and His God?
J.T. Well, I do not know about that; I should say that we begin with the brethren, because it is
{336}
thus we should merge into the feminine thought: because it is what the Father has in the bride. 
Ques. Is it not summarised in Mr. Coates¬ beautiful lines -- 'And God's deep love eternally shall rest In that which ever speaks to Him of Thee' (`293:5)?
J.T. Quite so.
P.H.H. Would you please say that again as to the feminine side giving way to the masculine? You say you are not sure about that.
J.T. Well, it is just the way you get it in Scripture. The truth works up to this passage, and it is largely the responsible side, it is the masculine. But then I was attempting to go on for a moment to @Genesis 22. Isaac does not come down and Rebecca is at once introduced. Then Abraham has the thought of a bride for his son; and then the servant visits Padan-Aram; and then the journey which is described graphically. There are the beautiful features of Rebecca and the wonderment of the servant. What a person she was! He marvelled at it, which is a remarkable thing; especially as we think that the servant of his house is really the Spirit. We are in the region of wonders in regard to Christ and the assembly. That is what it is. Isaac is seen coming and going, according to what should be read, coming and going from the well Beer-lahai-roi (see @Genesis 24: 62), the well that Hagar had to do with; but it is now a question of the assembly, not Israel. That is what he is occupied with. He is not like Joseph, the man of affairs; he is at leisure, and he is out in the fields meditating. "And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, camels were coming" (@Genesis 24: 63); meaning that he is concerned as to the power with which she is brought to him, in the power of the Spirit, on the camels. Then we are told Rebecca saw him, and she had already been instructed by the servant
{337}
that Isaac was his master. Then Rebecca veils herself, as if to refuse all others but himself. She is to be for him: and then the marriage, so to speak, although we have not the word at all. It is a question of the persons and what flows out from themselves; what they do, what Isaac does. Then later on we have Isaac dallying with Rebecca his wife. "Dallying" is the word used; and I think it is a time for that; to provide for the Lord's part, the active affections of the Lord for the assembly. If He has the bride, there must be enough time for that; and I would say that what is due to the Father flows out of that: the great volume of affection, involving the affections of Christ for the assembly.
W.S. As to the brethren coming first, is it that those who compose the bride must first of all be His kindred?
J.T. Quite so. I hope we have reached the consummation of the subject including man and his wife -- Christ and the assembly -- what man is as so viewed.
W.S. The assembly becoming a comfort to the heart of Christ.
J.T. Quite so.
{338}
MAN AS PRESENTED IN CHRIST AND THE ASSEMBLY (5)
@John 1: 4, 5; @John 17: 6 - 8
J.T. I was thinking of the idea of man, and I thought John's gospel would be the feature that we might look into now. The truth as to man is introduced in John in the passages read. The subject of man is brought in early, as most of us know, in the Scriptures, but perhaps we have not observed that no other beings are specifically mentioned at the outset; that is, in the first chapter of Genesis. The mind is impressed with the fact that so much is made of man at such a late date, because evidently the greater part of @Genesis 1 is late, relative to the first verse of the chapter: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". What follows throughout the chapter is comparatively recent, and it is surely a matter to strike the mind that it is so, that so much is made of man, not, indeed, in that chapter, but in view of all that follows. Verse 26 says that "God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion". Surely God meant to impress us with the importance of this feature, and John takes the subject up in his own peculiar way, and tells us that in the Lord Jesus, the Word, was life and that the life was the light of men; and then tells us a little about the light. It is a great theme throughout John, and how man alone was in mind in the thought of the light. The Lord takes the matter up peculiarly in chapter 17 in His prayer, saying, "Those that thou gayest me I have kept", and, "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gayest me out of the world. Thine they were, and thou gayest them me; and they have kept thy word". He had kept them; but I am thinking now of the fact that they
{339}
were given -- a special set of men -- men viewed by the Lord in a peculiar way as given to Him by the Father. So the question is why the subject should be specialised in John, why that being -- man -- is given by the Father to the Lord Jesus. How he is regarded throughout Scripture of course is an immense thing; the Spirit of God is engaged with it, making all other beings, except the divine Persons, subservient. At such a time as the present, in which man is regarded so cheaply and used merely for the will of man himself, as aspiring and violent, we should be impressed that he is so introduced and treated of in John's gospel, and we should learn what there is for us as to him in the abstract -- for that is the way it has to be looked at; and then how the truth is worked out as to him. The Lord speaks in a prayerful sense to the Father and stresses the thought of man, that the Father has given certain men to Him.
A.J.G. It says, "He does not indeed take hold of angels by the hand, but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham", @Hebrews 2: 16. Is that in line?
J.T. Quite so, I was thinking of that. That is, Why should it be the seed of Abraham? It is one of the points coming into Genesis that Abraham is signalised, and that seed was taken on. 
Ques. Are you stressing the thought of persons? Had you in mind the thought of race?
J.T. Yes, in the abstract sense. 
Rem. In contrast to all others in the creation.
J.T. Just so, especially having in mind the subject of creation in @Genesis 1 after the first and second verses.
A.M. Which do you think would come first, life or light?
J.T. If we go by @Genesis 1 light comes first, but John's gospel makes life first.
{340}
A.M. Do you connect both with man?
J.T. Yes, in a sense, from the detail that we have. Of course we know God is light; that is a great point in John, but what we have in the chapter read is that it is in Christ; "in him was life". 
Ques. Is there any special reason why the verse we commenced to read in @John 17 follows on the verse as to the place which the Lord had as Man?
J.T. Yes. He says, "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gayest me"; that is, the Lord comes to that point that the Father had given Him men. 
Ques. He is heir of all things, but He is given men to be usable by Him. Is that the thought?
J.T. Well, the idea of usability runs through from the first time it is mentioned that man is to have dominion, and the being is contemplated in a dual sense; that is, male and female. That must have a great place with us as to usability and what the Lord would have in mind as to the men the Father had given Him. It really is the issue abroad, and the question is whether it is obtaining amongst the brethren and whether what is obtaining amongst us will bear fruit, will be a testimony.
W.C. You used the expression, "a special set of men"; that was exclusive of Judas but inclusive of Peter. Is there anything in that as to what is happening in those who are apparently taken up? There were eleven and they had had that experience. A special sense of mercy would be found with them as retained by the Lord and definitely named as those given to Him.
J.T. Then administration was given to them; that is really the next point to come up, that administration is current; hence the use of the numeral twelve running right through and coming in in connection with the seed of Abraham. It is not a question of Adam, but of Abraham, of the seed.
{341} 
Ques. How does the term a *chosen race* link on with this?
J.T. It illustrates, I suppose, the idea of choice, which is a great matter with God. It is one of the things that affords the variation that love would look for, for the being is intended to love and to be loved. Hence a wide variation of terms and thoughts and usages is constantly introduced.
H.H. Why do you speak of administration in this connection?
J.T. Because it comes in in Peter. The question of the difference made as to men in this chapter was brought up, the difference made as to Judas. "None of them is lost", the Lord says. Peter is not lost, he is saved, and he is saved to bring out the idea of administration. 
Ques. Are you thinking of the place of man in new creation?
J.T. I had rather the abstract thought in mind, because we have to learn things in the abstract. God treats of things abstractly and we learn from what He does, and the idea of new creation comes in somewhat late in the subject. The idea of man stands out, whether it is the new man or the old.
W.M. "The life was the light of men". Is the thought that man as a creature is especially capable of appreciating the light that came out in the life of Jesus?
J.T. The thought is that that was God. Why did He not think of angels? They had been before man, but He does not mention them. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men". Men are His ideal; that is, speaking abstractly. He is going to do great things with them and has done great things with them. 
Ques. Does the matter become clarified because Christ became Man?
{342}
J.T. Yes, and that idea is introduced on the sixth day: He says, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion ..." and He made them, so that we feel we are now in the divine current, the current of God's mind.
A.M.P. Is that taken up in @Psalm 8: "What is man, that thou art mindful of him?" Are our souls to enquire, why it is that God has shown such deep interest in mankind?
J.T. It fits in with the book of Psalms. The saints of God think. There is very little real thinking and enquiring; the book of Psalms provides what is needed in that sense, and hence, "What is man?" 
Ques. Would the thought be finalised in @Revelation 21: "Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men"?
J.T. Yes, that is where it is. It had been with Israel, but not now; it is with men. 
Ques. Does not being made in the image and likeness of God give them a place of great distinction in the mind of God?
J.T. Yes. God has in mind that He is to be represented in His creature. The first thing is that he is God's image; then secondly he is to be like God.
A.J.G. Does the fact that God has man in mind as His representative, a creature who is inferior creatorially to angels, imply that He has in mind that the administration should be sympathetic?
J.T. I think so. The thought of image and likeness shows that the relation is to be very intimate. God has reserves and that is what brings out the great subject of the counsels of God and the area He has to work in. The race is to be very great, but God has reserves in it because He has Another to come. Adam was a figure of Him that was to come, that was really the Christ.
{343} 
Rem. So the life was really in a man according to @John 1; "in him was life"; that is, in Christ as Man.
J.T. Quite so.
H.H. That these men were given to the Lord Jesus puts them on a very high level.
J.T. It is the idea of selection -- another great thought in God's realm. What material He has! The thought now is whether we are in it, whether we are in what is current, for God has taken up things now externally in view of the terrible devastation and destruction, to bring out something, not exactly something new, for the truth was always the truth. Now are we in this thing, what God can do and is doing?
A.M. Do you link the word *apprehension* with that, involving our taking hold of a thing? The darkness apprehended it not, but that implied that certain ones did apprehend.
J.T. Quite so. 
Ques. Why does it immediately say, "There was a man sent from God, his name John"? Have you the stress on manhood there, and selection too?
J.T. I think that is the idea, also we have a man of the Pharisees (chapter 3) -- he too is available. God is stressing the thought. He has one man in John the baptist, a man in Nicodemus, and many others like that; but in John we are on special ground, the ground of selection, and the Lord says, "I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou gayest me". They are worthy, for the idea of manifestation is that they are worthy of what God can display in them. 
Rem. What is received by them and may shine forth from them.
J.T. Just so.
{344}
W.C. It comes out in the man in @John 9 that the works of God might be manifested.
J.T. Yes, the Lord says, "Neither hath this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should be manifested in him". He was a special case; you could not provide another such. That gives a good clue to what we are speaking of; the place that man has in the gospel gives a clue to what is in the Lord's mind, the usableness of persons seen in one who knew the Lord or one who had not known Him. You get the thought in @1 John 4 -- "we have known and believed". 
Ques. Is there a link in @Ephesians 4; "until we all arrive at ... the full grown man"?
J.T. I think that; that flows out from the gifts -- "received gifts in Man" (@Psalm 68:18), which is another important thought. In Ephesians He has ascended above all the heavens and given gifts to men, but it is in relation to the building up of the saints "until we all arrive ... at the full grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". It is to bring out the truth of the assembly, what God has in an operational sense in the assembly. 
Ques. Was the realisation of God's thought celebrated by the angels in @Luke 2, "good pleasure in men"?
J.T. Very good -- in keeping with Luke. 
Ques. Does what we have in chapter 10, following on what you said as to chapter 9, bring out that thought as to the sheep?
J.T. The subject beginning in chapter 9 is followed up to chapter 12. It is a great theme in John. It is a section in John that brings out much, and I suppose Mary of Bethany would be the theme in the mind of the Lord; what there was there. Judas is brought in there; the devil would spoil the matter if he could, but the position is maintained in Mary.
{345} 
Ques. The apostle says in @1 Corinthians 6, "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world?" and that "we shall judge angels". Is that the thought?
J.T. That is what the saints are to be, for the administrative idea runs right through.
H.F.N. Would what the apostle says in Colossians bear on it: "Admonishing every man, and teaching every man, in all wisdom, to the end that we may present every man perfect in Christ"?
J.T. That is a good scripture to help us in what we are saying; "to present every man perfect in Christ". It would help us as to Paul's work, the administration that God had put into his hands. He makes much of it himself, that the saints might know what it was, and it is that every man should be presented perfect in Christ. Ephesians brings out that the gifts are given from above the heavens, to work out the truth of the assembly and man, for the assembly is formed of men. Hence the position the assembly has in Revelation, the ultimate position it has enters into all this, what man is capable of, what material he is in the hands of God in working out what is to His pleasure. Then there is the idea of the man and the woman, the male and female thought, what possibilities there were at the outset and seen now in Christ and the assembly. The apostle says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly"; that seems to be the theme that God is stressing, Christ and the assembly; that is, it is a question of man, what God has made out of him. 
Rem. So man as you are referring to him includes male and female.
J.T. Quite so, that was there at the beginning: "Male and female created he them". The dual thought is there and will be there eternally; it is what God has effected in that idea, Christ and the assembly. That is the thing to speak about. If we
{346}
leave the dual thought out we cannot be right; Christendom cannot be right, for it leaves that thought out. 
Rem. You mean that literally the assembly is composed of men and women.
J.T. Not exactly that, but Christ and the assembly, the assembly representing the female side, the only feminine thing that remains. 
Rem. We have connected somewhat the thought of what is feminine as for the heart of Christ; you are thinking of the saints as composed of men and women as for the pleasure of God. So the assembly viewed femininely provides an answer for the heart of Christ, but Christ and the assembly viewed together is what you have in mind to stress in the thought of man.
J.T. The full divine thought. We get the female side for instance in John in Mary herself; she missed it at the first but she was subject afterwards. We have also the woman of Samaria; she says, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet". The Lord calls her "Woman". So the subject runs through in John, and when we come to chapter 20 we are touching the divine thought, the Father and the Son. So the Lord is seen in @John 20 as waiting till a certain thing developed. Certain things developed in Peter and John, but they went to their own home. But the woman was there, Mary Magdalene, and we are told certain things about her. But the Lord calls her "Mary", she had that name, and now she, turning round, says to Him, "Rabboni", which means Teacher. I think that is where the matter stands, the feminine thing in John -- belonging to man, but the feminine idea fully expressed, for the word Mary implies something in the way of suffering or bitterness which develops something that is suitable for the assembly, and she calls the Lord "Rabboni". Why is that? It is clear that she valued
{347}
the thought of teaching and the Lord was her Teacher, and as in that attitude and state she is made to carry the message. I think it brings out what we have already alluded to, that the idea of man requires the female, and that is to be worked out in Christ and the assembly; that in result we are eliminating all other themes but that, what God has in Christ and the assembly.
H.H. Would you get that in @Genesis 2 in the deep sleep and the rib?
J.T. I think that must come in; we must arrive at the thought of God in a sinless condition, a state in which God is absolutely restful. We have spoken of the abstract thought of man, but now we are dealing with the dual thought, what we are to come to by teaching and whether we are listening to the teaching, and Mary provides what is needed in the system, that is the female side which works out in the assembly. 
Rem. So she is called "woman" by the angel and by the Lord before she is called by the personal name.
J.T. That is it. This is most important; it is the beginning and the end of things -- Christ and the assembly. 
Ques. In regard to the name "Mary", is it not striking that there are three of them at the cross?
J.T. Yes. The position is rightly filled by persons of that name. 
Rem. In Matthew's gospel it is "Mary ... and the other Mary", but in John's gospel there are the three. 
Ques. Have you the thought in @Revelation 12 in the man child? Does that include Christ and the assembly?
J.T. The word there is the "male son". God takes the male son up to heaven to get him out of the way, as it were; He reserves him, as if the time
{348}
had not just come for the display of all God had in His mind as to that son. So we are entitled to think of great things ahead of us in these matters, and the male and female side will come to light more and more as God helps us to give place to the ideas and to see them working out. Man has been doing much and God is saying, I have been doing something too. He has kept it going, but He is ready to do more for those who pay attention -- and it is the idea of teaching. There is teaching and the teaching has to be attended to; it is not to be made cheap, it is what God has specially designed. Mary says, "Rabboni", that is to say, My Teacher. Each one has to learn whence the teaching comes and how it comes.
C.H. It is striking that in Genesis the word is said to be Jehovah Elohim. Is that what you had in mind when you spoke of what God is doing?
J.T. In introducing Jehovah here, God, I believe, had the idea of covenant in mind; and that is the setting in which the man and the woman were to be. 
Ques. You said that the thought of male and female came before sin came in. What do you say about God resting in that thought?
J.T. He does rest in it; He rests in His love and His love requires that thought. 
Ques. The holy city in @Revelation 21 is said to be adorned as a bride for her husband. Does not that show how God rests in the thought of Christ and the assembly?
J.T. Yes. The thought begins with Abraham in @Genesis 24. We have divine Persons typified there, the Father, the Son and the Spirit. The Spirit is there in the servant, for the name Eliezer is not mentioned in the chapter; it is a question of the servant and what develops on those lines. A thing that has not been noted perhaps is that the servant seems to be surprised at one time, to wonder at the woman he saw; that is not to be forgotten. There are other
{349}
suggestions of surprise in the Scriptures in the same connection, but it is not to be wondered at, for the Spirit of God is here in a most lowly, humble way to carry out the divine thoughts. It is not to be unexpected that the Spirit finds wonderful things in the assembly. I am seeking to bring out the idea of wonderment in the divine realm. 
Ques. "Jealous ... with a jealousy which is of God", @2 Corinthians 11: 2. Does that enter into it?
J.T. It does indeed. We want to be on our guard, for this subject of the assembly is the greatest thought outside divine Persons. 
Ques. Would Paul have that in mind in Corinth? Having found Aquila and Priscilla, he abode with them and wrought. Would they come in for the teaching?
J.T. I think so. They had to leave Rome because they had the status of Jews. Their spiritual history is presented to us at the beginning, continuing in connection with Paul in @Acts 18, and it is significant that they come in there and that the truth of the assembly comes out there. 
Ques. Is there a contrast in the many who "believed on his name" in @John 2, whose minds were in operation rather than their affections? You have not the man and the woman there, and the Lord did not commit Himself to them. You had in mind the necessity for the affections being reached rather than the mind.
J.T. The real position there is, "*But* there was a man of the Pharisees". The word "man" comes in there and that is whence the thing is to be worked out, from new birth; the mind of man is shut out by that truth.
A.M. One of the first things Nicodemus says is, "Rabbi, we know that thou art come a teacher from God". He was prepared to learn.
{350}
J.T. But he was a poor subject. The thought of learning is there, but not learning quickly, and I think that is the point at the present time; brethren are not learning quickly, in fact they are not learning at all in many cases. 
Ques. Do you think there is not much time?
J.T. There is very little time left, and we are not learning as we should. Mary says, My Teacher. There is very little being learnt. Ministry abounds, much being heard, but not learnt. Mary represents teachableness, and that is what the assembly is bound to come to if we are to arrive at the thought of God. 
Ques. How are we to be helped as to that?
J.T. It is to be taken up just as it is in John's gospel. Nicodemus speaks of the Lord Jesus as a Teacher come from God, which is very good, but it does not go very far with him. But we have another man in John, that is Nathanael, and he is characterised by quick learning, not taking things merely into the natural mind, but he learns quickly, and that is what is needed (see @John 1: 43 - 46). It is a question of our moving to where things are to be seen (verses 47 - 49). Nathanael is John's type of a quick learner. 
Ques. Is the full result seen in, "The words which thou hast given me I have given them, and they have received them, and have known truly that I came out from thee"? Is that the idea of their receiving being stressed?
J.T. Yes, and they were the words the Father gave Him (@John 17: 8).
W.C. The woman in @John 4 was a quick learner. She said, "Is not this the Christ?"
J.T. Yes. I believe these are just examples the Lord would bring before the brethren at the present time.
{351} 
Ques. "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". "The two shall be one flesh". Would that be something of what Paul was teaching in the school of Tyrannus?
J.T. Quite so. Whatever he taught would be severe. It is the beginning of things in @Acts 11; and we are told that they taught in the assembly for a whole year; as if, when Paul and Barnabas were about to be called into the ministry, they saw the need of teaching regularly and systematically, so that it should take effect, and I believe that is the beginning of the things that were seen so beautifully in chapter 13. 
Ques. Would Rebecca be an instance of a quick and good learner? She had said to the servant, "Who is the man?" Would the effect of the servant's mission have enlightened her so that she was ready for it?
J.T. That is right. 
Ques. I would like to come back to this thought of the man. "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom". Is the discernment of the teaching of the man to show us that by way of the features of the bride we take on what is proper to the man? It is a kind of a compressed allusion to what you have spoken of as the feminine side. Does he credit those he writes to with some knowledge of the movements of the bride?
J.T. Well, there is something in that; the bridegroom has the bride. 
Ques. Is there any significance in the fact that the beginning of signs in John was in relation to a wedding; a man and a woman?
J.T. I think there is. It is probably a millennial allusion, the Lord taking up His rights in Israel. It is John's way of dealing with prophecy. The millennial situation is that God is going to work out something in man in flesh and blood. There is
{352}
no doubt that comes in on the third day referred to in the second chapter; that scene is there to bring that out. Another scene that goes with it is in chapter 4; the nobleman who came into touch with the Lord and had his son raised up by the Lord. These are set there in the first part of John's gospel to show how the truth is worked out. 
Ques. Is the teaching necessary with us to come into the good of Christ and the assembly, that we might enter into God's thought in relation to man abstractly?
J.T. That is the idea of man, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion". Then we are told of the woman in @Genesis 2, how she was a necessity, but in verses 26 - 27 of chapter 1 we have the dual thought. Chapter 2 brings in the historical detail, but the mind of God is there and God is going to finish with it. Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly"; not ordinary marriages, but Christ and the assembly. That is to be the great ultimate as regards the race, the yield for the Lord Jesus on the feminine side. 
Rem. In @Genesis 2 the woman is a necessity for the man in the administrative sphere, and in @Genesis 24 she is a necessity for him in the sphere of affection.
J.T. I think that is right. How much Abraham thought of Isaac, and how much the Father thinks of Christ! So "a certain king ... made a marriage for his son" -- that is going through. 
Rem. So, if the assembly fills out the woman's part according to the divine thought, the personnel that make the assembly have part in sonship -- a masculine idea; but is it necessary first to apprehend the place the assembly has femininely, as answering to the heart of Christ?
J.T. That brings out what the assembly is. It opens up much we cannot touch now, but I think
{353}
we can see that God is dealing with these things and keeping at them, and the question is whether we are learning. 
Ques. Does @John 6 throw light on this: "They shall be all taught of God"? Then they say, "This is an hard saying; who can hear it?"
J.T. @John 6 is a real test for us as to learning. "They shall be all taught of God". That is what God has before Him day in and day out. Christendom has left out the assembly thought entirely.
{354}
MAN AS PRESENTED IN CHRIST AND THE ASSEMBLY (6)
@Genesis 2: 4 - 25; @Acts 2: 37 - 47
J.T. I have suggested these two scriptures because they are analogous to each other, both referring to man. Much history intervenes, but still the histories are of man and God's dealings with him. Genesis brings out man's physical nature and propensities before sin came in, God's interest in him, and how it would develop what was there. It was in the main a question of need, need calling forth certain elements in man which God would see developed and have pleasure in. The moral question had not yet been raised; although the basis of it was there, the thing was not actually raised, for man was still in innocency. The second scripture, however, contemplates moral questions, but it was man, God having wrought in him on moral lines. As we look into these portions, we shall see a striking analogy and how the moral side is brought to bear upon the present time. The present time is extraordinary in the history of the race and God would show that He is alive to it and would meet the condition, especially bringing out what was there according to the chapter read -- what God had placed there. So the abstract idea of man continues. It is thought we might take up this idea as applicable to us at the present time and see what there is in that sense, as meeting under God the present situation and relieving it; not only bringing out what is needed, but ensuring that God may still find pleasure in man. The first scripture, @Genesis 2, contemplates, of course, @Genesis 1; that is, what happens according to that history. There is a renewal of interest on God's part, giving us the history of chapter 1, and bringing out what was additionally there and how
{355}
the race, or order of being under review, is taking on a dual character, the second part of this dual character arising from necessity and bringing out the principle of superior intelligence.
F.I. I would like to know what you mean by 'dual character'.
J.T. It is intimated in chapter 1, but not actually effected in the record until chapter 2.
F.I. Do you mean that the dual character is male and female?
J.T. Exactly. The latter is made necessary by certain conditions in the former, God saying it was not good that the man should be alone. We shall see as we proceed that the dual character is essential to the working out of the great thought God has as to man, and can never be lost sight of. Any doctrine or principles amongst men that tend to obliterate it are contrary to the mind of God. 
Ques. Is that suggested in @1 Corinthians 11: "Neither is woman without man, nor man without woman, in the Lord"?
J.T. Just so, a very important scripture bearing on what we are saying, showing how the female side is brought into the administrative side in Christianity. There is a comeliness that is essential according to God's mind for the working out of the being that is before us. It requires a certain seemliness, but still the administration is proceeding. 
Ques. In quoting the scripture, "It is not good that Man should be alone", is that not only from man's point of view but also from God's?
J.T. Yes, and akin to that is what is said of Adam himself in verse 20 of the chapter, "as for Adam, he found no helpmate, his like". That is, there was a necessity, there was a void occasioning a necessity, and God discerned that and spoke of it saying, "It is not good that Man should be alone".
{356}
But what is to be observed, I think, is that this superior intelligence which subsequent facts developed is essential to work out what God intended to have pleasure in, and that superior intelligence is seen in the Lord Jesus, as I think we shall see in @Acts 2. @Genesis 2 is an additional working out of the great subject and the necessity that occasioned it, necessity in the fact that God required this superior intelligence in man; hence He brings out immediately what required the sense of intelligence in man. "Out of the ground Jehovah Elohim had formed every animal of the field and all fowl of the heavens, and brought them to Man, to see what he would call them; and whatever Man called each living soul, that was its name. And Man gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the heavens, and to every beast of the field; but as for Adam, he found no helpmate, his like". Of course, the next paragraph brings out how that necessity or requirement was met by God Himself, but it also brought out the superior intelligence that God intended to be displayed in man. 
Ques. Is it that man felt the need of something for his affections?
J.T. Yes. Man felt it, but God spoke of it first; He said, "It is not good that Man should be alone, I will make him a helpmate, his like". 
Ques. Do you mean that the exigency served to bring out what was already in the mind of God?
J.T. Just so; He noticed it Himself first, but it is remarkable that Adam felt it; the quest was there. "He found no helpmate, his like" -- the words are used as applicable to him. 
Rem. He found nothing suitable to himself that he could name.
J.T. That runs through the history of the whole race, and the lower creatures bear that out; they are
{357}
inferior, and Adam knew and saw that and was able to name them accordingly. 
Rem. It does away completely with the thought of evolution.
J.T. It does indeed. Then, as we have already mentioned, the Acts brings out this superior intelligence as seen in the Lord Jesus. The gospels all bear on the Acts, but the superior intelligence that was in Him is marked in the endings of the gospels, the Acts supporting the facts that indicate that intelligence was there and the need of the assembly was there. It is provided by God on moral lines rather than physical or creative lines. 
Ques. Is that seen first in @Matthew 16 -- "On this rock I will build my assembly"?
J.T. Just so, He had it in His heart; and as we have often noted, in the parables in @Matthew 13 He brings out in figure how He Himself found a certain treasure hidden in a field -- He found it there, He found it hidden -- He does not tell us what the treasure was, but it was hidden. Then He hid it, and He went and bought the field, selling all that He had -- it ought to read. "sells all whatever he has". The thing was there and hidden and the field was bought because of that, but it is put in the present tense -- it is with what the man *has* he bought that field. Then the next parable is that He was looking for something. He likens Himself to a merchant seeking goodly pearls and he found one and went and sold all whatever he *had* -- it is the past tense -- and bought the pearl. It was no hidden article or thing that he found; nor is he hiding it; it is not to be concealed, its value was manifest or known to him, but he went and sold all he had in order to secure it. So we can see that what is said in Genesis as to Eve has its analogy in the Lord Jesus, not only in the early part of the Acts, but particularly in Matthew, where it is worked out, for
{358}
Matthew is the only gospel that tells us formally about the assembly. The Lord speaks of it there as His; He says, "My assembly". 
Ques. Are you thinking that this remarkable intelligence shines out in these parables?
J.T. Remarkable intelligence, first as to the treasure in the way in which it was secured in buying the field, and then the skill or knowledge which the merchant had of the pearl; the word used refers to his skilful experience in that particular commodity. 
Rem. So he picks out one pearl.
J.T. And we are told it was of great value. Perhaps the brethren have not caught what I am trying to show. In the parabolic part of Matthew the person who found the treasure hid in the field -- the Lord Jesus being in mind -- sells all that he *has*, that is, what was current, current values; he disposes of all these in order to secure that field. Then in the case of the pearl, which was a matter of merchandise, a public matter, that anyone could weigh and see, he sold all he *had*, that is, whatever belonged to him historically, in order to secure it. It could be seen by all who had that knowledge that there was something supreme, supremely superior, and the man -- representing the Lord -- sold all whatever he had in order to get that. 
Ques. Would you amplify the difference as to the "has" and the "had", @Matthew 13: 44 and 46?
J.T. I think the "has" refers to the gospel as effecting the current activities of the Lord; the "had" is a question of what is historical; that is, what was in the mind of the Lord as to the assembly, involving all the Lord had. The current matter is what He has, that is what He is using in current operations. 
Ques. Would the selling of all that he *had* go back as far as emptying Himself (@Philippians 2: 7)?
J.T. I think it would, and therefore I ventured to use the word "historical", for it is an historical
{359}
matter, what the Lord was actuated by in view of the assembly. You therefore have to consider what He had according to facts, as to the creation or any other facts there might have been in history that had application, that the Lord gave all that up for the sake of the assembly. 
Ques. Do you link the one with redemption and the other with purpose?
J.T. Well, you might say that, for there was calculation in it; the word "purpose" is quite usable, I think, in that connection. There was calculation in the transaction; it was a direct transaction. The field was indirect, but the pearl was bought directly because it was valued. The field in itself would be valueless as soon as the treasure was taken out of it, but there was nothing of that kind applicable to the pearl.
W.C. Does the city with a pearl at each gate (@Revelation 21: 21) indicate the great price paid, a proof of that superior intelligence you have referred to?
J.T. I think that is very good. The first parable is indirect, the field has to be considered. There are two transactions; he found the treasure and he hid it, and then he bought the field; somewhat wider and more complex in its bearing, but it is current, it is a current matter, for it is what he then had, what he has now; but, as regards the pearl, it is a previous transaction and involves calculation as to what was to be expended. 
Ques. Would the treasure involve the moral question and the pearl rather relate to the Acts?
J.T. It does, I think; what the field cost and what entered into that. In fact, I would say it is generally worked out in Paul's ministry, what the gospel would result in in a current sense, involving the moral side of things and then what territory was involved. It is called "the field" and then "that field", that is to say, it is a question of what part of
{360}
the earth was implied, for the word "field" in itself would not mean a whole continent, it would not mean all the earth. The field is designated as the world in verse 38, but that is specific; the word "field" in verse 44 would not imply such an idea. 
Ques. Is the transaction of Boaz a type of this? He purchased all that belonged to Elimelech and Chilion and Mahlon. That has a wide bearing, but he had in mind to purchase Ruth to be his wife.
J.T. That would help. The field is of value in that sense because it was bought with her, but in the parable the field is only of value because the treasure is in it. That raises the whole question as to where the gospel has been preached and when, and what is current now. So in relation to the passage in @Genesis 2 as to the rivers, etc., we have to consider in what part of the area would that field be? If we are buying land, we must consider whether it is suitable for building; if so, house property, or some other kind; or whether there is gold in it, or coal, or diamonds. Hence I can understand that the Lord would indicate that current operations in view of the assembly were in a certain direction, in effect towards the West. I am only referring to @Genesis 2 because it is God's way of calling attention to what the earth was, what the garden of Eden was and the different items that are mentioned, and how there are these rivers effecting value in the territory. 
Ques. Do you think then that the preaching of the gospel needs priestly discernment?
J.T. I think so. It is a question of where the material is that is needed.
H.A.H. Does the preacher in Ecclesiastes refer to this when he says, "One man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I not found" (@Ecclesiastes 7: 28).
J.T. That is good -- something to follow up -- because the preacher is speaking; it is a question of
{361}
the preacher and that idea must enter into the current operations of the Lord. Another thing that comes up in @Acts 3 is that the heavens must receive the Lord Jesus until "the times of the restoring of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began", and the question raised there, in the mind at least, is, What is the Lord doing now?
W.H. There appears to be great wealth in connection with the flowing of Pison -- 'freely flowing' is the meaning of its name. Would that suggest an operation of the Spirit of God as moving westward?
J.T. That is good. I think the Lord, when He was speaking here on earth in His ministry according to Matthew, must have had great interest in all that, and there can be no doubt that the recent history of man has brought to light what there is physically on the earth more than ever before, and incidentally what there is for the assembly, where there is no material and where there is material. It must be of intense interest to the Lord to keep those things in mind. 
Ques. Why in the case of the first two rivers does it say they "surround" certain territory?
J.T. The surrounding would mean that they have influence. "The name of the one is Pison: that is it which surrounds the whole land of Havilah, where the gold is". These words would of course imply what there is for the assembly, and "the gold of that land is good". Besides the gold there is bdellium and the onyx stone. They are there, the Lord knows they are there, meaning that the Lord would hide what was there so that it should not be damaged until He had the means of procuring it.
W.S.S. Does the flowing of the rivers apply to what you were referring to in regard to the Lord personally -- "whom the heaven must receive" --
{362}
the activities of the Holy Spirit proceeding from the Lord's present position?
J.T. Exactly, it is a question of what the Spirit is doing in relation to Christ. What is the Lord Himself doing? He does not tell the disciples much as to what He would be doing. The kingdom is the Father's matter. What is His matter? It lies in relation to the Spirit, and that they should be His witnesses, and that witness should be universal. We cannot very well name what He is doing; "whom the heaven must receive", we are told. It is not that He is quiescent there. He is on His Father's throne, implying that He is in accord with the Father's mind, what He is thinking of.
W.C. Would the Lord have this in mind in @John 4 where, after referring to the Spirit, He says, "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest. He that reaps receives wages and gathers fruit unto life eternal"?
J.T. I think He would have that in mind as to the use of the word "field", but it is plural, of course, "fields". It is a question of life eternal, and they were white to harvest, meaning that the state of the crops should indicate the time. The sun, of course, determines time, but the state of the crops also indicates time, and the question is whether the state of the crops alludes to the church period or Israel's period in the future. I am only saying these things that our minds should be active as to what is meant. We have had a great deal on prophetic lines; in early days the prophetic map was opened up to the brethren, prophecy all bearing on the coming day, the millennial day. The Lord is waiting for that, the restitution of all things, but what is going on in the meantime? Well nigh two thousand years have elapsed, and what is He doing? I am only referring to this that we might consider what the Lord is doing.
{363}
A.J.G. Do you mean that in view of those times the woman should be brought to light? You were saying the woman was necessary for the man in an administrative setting. Is that what the Lord is doing at the present time?
J.T. I think that is right. The Lord is not really set in His prophetic position until He secures the woman -- "whom the heaven must receive until the times of the restitution of all things" -- but the principle of the assembly was hidden and the book of the Acts brings it out; it brings out what the Lord was thinking about in chapter 1 and right through the book. Then Paul is brought in, one who has thoroughly got the Lord's mind; he has the double ministry which involves the assembly, and he says, "My intelligence in the mystery" (@Ephesians 3: 4) -- he has got it for us.
A.J.G. So that Paul's ministry covers both the treasure and the pearl.
J.T. That is what I was thinking, only the treasure is a current matter, whereas the pearl is more purpose extending back to the counsels of God and to eternity; but the field is a current matter. 
Ques. Would that throw light on God's governmental ways recently in these countries, one devastated and another escaping?
J.T. It is very important to think of that, what God has done in these different countries. The Lord would say, When you are taken out of the field it is nothing to Me, but I am taking you out that you should be according to My mind. Paul's ministry is intended to do that.
H.F.N. Would that be supported by what Paul says in @Romans 15, how he had fully preached Christ "in a circuit round to Illyricum" and connecting it with the offering up of the nations, "acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit"? Then he goes on to speak of the preaching of Jesus Christ
{364}
and the revelation of the mystery. Would that involve the two thoughts you are speaking of?
J.T. It would. One has that in mind, the wide sweep of territory, but notice it is westerly, extending to the Adriatic, but always in view of what was there. How will the Lord regard it when we are all gone? It is terrible to think of what will happen according to the book of The Revelation. But the Lord is intensely interested now in working out this matter; it is a question of this field, that is, a specific part in which the treasure is. 
Ques. Would the man of Macedonia indicate the way in which this selection of territory works out, where the gold is?
J.T. I think that is the point. "Come over and help us". Paul is to come westward because there is need, a man needing help, and the territory from Jerusalem round about to Illyricum clearly points to that; that is where the apostle Paul expended most of his labour. 
Rem. It is striking how that was guarded, for they attempted to go to Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them, showing how the gold was guarded.
J.T. Just so, and it is to bring out what is in that territory, how much the brethren can stand, how much they can endure for the Lord's sake. 
Ques. Would it help to settle the minds of young people as to the lack of so-called missionary work amongst us? Young men in the army are raising questions, as a result of contact with others, as to missionary work in other lands where the truth of the assembly has hardly taken shape at all.
J.T. I think it would settle it in their minds anyway, and they need to have it settled.
G.C.S. Would this be "the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of kings is to search out a matter"? @Proverbs 25: 2.
{365}
J.T. Just so. Matthew is the kingly gospel and the idea of that is that there is power to work things out. 
Ques. Would you open up your thought as to the gospels converging on the Acts?
J.T. The passage in @Genesis 1 refers to Christ typically in the superior knowledge that came out in Adam, that God intended to bring out in him. God brought the creatures to him to see what he would call them, and then reference is made to the fact that there was no suitable helpmate for Adam -- that showed his intelligence. I would connect that in the book of Acts with the intelligence that marked the Lord in chapter 1. He was in heaven ten days before the Spirit came down. He went up after the forty days and the Spirit came down. What was in the Lord's mind? He did not answer the question of the disciples as to the kingdom of Israel; He said it was the Father's matter, but they were to wait for the Spirit. We can do nothing without the Spirit, but we can do much with the Spirit, and that much has reference to what the assembly is, because the Lord is occupied now, not with prophetic subjects, but with assembly matters. It is like Isaac in @Genesis 24; he is occupied with one thing, that is Rebecca. He is meditating in the field -- that is all he is doing; he is coming from Beer-sheba, but he sees the camels coming -- that is an indication to him as to the current situation. 
Ques. Does it help to see that in @Genesis 25 Abraham sends the other sons away eastward to the east country?
J.T. It does help. One has heard lately of the idea that there is another family that God may be bringing out on lower levels than the assembly, but there is no such family. Israel is yet to be brought out, but that is future. God is working now with the
{366}
assembly; that is what is current, and there is nothing in the Lord's mind more than that.
A.J.G. Do you think the antitype of Adam's intelligence in naming he woman is seen when the Lord says, "Why persecutest thou me?" naming the assembly in that distinctive way, calling it "me"?
J.T. Yes. He uses the word "me" in the sense that it covers the assembly.
H.F.N. Would you mind saying a little more as to there being nothing for the Lord outside the assembly?
J.T. That is what I understand -- the Lord is engaged with the assembly. He was on earth for forty days and then went up to heaven and was there ten days, and the Spirit came down. The Lord remained on earth forty days according to the book of the Acts, but not according to the gospel of Luke. From Luke it would seem that He went up the same day He arose; not that we should conclude that, but there is the suggestion that the Lord was in haste, so to speak, to be up there to work out this thing that He had in mind, to work out the assembly. He was going to heaven, heaven received Him; it is not His official place in relation to Israel. Chapter 9 begins to speak of the Lord going up to heaven, and in chapter 24 He goes up and there is no mention of a forty-days¬ period. There was the fact that He was going up and that there would be a great gospel movement -- "that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem". The Lord went up saying all that, and I believe the position is, that He is where He wished to be, and to be quickly, to begin this great work which has gone on all these centuries. The time of the restitution of all things has not come in yet, but this thing has come in, the Lord's activities amongst the saints are in view of the assembly.
{367} 
Ques. Would that be what the Lord had in mind in the words, "It is expedient for you that I go away ..."? @John 16: 7.
J.T. Quite so. And see how quickly the Spirit did come, and immediately He began by Peter to open up the truth of the gospel. The hearers say, What are we to do? Did Peter direct them to the prophets? No, they were alluded to, but it is a question of the Spirit. "Peter said to them, Repent, and be baptised, each one of you ... for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For to you is the promise and to your children, and to all who are afar off, as many as the Lord our God may call", @Acts 2: 38, 39. 
Ques. Is Peter's understanding seen in the way he makes the word of the prophets bear on the situation?
J.T. Quite so, not the present but the future operations. 
Ques. Is the Lord's present position indicated in @Ephesians 5: 31 -- "Because of this a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be united to his wife, and the two shall be one flesh"?
J.T. Quite so. 
Ques. Is it suggestive that the only names that Adam gave after the deep sleep were what he gave to the woman, and, at the end of one hundred and thirty years, something after his own order, like himself -- Seth? I wondered whether the woman was of himself, while Seth was like himself.
J.T. Yes. Seth meant "appointed", an appointed condition; the man comes in again. Much history had been gone through in relation to the two other sons¬ names. Seth is the appointed one, and then it says, "people began to call on the name of Jehovah", for Adam recognised the mortal condition of his son, a poor dying creature.
{368}
A.H. Were you going to say something further in referring to @Genesis 2: 24?
J.T. Yes. It is a question of the present occupation of Christ, because Peter says, "Whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things ...", @Acts 3: 21. According to the note the reading "since time began" refers to the holy prophets, literally 'his holy since-time-began prophets'. That is, the whole prophetic area or period points to the times of refreshing which God would send; that the Lord would come, that God would send His Son -- this is yet future; in the meantime the heavens must receive Him. All that brings out what has been alluded to. What is Adam engaged with? He is engaged with Eve -- "Because of this a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be united to his wife, and the two shall be one flesh", @Ephesians 5: 31. The Lord is engaged in that way now, and it is a question of our coming into it. Of course, we may get all the knowledge we can of prophecy, for the millennial day will be a great period and God will do great things with men in flesh and blood, as we are now, but in the meantime He is doing great things in regard to the assembly, and the Lord is just engaged in that way while waiting for the time to which the prophets allude. 
Ques. So should we arrive at an understanding of the times by the state of the saints and the way in which the church comes into evidence as we know it in the divine mind, rather than by the study of prophecy?
J.T. I think that is right, and I think we can all see that the Lord is blessing the ministry. Many are addicting themselves to it, and it is in keeping with the Lord's mind to bring out the features of the assembly, not only that we should know them, but that we should walk in them, so that the service of God should take character from them.
{369} 
Ques. Are you connecting the great things and the superior intelligence of the man with the assembly at the present time?
J.T. Quite so. It is not a question of Christ ruling Israel and the nations; He is appointed to rule over the house of Israel for ever, but He is not doing that now, He is occupied with the assembly day and night, and with the most superior intelligence developed in the "gifts". 
Ques. It says in @Hebrews 11 that God has provided some better thing for us -- would that suggest the assembly?
J.T. I think so. 
Ques. Would what we have had throw special emphasis on the saved? Are those that are saved from the coming judgment brought into this special sphere where the assembly is?
J.T. Quite so. But think of what is happening, how cheap human life is now; *God* is not regarding men or women as cheap; they have cost too much. The two parables we have referred to allude to that, and He is going on on those lines. How precious they are! If men are not valued in the world, they certainly are valued amongst the brethren.
We have spoken of the great journeyings of the apostle Paul; he says "in journeyings often", @2 Corinthians 11: 26. It is the time of going out now, the time of travel, of covering distances and getting at the saints. It is a question of the Lord's activities, what He is doing, and it is a matter of superior intelligence; it is a question of whether the brethren are really following the things God is developing in the truth and being formed by them. That "ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery", Paul says, @Ephesians 3: 4.
A.M. Would the reference to "one thing" and "forgetting the things behind" (@Philippians 3: 13), show that Paul had the mind of Christ and that he wanted
{370}
others to be on the same line with one thing before them?
J.T. I think so, and what that wonderful chapter of Philippians goes on to speak of is the bodies we shall have -- "we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory". That does not indicate any cheapness, but great value in the saints, and I am sure that is what God would say. He would bring out His mind in the brethren over against the awful things that men are doing and devising, involving the cheapness of human life and cruelty, implied in their operations without any regard for God's rights in man at all; whereas the saints regard God's rights in man.
C.H. Peter says, "Be saved from this perverse generation". You were speaking of salvation and evidently that is part of it.
J.T. Yes. I think the brethren will use this opportunity for looking into matters and seeing what God has been doing in all these years of sorrow and how the saints have stood the suffering. 
Ques. Do you think it is in principle what was said to Ruth, that she was to glean in the field that had been reaped? Is that a particular word for us now, whatever emphasis is being laid on as to the truth, that is the thing to follow?
J.T. Quite so. 
Ques. You were speaking in prayer of the Lord opening understandings. Is that what the Lord would delight to do for us today?
J.T. Quite so; that is what it says, "Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures", @Luke 24: 45.
{371}
THE LORD MAINTAINING DIRECT LINKS WITH THE ASSEMBLY
@Acts 1: 1 - 5; @1 Corinthians 15: 5 - 9; @Acts 22: 17 - 21; @John 14: 18 - 21
J.T. I have in mind the Lord maintaining direct links with the brethren in the assembly during the period of His absence. Christianity, or the assembly, is not simply, as it were, set up alone, and left to itself, or even left to the Holy Spirit, but the Lord Jesus, the Son, comes and maintains connections with it. The same thing is seen in the universe. It was not simply drawn up, and left to work itself out, to maintain itself. God keeps on with it and maintains it. The Father is "over all, and through all, and in us all". So these scriptures are read to call attention to the fact that this is in accord with the Lord's way when He was here in the flesh. It is said in the same scripture we have already read that He came in and went out amongst them, from the baptism of John until the day in which He was taken up. The disciples were not left to themselves at all, for the Lord maintained constant links with them, coming in and going out amongst them from the baptism of John; that is, from the time He was anointed, until He went up to heaven, and so He continues coming in and going out of the assembly now in a spiritual way, involving much as to ministry and growth and freshness. John's gospel bears particularly on this side. It is seen in the verse read in chapter 14: "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you".
A.R. The Lord says at the end of Matthew, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world". Is that in line with what you have before you?
{372}
J.T. It is, but it is Matthew's way. In Matthew He does not ascend. It is a question of what is being maintained here continuously; not the idea of the Lord's coming, but His being here, and so He says, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I" -- not, there I will come, but there am I. So Luke, after the resurrection, says, "He himself stood in their midst"; he does not say He came. John particularly stresses the thought of His *coming*. The gospel of Matthew, of course, has its own peculiar character as bearing specially on the assembly, and is the only one that mentions it formally, stressing the authority that is in the assembly down here, and what is needed in the way of support. So according to Matthew, the Lord is viewed as here, but the saints are doing things and He is supporting them.
A.M. Do you mean that Matthew and Luke have the faith position in mind, whereas you have something more in mind than the faith position?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord went up, according to @Acts 1, and "a cloud received him out of their sight", and, although they continued looking after Him, the angels rather prohibited that; it was not in keeping with faith. He was received up out of their sight, and hence the faith period began, and it continues, but John, in the verses read, records the Lord's words: "Ye see me; because I live, ye shall live also". This is clearly in a spiritual sense.
W.H. Would John have a spiritual realm before him in the way the Lord acts and speaks?
J.T. Just so. It is the realm inaugurated by His going up into heaven, and the Spirit coming down, forming the assembly; the realm is within the bounds of the assembly, the Spirit operating in it.
A.R. Are you speaking of the presence of the Lord personally in the assembly, as distinct from the Spirit, or alongside of the Spirit? We understand,
{373}
I think, the Spirit being present, but are you suggesting that the Lord personally is present in the assembly?
J.T. I should say it is by the Spirit, only reserving the thought, that He, being one of the divine Persons, the Son, is at liberty to come of Himself as He pleases. Therefore He is seen as coming actually in these scriptures. In the beginning of Acts He is seen corporeally during forty days, going in and out amongst them, and as Paul says, He was seen by him, as recorded in @1 Corinthians 15 and @Acts 22. 
Ques. Are you linking this on to @John 20: "Jesus came and stood in the midst, and ... The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord"?
J.T. That is a pattern of the present situation. Before He went up to heaven He set out the idea of a pattern, such as in the book of Exodus; the word pattern is stressed in that book, and I believe @John 20 involves a pattern of the way the Lord is doing things. On the first day of the week, Jesus came. It stresses, too, that it was late in the day, as if He were moving about all day, and came in the evening. From Luke one might suppose that He went up to heaven the day He rose. From @Luke 24 you would hardly think He was here forty days; it is rather that He was, as it were, in haste to enter on the position of administration so as to do all that love would do. Love acts administratively; that is, formal administration is being done at the behest of love, and the Lord is in haste to begin there, but John would indicate that He remained, and Luke tells us in the Acts that He was forty days amongst them, as if He were loth to leave; as if it were a question of love, but He could serve them better above.
The Lord said specifically to Mary, "I have not yet ascended to my Father", as if that were necessary where He would be free to move about, as in
{374}
chapter 14. The facts indicate that the Lord was active the whole day after He arose, active with the brethren; first to restore them, and then, as He secured them, to show Himself amongst them, and then to instruct them, and hence the chapter continues until He goes up. These things are facts that ought to bear on our present position, and much enters into it; freshness and heavenliness all the time coming in.
F.B.W. Would you explain how these things bear on the present position?
J.T. Most of what I have been saying involves freshness. From the heavenly side all is as fresh and vigorous as at the beginning at Pentecost; there may be sluggishness, through failure, with the assembly, but from the divine side none.
R.T. Would you distinguish between, "We see Jesus", in @Hebrews 2, and what we have in @John 14, "Ye see me"?
J.T. Hebrews is a suggestion of the Stephen position. Hebrews has been called the book of the opened heavens. Stephen looked up into heaven and saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God. That would be the position, and we have to work it out in our experience, the Spirit enabling us to do it, because the Spirit's position here is absolutely essential to Christianity, to the assembly, and to the existence of a Christian at the present time; but in the book of Hebrews the saints are urged to look away from earth to heaven. "Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith" -- looking steadfastly; that is in no sense incompatible with the era of faith, the faith system having begun and faith being in that sense opposed to sight.
W.H. In the first scripture read, reference is made to what the Lord did by the Holy Spirit in verse 2, and in verse 4 He stresses the need for their having
{375}
the Spirit. Would the thought of the Lord doing things by the Spirit still continue after His ascension, or is it specially stressed during the days of His humiliation?
J.T. I would say that He does things by the Holy Spirit. That is in keeping with the thought of pattern and, in character and principle the operations are by the Spirit. New birth is by the Spirit and, of course, always was, but there is a continuation of the Spirit's operations. The speaking at the beginning was by the Spirit; it was about the wonderful works of God. We are apt to limit the Lord. The Father and the Son act; They have Their part too, and never lose it. @John 14 continues to speak about this subject; I did not intend to read about the Father because time fails us. I thought we would confine what we have to say to the activities of the Son down here, and Paul is a witness to it, that the Son, the Lord Himself, appeared to him, according to the passage read.
F.I. Would you say that, apart from our hearts being fixed on Christ in the position where He is, the Spirit is impotent to produce anything in us in the way of spiritual formation?
J.T. Quite so. That would be an allusion to our state, of course. We might hinder the operations of the Spirit. You mean that the saint, as a subject of the divine work, requires to have his eye, the eye of faith, on the Son where He is and the Spirit is then free to work in him. 
Rem. With reference to the question about the Holy Spirit, @Acts 1: 5 records the Lord's words, "For John indeed baptised with water, but *ye* shall be baptised with the Holy Spirit".
J.T. It was said by John that the Lord Jesus should baptise with the Holy Spirit, so that is in keeping with this passage in @Acts 1.
{376} 
Ques. What is the force of that word, "with the Holy Spirit", @Acts 1: 5? Does it mean in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. It really means the power of the Holy Spirit. That would really imply that the Holy Spirit baptises too. The preposition would indicate that they were to be baptised *in the power* of the Holy Spirit. John had said, in chapter 1: 33, that the Lord Himself would baptise with the Holy Spirit, but I am further suggesting that the Spirit Himself acts in power in this baptism. The preposition "with" (Greek *en*) means that it is in the power of the Holy Spirit that this baptism takes place, without saying that the Lord does it in @Acts 1:5, but John in the first chapter of his gospel says that the Lord does it, and, of course, that enters into the whole position of the assembly. We read in @Acts 19 that John's disciples were found at Ephesus, and they were not baptised; meaning, I suppose, that John's disciples failed to continue in the truth in the full sense of the position; indeed, they did not even hear of the Holy Spirit, somewhat indicating the present position among Christians. How much is not understood! How much ignorance there is! You might say it was culpable in John's disciples, because John expressly stated that the Lord Jesus would baptise with the Holy Spirit, and when Paul asks them in @Acts 19, they state, "We did not even hear if the Holy Spirit was come. And he said, To what then were ye baptised? And they said, To the baptism of John. And Paul said, John indeed baptised with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe on him that was coming after him, that is, on Jesus. And when they heard that, they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. And Paul having laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them", as if the Holy Spirit operated Himself through Paul's hands. All that raises much in detail
{377}
as to the procedure in Christianity, that all the Persons are operating, and, in the gift of the Spirit, the Father and the Son are operating as well as the Spirit. 
Rem. In @Acts 10, "the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word".
J.T. Quite so. That is an energetic action of the Spirit, and is really the same word as that used in @Luke 15 of the father's actions towards the prodigal son: "*fell* upon his neck, and covered him with kisses". That is the same idea.
A.N. Do I understand that your point is, that while there is the Spirit's activity, the Lord comes personally?
J.T. That is the point I am stressing, and what has been said is important, because there is considerable confusion about the matter, and the possibility of persons not having the Spirit at all, whereas what marks the dispensation is the Spirit's activities, as well as the activities of the Father and the Son; and that new birth is by the Spirit, and anyone that is born anew is born anew to be saved in the Christian period.
A.N. I think that helps to make the thought clear that all the Persons of the Godhead are active. I was thinking of where it says of Paul, when he was in conflict, "The Lord stood with me", @2 Timothy 4: 17. That would be the Lord personally?
J.T. Quite so.
A.M. In @Luke 15 the activities of all the divine Persons are set out.
J.T. Yes, that is a good point, and surely we all ought to feel the importance of it, that the Father, Son, and Spirit are operating, and we would rejoice in it all -- the magnificence of Christianity. It is a time of salvation, but salvation according to the operations of the New Testament. The first would be new birth; the second, believing in the death,
{378}
resurrection, and ascension of Christ; and then the coming in of the Spirit. So Peter says when they asked him, "What shall we do?" "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 2: 38.
In @Acts 1 we have first the Lord's charging them by the Holy Spirit, and then it says, "He was taken up; to whom also he presented himself living, after he had suffered, with many proofs; being seen by them during forty days, and speaking of the things which concern the kingdom of God; and, being assembled with them, commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to await the promise of the Father, which ... ye have heard of me. For John indeed baptised with water, but ye shall be baptised with the Holy Spirit". This is plainly indicating what prevailed during the forty days after the Lord arose. He went in and out amongst them. He had done it before He died; meaning that He would accustom them to the thought of His own visitations, as Samuel, in making a circuit every year, visiting certain parts, indicated the same thing. The Lord carried it on in His lifetime here before He died, and He now carries it on, the Spirit being here, but the point of importance is that He inaugurated the idea of coming Himself in the forty days, which is corroborated in the passage read in Corinthians. Paul's experience carried the thing into the assembly period, because he had that committed to him, and what he says has a bearing during the whole period of the assembly; hence what we have in @John 14, corresponding with John's place in the economy. The Lord said, "If I will that he tarry till I come". John's place is mysterious, and the Lord's coming as John records it involves what is mysterious, and so makes Christianity a mysterious system of things. The Lord Jesus coming in personally, periodically
{379}
as it were, according to the principle in Samuel, and according to the principle He established Himself in the days of His flesh and in the forty days, continues according to the mysterious testimony of John the apostle.
A.R. I understand the idea of the appearings of the Lord on occasions, but what do you mean by what is continuous?
J.T. I mean, as Samuel did. It goes on from the time when the Lord was here in flesh. From the baptism of John until He was taken up, the Lord Jesus came in and went out amongst them. That is the idea of continuing.
A.R. Then, as to His appearing amongst them, as in @John 20, would that continue at the present time?
J.T. Yes, and would maintain the heavenly side of the position. It is a heavenly thing. "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father", would mean that it was a heavenly thing, a mysterious thing, and hence the coming in verse 19, consequent upon the Magdalene's message, would show how the dispensation is set up, and what is to characterise it to the end. What I am saying is well worth considering, because we are coming to the end of the dispensation, and we want to be in keeping with it. It is an up-going thing, it is not simply that we are taken up by the Lord, but the idea of ascension is in it. It has great dignity, going up out of the earth altogether to heaven, and so the assembly comes down from God out of heaven. @Revelation 21 implies that she has a sinless history, heavenly history, not simply something that happened here on earth, but something coming out of heaven, as if it belonged to heaven. The idea of the ascension enters into the dispensation. It is a dispensation unlike any other. There are many dispensations, but there is none like
{380}
the dispensation of Christianity. I think @John 20 implies that. The Lord came in verse 19, and He came in after remarkable proceedings, telling them, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted", and eight days afterwards He came again.
W.R. Would the conditions for His coming in be seen in @John 14, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you".
J.T. The conditions in the main in this passage are that the Spirit should be given. In the main that is what is stressed. He says, "If ye love me keep my commandments. And I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". That is a verse that has a peculiar meaning in John. We do not find it elsewhere; Matthew, Mark and Luke do not have it. It is affecting that the Lord would not leave us orphans, not that we can be orphans while the Spirit is here; two divine Persons are operating in relation to each other. The Spirit would take the Lord's place as comforting them, being with them, but there is this additional thought: "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". Leaving it indefinitely like that keeps you on the *qui vive* all the time. 
Ques. Is the thought that we should be in keeping with it? "Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord".
J.T. Just so. These three comings in John are remarkable, three manifestations. The assembly period is being stressed; that is, the period marked by the Lord coming to us, and on the principle of having ascended; it is as if in @John 20:19 He came out from the Father in heaven that very minute.
{381}
Luke in his gospel writes as if the Lord was taken up on the very day He arose.
R.McK. Would the period seen in @John 20: 19, "When ... it was evening", conclude in @Acts 20, where the apostle spoke "until daybreak"?
J.T. I should think so. That is an important chapter, the Pauline chapter. It is characterised by love from beginning to end, the love of Paul. It is a question of the place Paul had in the affections of the saints, and Paul really represents the Lord. What a place he had in the affections of the brethren! We have in that chapter the thought of the first day of the week when the disciples assembled, as Luke says, "We being assembled to break bread", and Paul discoursed to them at length. This calls attention to Paul's ministry, which runs down the assembly period, and characterises it, and links on to the Lord's coming. 
Rem. The Lord would seem to delight to come.
J.T. I think that is what you gather. He is telling us that He is coming in now. The brethren have had a terrible time; He knows it, and I believe He is showing Himself. 
Ques. Do you suggest that John brings in the "disciple whom Jesus loved"?
J.T. That is the idea running through John; "If I will that he tarry till I come". There is in that some mysterious thing; John's ministry carries right down to the present moment.
R.McA. The Lord would maintain direct links with us.
J.T. That is the idea. For example, Paul stressed to the Corinthians that he was coming. He kept it before them that he was coming, and I believe it suggests to us that the Lord comes, not yet for us, but to us, to sustain us in view of His coming for us.
D.McI. In @1 Corinthians 15 it says, "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones". Is he
{382}
thinking of those who have experienced those manifestations?
J.T. I think so. The idea of manifestation is peculiar to John. It is a real thing, not simply that the person comes, but manifests himself. One might come quietly and hardly be discerned. Something may be spread out in ministry, or in some other way, that shows what his presence really is in such circumstances. 
Ques. In @John 14 does this thought of visitation develop into manifestation and finally into dwelling?
J.T. Quite so. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me ... and I will ... manifest myself to him". You might say that the Lord is there, but the point is manifestation. There is no doubt about it. It implies He is really there.
A.R. Would you suggest that the appearing of the Lord in the midst in @John 20 would be the answer to what you have in @John 14, "I am coming to you"?
J.T. I think so; it is the pattern, it is something that you can go by, and keep in your mind; other things that come in must be in keeping with the pattern. @John 20 should be kept in mind in the service of God on the first day of the week, because that is what is stressed in that chapter. The important thing is to keep the pattern before us and eliminate anything else. There is the case of Thomas in the second manifestation, and the erring disciples in the third one; it is there the Lord speaks about John being reserved. We keep that in mind too, but the first manifestation refers to the assembly; it is a question of keeping in principle to the pattern. The Lord *comes*, not that He is there all the time; He comes in in accord with the message sent to the disciples; it was a time of ascension, it was a heavenly time. In view of what the brethren have suffered He would reward us by showing Himself, in
{383}
something in the way of ministry, and especially to stress the Spirit as the breath of Christ, and the spirit of forgiveness amongst the brethren should follow on it. Let forgiveness characterise us as of the assembly. 
Rem. The word to the overcomer in Laodicea is, "I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me" @Revelation 3: 20.
J.T. That is a very good word. That came out in conversation the other day with a brother not committing himself to the truth definitely, and I believe it helped him. "Behold, I stand", as if He were waiting with a definite purpose in the position, "if any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me". That is what is going on. He will sup with us, and we with Him. That is, He takes us into His circumstances on the principle of "part with me", as He says in @John 13. 
Ques. What is meant by @John 14: 20?
J.T. "In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you". I think it shows the full thought of Christianity. It shows that the Persons of the Father and of the Son and of the saints are bound up together.
J.C. As to that verse, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you", ought we to have that experience in all our comings together?
J.T. Well, I should say so if the conditions are there. The thought of the Lord's presence banishes all anxiety; it banishes the orphan feeling.
A.M. Are we tested on this line as to our love for the Lord? "If ye love me", He says. I was thinking of the Spirit and the bride saying, "Come", at the close of the dispensation. Could there be anything on this line at all apart from responsive love in the saints?
{384}
J.T. I would take the first passage as collective, which I suppose would be the beginning of things, but verse 21, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", contemplates the breakdown in the history of the assembly and refers to the individual loving the Lord and the Lord coming to him. It is an individual matter: "he it is that loves me". The *he* is stressed there. "He that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". That is what we are experiencing. These are the manifestations of the Lord, involving not only His coming, but the effect of it in ministry, and perhaps formation too and stirring up of the brethren.
A.M. In verse 23 it says, "If any one love me, he will keep my word ...".
J.T. That brings in another thing. This is in answer to Judas, not Iscariot, who says to Him, "Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world? Jesus answered and said to him, If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him". "Any one" who will keep His word. That is another thing. The keeping of His word would refer to the ministry in relation to the service of God. The Lord has given light as to the service of God, and that implies not only the Lord coming, but the Father also.
A.M. Would it be that divine Persons really test us as to whether we want Them?
J.T. Quite so. Love will want Them.
H.B. You spoke of "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all", suggesting, do you think, that divine Persons are active on these lines amongst the saints universally?
J.T. Quite so, and I think too They are looking for the recognition of the order that belongs to the assembly, that we are doing things rightly. The
{385}
Lord's word to Philadelphia, "Thou ... hast kept my word", means that we are doing things rightly, not in a slipshod way.
H.B. We would be co-operating with divine Persons.
J.T. No; we are co-operating with one another. Paul says, "And thus I ordain in all the assemblies", meaning that we are moving together in the things we are doing, in the principles, or methods, or ways we are following, that we are all doing the same thing. As having part in the house of God we should be taught and so learn the law of the house. 
Ques. You referred to the pattern. Would that suggest that, as the Spirit has His way with us, it leaves room for the Lord to come in?
J.T. Quite so. The assembly is called "the Christ", the anointed vessel in which divine principles are maintained. We are following the same principles throughout the world in all the assemblies. No local company has customs of its own. We are all governed by the same principles. I believe that is a most important thing. 
Ques. Is this all in view of the rapture?
J.T. It was in my mind that we should be ready for going up. The Lord is preparing us for ascension.
{386}
OUR HEAVENLY PART
@Genesis 22:19; @Genesis 24: 62 - 65; @Deuteronomy 24: 5
J.T. We have alluded in our prayer to the opening verses of Ephesians: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ", so that our blessings are in the heavenlies, and not earthly. Although we are actually on earth, the assembly too, and the Spirit also, yet the assembly is heavenly; the assembly is out of heaven. Then in Corinthians we have, "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones". With these verses in mind, the first scripture is read because it does not record that Isaac came down from the mountain. It records much about his going up, that is going up to die, and after the figurative death of Isaac it is said in verse 14, "Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh; as it is said at the present day, On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". Then we read, in verse 19, "And Abraham returned to his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beer-sheba. And Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba".
After this, we have recorded the genealogy of Rebecca, who is the assembly in type: "And Bethuel begot Rebecca" (verse 23). In chapter 23 Sarah dies, figurative of Israel's disappearance off the scene to make way for the assembly, and then the whole of chapter 24 speaks of the assembly in type. This is a very long chapter of 67 verses. The verses we have read refer to Rebecca's coming to Isaac, and it pictures Isaac, as it were, at leisure, not occupied in any ordinary manner, but just free. Nor does it speak of Abraham at the end of the chapter; it is Isaac, and Isaac is said to be the servant's master, therefore it is a question of Isaac and Rebecca. These are the great subjects of the chapter, according
{387}
to the apostle Paul's comment in Ephesians, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". The type speaks of Christ and the assembly, and therefore the assembly peculiarly fits into it, and the Lord's supper fits into it. The verse in Deuteronomy is read from the books of Moses, that is the typical books, to show in type the Lord as having had a whole year of leisure after He takes the assembly. "When a man hath newly taken a wife, he shall not go out with the army, neither shall any kind of business be imposed upon him; he shall be free for his house one year, and shall gladden his wife whom he hath taken".
It is thought that this outline would indicate to the brethren what may be profitably before us and that it may tend to lift us up to our heavenly part, especially as we are now in the Lord's day, the first day of the week.
W.H. Would the thought of Mount Moriah, and going up to die, that you called attention to, suggest the elevation on which God is working, rather than the meeting of need? Are His own thoughts in view?
J.T. It would seem so. Genesis particularly affords God such opportunities. It is a book of liberty, not a book of the law, such as Exodus, Leviticus, or Numbers. In Genesis we see men at liberty, free to act according to their intelligence, and according to the liberty which God grants. So Christ and the assembly are peculiarly in it. It portrays the present time, which is not governed by public laws. The world of course is governed by Him in a providential way, but not directly; what He is dealing with directly is the assembly. The assembly does not come under the law in that sense. It is a remarkable period in which the Lord Jesus is seen above; of course, He is spoken of in the doctrine of Christianity as in heaven at the right hand of God, but He is not occupied particularly
{388}
with anything on the earth or in the universe, but just the assembly and the gospel, which bears on it and has the assembly in view.
A.R. Would you say what you have in mind in remarking that Isaac is not said to have returned with Abraham?
J.T. Just that the Lord Jesus has gone into heaven. He will come out too, but not publicly; He comes out for the assembly with the assembling shout; but His public coming is subsequent to that. As it is rightly understood, we should be more taken up with that state of things, and we would be heavenly instead of grovelling down here in earthliness. 
Ques. Does the thought of divine co-operation come in -- "they went both of them together", as in John's gospel, the Father and Son moving together?
J.T. Yes. The matter was between themselves, not a public matter. So the death of Jesus was carried out under divine direction. It was not simply that men did it; but it was by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God. They had taken and crucified Him, but that is how the matter is presented. The death of Christ is a public matter, as the book of Acts records it, but it is a question now of the Father, and the Son on the Father's throne. All the prophetic public matter is held in abeyance; according to what Peter says, "Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things", @Acts 3: 21. All the prophets since time began are bearing on it, but the fulfilment of their word is in abeyance at the present time.
A.R. Whom does Abraham set forth in the type in this chapter?
J.T. I would say generally the Father; God of course, but God as Father; only, when we come to the end of the chapter, he is not in evidence. It is
{389}
Christ that is viewed in the type as the master of the servant; Abraham is not mentioned at the close of the chapter. It is Christ, and I think that is how the matter stands in the Lord's supper. 
Ques. What is signified by the camels?
J.T. It is another type of the Spirit. There are several types of the Spirit in the chapter, and the camels are a type of the Spirit as the power by which the assembly is taken to Isaac, and the servant, of course, is a type of the Spirit. He does everything for Rebecca, and what is remarkable about him is that he is astonished at what he finds in her, that is, in the assembly. Then Beer-lahai-roi would refer to the Spirit as enabling us to rise up to the heavenly position, the position proper to Christ and the assembly. It had to do with Hagar; the well was in connection with her, but Isaac was occupied with it; he was coming and going to it. There is some allusion to it in the margin, literally 'came from coming to', as if it were the prime thought in his mind. He is meditating in the field; he has nothing special before him. The one thing in his mind is Rebecca, hence what he remarks is not that Rebecca is coming, but that camels are coming. They would suggest to us the power by which we are brought to Christ.
A.R. What is meant by the servant saying, "That is my master!" What have you in your mind as to it?
J.T. It is not Abraham. Abraham is his master at the beginning and of course, in the antitype, he represents the Father. John makes everything of the Father, in his gospel particularly, but in the Lord's supper the Lord is supreme Himself. It is not God's supper, nor the Father's supper, but it is the Lord's supper.
A.R. You are connecting this with our assembly position and the point where things pass over to
{390}
where Christ is supreme, where "That is my master!" would come in, where Christ takes full control.
J.T. Exactly. It is hardly understood by brethren, because constantly we hear of God, and the Father too, being approached very early, before the Lord's supper is finished; whereas it is the Lord's supper. The book of The Song of Songs corresponds in the Old Testament in that it is a question of the bride and the bridegroom, whether it be the assembly or Israel; although God is mentioned in it, but only by the name of Jah, chapter 8: 6.
W.H. Would you say a word regarding the covenant in the Supper as relating to Christ rather than to God?
J.T. The Lord says, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood". "My" connects with Him. That is all I can say; of course much may be said of that, and it is open to us to say it, because the new covenant in Christ's blood implies liberty. Paul says that God had made them able ministers of the new covenant, not of letter but of spirit, meaning that it gives liberty; "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty".
A.R. Does not the cup in some sense connect us with God, and with the love of God?
J.T. It is a question of a brother taking liberty to bring God into it; but the covenant here suggests the Lord, it is not the covenant of God; the Lord says, It is in "my blood". In the early part of the service of God it is a question of Christ and the assembly.
A.R. Would you say that one would address the Lord in regard to the cup, and not God, but it might suggest to our hearts the love of God, as well as speaking of Christ's blood shed for us?
J.T. It would, but it is well to keep it as it is. It is a question of Christ and the assembly.
{391} 
Rem. The cup is for a remembrance. "This do in remembrance of me" is said both in regard to the bread and the cup.
J.T. In the final light governing the Lord's supper, which the Lord gave according to Paul in @1 Corinthians 11, that is added in regard of the cup. It is not found in the gospels, it is only found there. It seems to be an additional thought which the Lord is pleased to add, in furnishing the light as to the Supper to His servant Paul. I think we should pay attention to that. It is connected with Christ; the whole clause is connected with Christ Himself, not God or the Father. 
Rem. In regard to @1 Corinthians 11: 23, "I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you" suggests that the apostle had this directly from the Lord Himself.
J.T. Quite so. It is not anywhere else, but just there.
H.B. Does that link on with @Matthew 16, when the Lord speaks of His assembly?
J.T. Yes, just so. It is God's assembly too, but in that passage it is Christ's assembly.
H.B. What you have before you is to introduce us into that setting, so that we are with Him in connection with His assembly?
J.T. It is what He is getting. You might say He has not anything else now. He has not got Israel, or the nations. He is "caught up to God", @Revelation 12: 5. I believe the assembly is caught up with Him. The One who is caught up is to rule the nations with a rod of iron; that is pending, but He is waiting; in the meantime He is occupied with the assembly.
R.B. Why does it say that Isaac saw the camels coming? It does not say he saw Rebecca coming.
J.T. There is the fact that everybody should see. You would think he would be looking for Rebecca, but he saw the camels coming. Possibly it might
{392}
be said that, looking across the desert, the camels would be more obvious, but Isaac knew, and the type would imply that Christ knows. I think the point in the passage is that it is a question of the power by which she is carried. "Rebecca arose, and her maids, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man. And the servant took Rebecca and went away" (verse 61). Now in the next verse we read that Isaac had just returned, and, verse 63, "he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, camels were coming".
R.B. Does that link on with what we have in Song of Songs? "Who is this, she that cometh up from the wilderness like pillars of smoke?"
J.T. That is what I understand. It is mentioned twice, and it is described in chapter 3. 
Ques. In @1 Corinthians 11 are the affections of the saints engaged with the Lord Himself, and the way in which He presents Himself to us, so that we are led from one point to another in the service Godward?
J.T. That is right. There are sections, so to speak, in the service of God, for it extends beyond the Lord's supper, but the Lord's supper is taken, and was taken from the beginning as the inauguration of the service of God. It is said in @Acts 2, they were "breaking bread in the house". That is what marked them "in the house" in contrast to the temple. It is detached from the Jewish system even from the beginning. 
Ques. Would we discern the movements of the Lord, as coming from and going to the well, thus touching the hearts of the saints, until all are engaged with Himself?
J.T. Well, I should say His coming from and going to the well would be stressing the place the Spirit has: the Lord is indicating that we are not relying on the Spirit enough. The Spirit's power
{393}
underlies the Supper, and if we take it aright we must recognise Him. He occupies us with the Lord. It suggests that we do not recognise the Spirit enough.
A.R. You are suggesting then that at the early part of the meeting we address the Lord.
J.T. Yes.
A.R. But the Spirit would be conducting; He would lead us on to the point when Christ comes into control, and when He is supreme.
J.T. Well, yes. Only that the Spirit would be there all the time. We rely on the Spirit; things are done by the Spirit. He is viewed as the Spirit of God, or, to be more accurate, just the Spirit by Himself. Then, later on, He is the Spirit of adoption, whether relative to our place as the brethren of Christ or as the sons of God. 
Ques. The feature of the lifting up of the eyes is prominent in this chapter. What would we gather from this?
J.T. It is the action of Isaac himself; he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, the camels were coming, and then it says that Rebecca lifted up her eyes and saw Isaac; she sees him alone, and she sprang off the camel. That would be another suggestion of the spiritual power she had: suggesting Christ's occupation with the assembly and the assembly's occupation with Him. 
Ques. Would the upper and nether springs of Achsah apply to this?
J.T. It is somewhat similar, only that Caleb gives Achsah his daughter the springs, but I think we should not pass too quickly over chapter 22. The fact that Isaac is not said to have come down characterises the assembly period, it is a period, a nondescript sort of dispensation, things not being named specifically, but they are there. Everything is there, only we are supposed to see things and know
{394}
things, to find things out, and hence, when the Lord's supper is in question, Paul says, "I speak as to intelligent persons", appealing to our intelligence, as if we should know things, and then he says, "Do *ye* judge what I say", @1 Corinthians 10: 15.
G.D. Does the Lord's supper produce this spring and energy with us, as seen in Rebecca springing off the camel?
J.T. I think it does, as when the movement is felt in the assembly, when the Lord is apprehended as coming in. "It is the Lord", as John the beloved said. When Mary Magdalene brings her message there is nothing very formal; she told the disciples that she had seen the Lord. I think things are informal; everything is free. The suggestion is that we are to be intelligent in everything.
A.M. Referring again to chapter 22, is the reference to Beer-sheba a reference to the Spirit here in the absence of Christ?
J.T. I think it would be a reference to the faithfulness of God. Beer-sheba is the well of the oath, therefore of the purposes of God. Abraham and his young men dwelt there.
A.M. Do the dwelling conditions at Beer-sheba involve the Spirit of the dispensation?
J.T. Yes. The first and second epistles to Corinth are to establish us, especially the second epistle. Hence the apostle says, "Now God is faithful, that our word to you is not yea and nay. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you ... did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us. Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". That is the idea in these two assembly letters, and they are intended to correct
{395}
us and adjust us, and establish us. I believe that is the idea of the well of the oath, so that God is said to be faithful. In the first and second epistles to Corinth there is thus an allusion to Beer-sheba. The Spirit is here to establish us, and hence the great prominence given to the Spirit in these epistles.
F.I. Have you in mind, when referring to Isaac not coming back, that we should, in moving towards the Supper, have our eyes upon the Lord as He is in glory, so as to have the power to enter into all the Supper leads to?
J.T. Yes. We leave our houses, and we come to the meeting place; we meet the brethren first of all, we meet one another; it is a question of love, where we really value one another. We sit down together in love. All that is in the light of Christ in heaven, the rejected Man, cast out here, but glorified there. Then His movements are towards us.
A.R. Would you say there is a point when we ought to realise the Lord's coming in amongst us?
J.T. I would. I believe there is a stirring in our affections when that happens. The Spirit would never fail to occupy us with Christ, especially when there is anything like presentation, and so it is said that He presented Himself to them living, as if He would say, It is Myself. Your eye would be directed to Him. 
Rem. It was when she saw Isaac that she sprang off the camel.
J.T. That is the point. It suggests spiritual energy.
A.R. Then would you say that we would not address the Lord as in heaven, but rather as present amongst us?
J.T. I would say that.
A.R. One has been concerned lately as to addressing the Lord as in heaven after the breaking of
{396}
the bread and the sense of His presence has been realised.
J.T. I think we should keep before us that we are in the Lord's realm, so to speak, and then in the Father's realm. First of all, we are in the Spirit's realm; He is here to take care of us. As the Comforter He abides with us. The Lord is up there taking care of our interests there, but the Lord has the right in His own Person to move, and I believe that Isaac represents that in the passage read, coming from and going to the well, and what he notices, and how Rebecca comes into view as having reverence for him, veiling herself, as if to say that she is not to be occupied with anyone else. She is wholly for him, as Paul said, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ", @2 Corinthians 11: 2. We are there for Him.
R.McK. With reference to the energy in Rebecca, is the idea the same as Dan springing forth from Bashan (@Deuteronomy 33: 22)?
J.T. He leaps from Bashan; it is power to get out of an awkward position. It is not to Christ, it is from Bashan, from some place. I do not know if that is in your mind.
R.McK. I just wondered if the wilderness is the place where we break bread, and there is power to move over into the land.
J.T. The idea is that there is power in us. The Spirit is the power.
J.M. What movement of the Lord is suggested by Isaac walking in the fields to meet her?
J.T. Isaac had just returned from Beer-lahai-roi, for he was dwelling in the south country. It was a position of favourableness and liberty. We pointed out that Joseph was a man of affairs, he was lord over all Egypt, and he had many things to administer; the immensity of the work has been noted. When he would come to show himself to his brethren
{397}
he comes in at noon as if to lunch, speaking simply. He has plenty to do and is going back to do it, whereas Isaac is not employed thus. He is at leisure, and all that accompanies that fact is presented to bring out the present dispensation, how the Lord is free now. He is not occupied ruling the universe, or the nations. He is not on the throne of David, not even on His own throne, but on His Father's throne. He has time and leisure, as you would expect, the liberty of the Son, and so the dispensation goes on for centuries. We wonder why He is so long detained at this period when Israel and the nations and Christ's place in creation are in abeyance, but He is occupied with the assembly, and the point for us is to be exercised to answer to it, to be like Rebecca. She had come a long way at the behest of Abraham; she is to be for Isaac, and she knows it, and she says in effect, I am for you only, and she takes the veil and covers herself. 
Ques. What would be the thought of Isaac going to the field to meditate? He would be fully aware that the servant had gone to get a bride for him.
J.T. He would. The Lord is perfectly aware of everything, but He is seen in a subject attitude, and yet He is not subject on this particular occasion. He is the master, and He has a free hand; He is not occupied with other things. He is ready for us all the time and we want to be ready for Him. That is the point Rebecca makes; she is ready for him.
H.B. In that way we are occupied with the activity of love, seeking to introduce one another on to assembly ground, and into assembly function.
J.T. That is right. We come together to meet one another; we go there because we love one another and there is much done in the beginning of the meeting which bears on the general position of Christ's interests on earth, it is not yet the ruling of the nations; we have nothing to do with voting or the
{398}
like, secret societies, or social functions. Business is of secondary importance, especially on the first day of the week; we are all ready for Him and the idea is that we have power over our own minds: "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". We have power over our minds, so as to occupy them with certain things for a certain time, and that is with Christ.
A.S. Would Rebecca's question be of importance, "Who is the man"?
J.T. That brings out something else, it says, "she had said to the servant, Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us?" That is an historical thing, another matter to be considered, a matter of history in regard to Christ. The question who the Lord is enters into the service. The servant said, "That is my master!"
J.B. Does verse 65 precede verse 64 in that sense?
J.T. No doubt historically it did, because it says, "she had said ... Who is the man ... ?"
J.S.T. Was Mary ready for the Lord when He called her by name?
J.T. That is it. That is when she comes in to the thing fully. She says "Rabboni".
W.S. When the servant said; "That is my master!" then Rebecca veiled herself. Would that suggest the spirit of devotedness?
J.T. Just so, and that we are exclusively for Him. I think the veil would mean that she was fully for Isaac.
R.B. Does she answer to the pearl at this juncture?
J.T. She does. Because that also is a matter of history, what he *gave* for her (@Matthew 13: 46). That is historical: he "went and sold all whatever he had"; but in verse 44, speaking of the treasure, it is the present tense; for joy he "goes and sells all whatever
{399}
he has". Therefore verse 46 is greater, because it alludes to the counsels and purposes of God. "Whatever he had" was historical; he sold all to have the pearl.
G.L. Would this be seen in @Psalm 45? The King greatly desired her beauty.
J.T. Just so. That is, of course, on moral grounds. "Forget ... thy father's house". What is said to her is not like the pearl; it is a question of what she forsakes, meaning that you will give up mere nature for Him, and the King will desire "thy beauty". But as to the pearl nothing is said about it in that sense, it is what it is essentially, it is of great price. The merchant would understand that. 
Ques. Can you tell us why the thought of securing a wife for Isaac originated with his father?
J.T. That is understandable. In @Matthew 22 the king would make a marriage for his son. I mean, the Father was in that. Still, in figure, the Lord seeks a wife. We see that in Adam. God thought of it before him. It was not good that he should be alone, but he did not find anybody suitable, as if he were looking for one, showing how the truth runs concurrently, the truth bearing on divine Persons.
J.L. Could we have a word on Deuteronomy?
J.T. It is just to confirm Genesis, because Genesis is unique in the five books of Moses. I have no doubt the five books of Moses are like the five books of the Psalms. There is more latitude in the first book. In Genesis persons are shown as doing things of themselves, but when we come to the typical books we are on narrower ground, and it is what we are told to do; it is not what the person does but what he is told to do. "The Lord commanded Moses", for instance. In @Deuteronomy 24 we have a reference to marriage, and it runs on down to the end of verse 4, and then we have, "When a man hath newly taken a wife". It is clear that it is a picture
{400}
of something, and I think something in Genesis. I think all this would refer to Christ and the assembly. He is free from ordinary things that belong to Him, as we have already said. Israel belongs to Him, the nations, and the universe too; He made it, and He is to rule it, but He is free from all that at the present time, a remarkable figure. And He is to be in His house, which would be the assembly. Hebrews speaks about the Son, and that the Son is the builder of the universe, and the universe is God's house, and the Lord has right to it, but He is confining Himself now to the assembly. He is occupied with the assembly for a whole year. "He shall be free for his house one year, and shall gladden his wife whom he hath taken".
J.B. What is the extent of one year?
J.T. It is used elsewhere for an indefinite period. The acceptable year of the Lord has lasted eighteen or nineteen centuries, and it is called a year. 
Ques. Do you link this verse in Deuteronomy with Isaac dallying with his wife Rebecca?
J.T. Quite so. It suggests what He has in the assembly; He is free to be occupied with us, not having any business on His hands. This is most suggestive and most touching, that He is with us and we are with Him, yet He is the maker of the universe. Joseph was called, *The sustainer of the life of the world*. Well, the Lord Jesus will be that, but He is now confined to the assembly.
W.C. Is that suggested in what Abraham says to his servant, "Bring not my son thither again"?
J.T. Yes. Isaac was to be a type of Christ. He is not to be brought back into the world yet, but God is going to bring the First-begotten into the world, we are told. The coming of the Lord is the fulfilment of this. We are enjoined to love His appearing, because it is the time He comes into everything that is His. In the meantime He is telling
{401}
us how much He loves us, and He wants us to be with Him and so He is going to take us up with Him to receive us unto Himself.
A.R. In Genesis she became his wife, and he loved her and Isaac was comforted after the death of his mother, but in Deuteronomy it is from his side. He shall gladden his wife whom he hath taken. Does that suggest that it is reciprocal?
J.T. Yes indeed. And hence what a time the first day of the week is! Luke says in @Acts 20, "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread". 
Rem. "Newly taken a wife" -- that is a beautiful touch; there is nothing historical about her.
J.T. Quite so, it is the newness of it. It is a new matter in his experience. 
Rem. The bride says in the Song of Songs that the bridegroom is altogether lovely. Do you think that the assembly should take on these features, what the Lord is to the assembly?
J.T. Quite so, and in the Song of Songs we have also, "Thou art all fair, my love". 
Ques. Does this bear on the gospel of John in a particular way, where the Lord has so much to say to His own in chapters 13 to 16?
J.T. Yes. He spends far more time with the disciples in John than He does in the other gospels.
{402}
THE FAITHFULNESS OF GOD
@Genesis 22: 15 - 19; @2 Corinthians 1: 18 - 22
J.T. These scriptures speak of encouragement and establishment. Nine or ten times in the first chapter of 2 Corinthians the word "encouragement" is used, which is a matter of very great importance to us. The Lord has us in mind for encouragement. There is much discouragement, and much occasion for it, but this chapter is full of encouragement. Then establishment goes with it. Hence in @Genesis 22, where we have in type the resurrection of Christ, we have Abraham and his young men going to Beer-sheba, which typically implies the faithfulness of God, the well of the oath, and Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba. That is to say, God has already wrought in raising Christ from the dead, typically, when He swears to Abraham. It says in the New Testament "because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself, saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee", @Hebrews 6: 13, 14.
So in these verses the angel of the Lord calls to Abraham a second time, "By myself I swear, saith Jehovah, that, because thou hast done this, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, I will richly bless thee, ... and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth bless themselves, because thou hast hearkened to my voice". The secret is obedience. God has done all the rest, as it were, in raising Christ, and now it is a question of obedience. It is said in the passage we have read in the New Testament that every promise of God is yea and amen in Christ; that is, Christ in heaven. We are seen here; the assembly is formed, in principle, at Beer-sheba, where God's faithfulness is proved. The statement, "God is faithful", is mentioned at least three times
{403}
in the epistles to the Corinthians. It is a matter to be taken to heart at the present time, when there is so much pressure, to count on the faithfulness of God. One feels that Christ in heaven is but poorly apprehended by us. It is not said that Isaac came down with Abraham after he was typically raised from the dead. The suggestion is that he typifies the Lord as gone into heaven, angels and principalities and powers being made subject to Him. And Abraham below represents the assembly where the faithfulness of God is needed and proved, the Spirit of God being here, answering to the position of Christ in heaven.
R.M. Is that why the place is named?
J.T. The meaning of the name is "the well of the oath", and the facts in chapter 21 prove clearly what it means; it is the place of the faithfulness of God. When Jacob was going into Egypt with his family, Joseph having sent for him, God appeared to him, the God of his father Isaac, at Beer-sheba, a striking example of what we are saying. Whatever happens we can count on God, that He is faithful.
A.N. Would that be the thought in @Psalm 37? It opens with adverse conditions, but the exhortation is to "Confide in Jehovah ... dwell in the land, and feed on faithfulness" (verse 3).
J.T. "Dwell in the land" goes beyond what we are saying; nevertheless it is true for us. The land is the heavenly position, involving the assembly; that is where we are to dwell. Another says, "I dwell among mine own people". The great defect and weakness with many is that they do not dwell with the saints; they have their dwelling, their interests elsewhere. 
Ques. Does the heavenly position you speak of correspond to what we have in Ephesians?
J.T. Quite so. That epistle contemplates Christ in heaven, the Spirit here, and the assembly formed.
{404}
"There is one body and one Spirit ... one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". That is the second part of the epistle, but the basis is that Christ is not only risen but glorified; and indeed anticipatively the assembly is said to be risen too, "raised us up together, and has made us to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ", @Ephesians 2: 6.
The New Testament direct reference to this chapter is in @Hebrews 6: 13 - 20. Here the type is carried forward to the thought of our entering into the holiest, where we have an anchor sure and steadfast.
A.R. You said a little earlier that it was not the heavenly position that was in view. Is the holiest something different, something we touch down here?
J.T. Quite so; it is a position that was wrought out in the wilderness. Before they entered the land it was there in the tabernacle. Therefore it is a privilege open to us now, and the passage read in Genesis leads to it and involves it; but it also involves that Christ is in heaven, as Hebrews teaches, the Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.
W.H. In calling attention to the thought of the oath, God's faithfulness, is it in your mind to encourage us, that what is established in Christ in glory should have its answer now, and God is set to support this?
J.T. Yes. The Spirit being here, what is here is comparable to what is above, equivalent really to what is above; there is a divine Person above and a divine Person here, the same term applying to both. What the Lord is in heaven as a Priest to take care of our interests up there, the Spirit is here to take care of our interests here, and in His power we have access to the holiest by a new and living way, which Jesus has dedicated for us through the veil. That is the position, an impregnable position that cannot be
{405}
moved, as it is said, "We receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved", @Hebrews 12: 28. 
Ques. Does the encouragement you speak of come by our reverting to what Beer-sheba stands for, the faithfulness of God?
J.T. That is the idea exactly, reverting to Beersheba. Abraham dwelt there and Isaac after him went there, as we learn in chapter 26.
H.B. In @Acts 2 do we get the assembly idea, but from the standpoint of the indwelling Spirit?
J.T. Yes. The assembly was inaugurated there; it is the great inaugural chapter, and amplified by the great results that God graciously gave to Peter s gospel address, three thousand being converted. Perhaps we have nothing like it later. God was showing what He could do at the beginning in order to encourage the brethren, giving them a start in the assembly.
A.M. Is @2 Timothy 2 something like the return to Beer-sheba? "Remember Jesus Christ raised from among the dead, of the seed of David, according to my glad tidings". Then it says, "The firm foundation of God stands, having this seal". Would that be like Isaac raised from the dead, and the foundation of God standing at Beer-sheba, to which Abraham returned?
J.T. That is very good and confirming. It was to encourage Timothy, and it is what encourages us. It has already been remarked that Isaac is not presented as having come down with Abraham and the young men. The Lord says to Mary, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father", indicating that the assembly was being formed in relation to the Lord Jesus ascended in heaven, the brethren being recognised as His brethren, God being their Father as He was Christ's Father. It is set up in a relationship that is invulnerable; it is a question of standing there. Abraham dwelling there
{406}
would enjoy typically the faithfulness of God, and we enjoy it as we do here today.
A.N. Would that not be set forth in principle in the day of Pentecost, when the apostle enlarges upon the resurrection and exaltation of Christ as the basis of all future operations?
J.T. Yes, and then at the end of @Acts 2 we have the system inaugurated in the apostles. Those that believed were added, and they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles. Christendom has gone all astray in being diverted from the teaching and fellowship of the apostles. We have independent teaching, independent doctrines, and independent associations or institutions, religious institutions, without any proper regard for what the apostles taught, and the fellowship that was attached to that.
W.H. You stressed earlier that Abraham came into all this assurance on the ground of obedience. Would that be the line on which we come in for the present encouragement of all that is established in Christ?
J.T. Hence the gospel through Paul was announced for the obedience of faith among all nations. Without obedience there can be nothing for us. 'Isms' of different kinds are current, whereas the point at the beginning was the teaching and fellowship of the apostles. Then they continued in the breaking of bread and prayers. These are all very simple things that brethren continually enjoy, or should enjoy. "And fear was upon every soul, and many wonders and signs took place through the apostles¬ means. And all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all, according as any one might have need" -- meaning that love was there -- "And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and
{407}
breaking bread in the house ..." That was not in the temple, nor is it today in a *temple* of brick and mortar, but in a house, or a room without any pretence. Then they "received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people; and the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved". That is how the assembly was inaugurated, and was intended to continue; but it has not continued. Hence there had to be a break away from the errors, both in doctrine and religious custom, that had been brought in. Thus it is a time of a remnant, the Lord is gathering twos and threes back to the original teaching and fellowship of the apostles.
R.M. Does Paul as our model show us the way to it in addressing Agrippa in @Acts 26? He says, "I was not disobedient".
J.T. Quite so. The point for us is to be obedient. The Reformation afforded some light, but not light as to the assembly. Not for several hundred years after that did the saints come into the clear light of Scripture, as to the assembly, and they have continued in it ever since. 
Ques. Would you say our encouragement follows on the same lines?
J.T. Quite so, that is why I read this passage in 2 Corinthians. It was a question of whether Paul was coming to Corinth, a very simple matter, but really involving the idea of Christ's coming. Paul had not come, and the Corinthians were doubtful as to whether he was truthful. He says that he was not untruthful, "For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you ... did not become yea and nay". *He* did not become what they thought of Paul, that he said yea and did nay. But he says, "Yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us". He was true and
{408}
sincere and in love he desired to be with the Corinthians, but their condition forbade it. He tells us elsewhere that to spare them he stayed away. 
Ques. Is there any connection between Paul staying away from Corinth until things were ready for his coming, and the word in @Malachi 3, where much is made of the Lord's coming to His temple suddenly, and the result that would follow? Did Paul wish to avoid having to bring in judgment on them?
J.T. Yes, it is in keeping with Christ's coming. Christ's movements were in love, as they are now. He has promised to come for us, and He will keep His promise, only we have to learn to wait. The Corinthians had to learn to wait for Paul.
J.M. Would it be right to say we have little conception of what it is to have a visit from the Lord?
J.T. Just so. We spoke elsewhere of Samuel's circuit, and of the Lord's own circuit, as we may say. He came in and went out among His disciples while He was here, from the time of the baptism of John until He was received up. Then He is coming according to @John 14, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". That is a present thing. It may happen weekly or oftener; we might expect it at such a time as this in some sense. Then there is the final thought of His coming, which is depicted in 1 Thessalonians; He descends from heaven with an assembling shout. All these suggest the need of our being on the watch. "What I say unto you I say unto all, Watch".
J.C. Are you suggesting that dwelling at Beersheba would provide suitable conditions for the Lord coming in?
J.T. Well, it would be the sense of faith and dependence on God. These are conditions that the Lord Jesus would honour at any time.
{409}
F.I. Would not the faithfulness of God be seen practically as we take account of the present position of Christ? It says earlier in @Acts 2, from which you have quoted, that Jesus has been made both Lord and Christ.
J.T. That would be the answer to all that had been promised in the Old Testament down to the Lord's coming. God had made Him both Lord and Christ, meaning that He was in the place of administration; He was in the position in which He could fulfil every promise of God, every purpose of God. These are great matters, because they beget stability in the saints. Then there is too the idea of establishment. It goes on to say, "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". These are stabilising things; they are vital and enjoyable.
G.S. In the scriptures read, does encouragement strengthen our links with divine Persons, whereas establishment rather strengthens us with the brethren? The apostle says, "He that establisheth us with you".
J.T. Quite so. Encouragement is largely what God is to us Himself. He is the God of all encouragement; it is what He is Himself at the present moment, but there is what is to be established for ever. "Who also has sealed us"; marked us off as His own property inviolably. No one can touch us with impunity. He has marked us off by sealing, and has "given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". That is the present portion for our hearts. 
Ques. Does Paul in Philippians put the saints on the same ground as this? "He who has begun in you a good work will complete it unto Jesus Christ's day".
{410}
J.T. Just so; and the corresponding responsibility on ourselves, "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who works in you both the willing and the working according to his good pleasure". 
Ques. Would the appreciation of God's faithfulness develop trustworthiness in the saints?
J.T. That is what comes out in Abraham. He was a reliable man. "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do ... For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him". Abraham grew, in God's estimation, in reliability. So in @John 20 the Lord shows that He can trust the brethren. It is a great matter to be reliable, to be trusted by the Lord and by one another, speaking the truth one to another. We are apt to be, not lying, but dissembling; perhaps failing to keep promises, failing to come to the meetings to fulfil our duty. What marked Abraham above all other things, was that he grew in reliability under the eye of God. He is called the friend of God. The Lord calls His disciples His friends; very few have come into the appreciation of that. John in his epistle says, "Greet the friends by name", meaning that we are to know one another personally, speaking and writing to one another. 
Ques. Have you in mind that those whom the Lord speaks of as friends are those who dwell at Beer-sheba, and are not governed or prompted by what is natural?
J.T. Quite so. We find that Isaac in chapter 26 refused to enter into social links with the king of the Philistines. Jehovah appeared to him at Beer-sheba and said, "I am the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake". And he built an altar there, meaning that he would sacrifice, which is a feature of a pilgrim, and he
{411}
called upon the name of Jehovah, and he pitched his tent there, and there Isaac's servants dug a well. Abimelech, Ahuzzath his friend, and Phichol the captain of his host come to him there. Isaac says, "Why are ye come to me, seeing ye hate me?" They reply, "We saw certainly that Jehovah is with thee, and we said, Let there be then an oath between us". Isaac stands out as a pilgrim like his father, refusing to join in social relations with the Philistines, although making a covenant of peace with them, which is quite right. The same day Isaac's servants "told him concerning the well that they had dug, and said to him, We have found water. And he called it Shebah; therefore the name of the city is Beer-sheba to this day". The friends of God are found at Beer-sheba. 
Rem. There were those who spoke to the Lord on the occasion of the death of Lazarus, but He remained two days where He was; He did not come at once.
J.T. He wanted to bring out all that was in His mind, not yet disclosed. Therefore He remained two days away, but the result was victory. We have to wait on the Lord, and in waiting we may be tested, but we prove eventually that He will do the very best for us.
J.C. Is not that how Saul was tested -- in waiting for Samuel?
J.T. Quite so. He failed to wait for him, and missed the blessing. I believe it is a great moment for God's people. He is going to do something for us in a spiritual way. We are not to be helped socially in the world; He is looking for rigid separation from the world. Nor is He going to help us particularly industrially, but He is going to help us spiritually.
J.C. The same day that the heavenly man, Isaac, sent the Philistines away, water was found.
{412}
J.T. That shows how God honours us.
H.K.R. Will you say what is in mind in giving us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts?
J.T. I shall endeavour to distinguish between the things Paul mentions by which we are established. The first is anointing. We are marked off as persons who have the Spirit, but persons distinguished by the Spirit in an external way. That means our ways and walk, and of course ministry and preaching and the like. Then the second thing is that He has sealed us, which would mean that we are marked off as His property; we belong to God. Thirdly, we have something in our hearts to keep us going spiritually until the Lord comes; that is the earnest of the Spirit, what the presence of the Spirit implies as a present portion for us.
R.M. So we have the three divine Persons mentioned in that verse?
J.T. Quite so. It is always noticeable. In the baptismal formula, for instance: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
A.M. What is the link between the faithfulness of God and the word of the apostle not being yea and nay. Is it important to hear the word, as with Abraham, who hearkened to God's voice?
J.T. I would say that Paul is showing how completely he is identified with the Lord, which is a great matter in ministry -- the idea of representation. So he says, "Having therefore this purpose, did I then use lightness?" They had indicated that he did use lightness, but he is showing that what was in him was according to what was in Christ. He is in keeping with his preaching. "The Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you, by me and Silvanus and Timotheus" (three witnesses) "did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him". It is as if the apostle just moved over from himself to the Lord Jesus. "For whatever promises
{413}
of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us". That is how the matter stands; the servant is in entire keeping with God.
J.C. Is the apostle in that way taking his stand by the swearing of the oath?
J.T. That is what I thought. It is a remarkable thing that God deigns to swear, and I think it is largely to confirm young Christians, as indeed the new covenant is to confirm young Christians. All Christians do not need an oath from God; they believe God, as Paul did. All true Christians believe God, but young ones are not quite so sure, and no doubt the young element was questioning Paul here. So the thought is that he is in keeping with the oath of God, on which our position stands in the covenant. 
Ques. Is "the second time" involved in that? He speaks to Abraham a second time.
J.T. Second epistles are usually of that character, confirm what is said in the first.
J.C. So the apostle writing to Timothy says, "If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful: he cannot deny himself". Is that what you have in mind?
J.T. Quite so. Christianity, in principle, is Christ. It is maintained in the power of the Spirit here in keeping with what God is in Christ.
H.K.R. Is that where the value of our elder brethren comes in? They have experience of God, and are governed by what He says, so that the younger gain much by learning from the elder?
J.T. Hence the importance of the young keeping with the elder. There is a stabilising effect with the experience of the elder brethren. 
Ques. Does Paul in chapter 3 develop the covenant side of the truth?
J.T. I think that is what is meant. "Do we need, as some, commendatory letters to you, or commendatory
{414}
from you?. *Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men", meaning that he loved the Corinthians so much that they were his very letter. Wherever he went he spoke about the beloved Corinthians. The Lord had used him to convert them. That is what should mark the brethren; we speak well of the saints; we do not criticise them unduly. 
Ques. Is it remarkable that in the address to the Laodiceans the Lord presents Himself as "the Amen, the faithful and true witness"?
J.T. That is at the end of the assembly's period down here. The Lord is seen standing before us as the Amen, the faithful and true Witness. The assembly had not been that; that is the point. But the Lord is bringing about something now, after all these centuries of unfaithfulness in Laodicea and Thyatira and the others. Philadelphia is outstanding as according to the mind of the Lord Jesus, and He is bringing Philadelphia about now, through present exercise and ministry. 
Rem. It is said to Philadelphia, "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee out of the hour of trial".
J.T. It is a very great comfort to know that the Lord will keep us, especially when we think of the things that are portending now in a military sense. 
Ques. Has Paul that in mind when he writes to Timothy, "The things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also"?
J.T. Quite so. He does not say gifted men, but faithful men. Gift in itself will not help us. There are many gifts abroad who are not faithful and they are not available to us.
A.R. Would you say why it emphasises so much that things are "in him"? There is no danger of breakdown if things are in Him.
{415}
J.T. Exactly. That is how things are inviolable in Christianity. It unites two divine Persons, yea, three divine Persons; the Lord in heaven and the Spirit down here, and the Father over all, and through all, and in us all. Hence the Lord says that no one can perish in His hands, and no one can perish in His Father's hands, who is greater than all. That is how the economy stands. It is impregnable. So that whatever is portending or threatening, the Lord will take care of us. "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". That is our hope. 
Ques. Would you help a little as to "the glory of God by us"?
J.T. That would be in the sense in which Paul glorified God in his faithfulness and ministry. What is public is in the assembly, and that is where the glory is to be seen, in our ways and walk and ministry.
W.H. Would it not be encouraging that Paul, in writing his first epistle to Timothy, when defection was coming in rapidly, uses the expression, "God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth"? @1 Timothy 3: 15.
J.T. Very assuring. One is to know how to behave oneself in it. The truth is that God has set out everything from His own side through Christ. He accomplished redemption, He has placed Him in heaven, and sent the Spirit here. Everything is set up by God from His own side. Now our part comes in. But God is working with us; He does not leave it to us. "It is God who works in you both the willing and the working according to his good pleasure". But the thing is impregnable to start with, and will be so at the end, and will go up into heaven. 
Ques. Is the Spirit of God bringing the faithfulness of divine Persons before us in these last
{416}
days, with the object of strengthening faithfulness on our side? The saints at Colosse and Ephesus are both said to be faithful.
J.T. Quite so. I think the Lord glories in a faithful man.
A.M. Would you say that, while we cannot do the work of God, we can hinder and divert it?
J.T. Quite so, alas! Yet God is going on patiently with us. It is a marvel to consider how He has gone on patiently for nineteen hundred years, and at the end bringing out something that He can translate to heaven. I believe that is what is in His mind, and He is allowing what is going on in the world to test and bring out what is in the brethren, and make us worthy of translation.
{417}
LEVITICAL SERVICE
@Numbers 4: 29 - 33; @Ephesians 4: 7 - 16
J.T. The brethren will be aware that the Levites represent the saints, particularly those who minister the truth, either as preaching or teaching, and that the families of the Levites were to carry the tabernacle. The idea of carrying is really burden bearing, and the Merarites were to carry "the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and bases thereof, and the pillars of the court round about, and their bases, and their pegs, and their cords, all their instruments, according to all their service", and then it is said "by name ye shall number to them the materials which are their charge to carry". That is not said of any of the material save that which the Merarites carried. The use of the word "name" is important, because it applies peculiarly to the saints. The Lord knows us by name. John the apostle says, "Greet the friends by name". The apostles were named carefully, and others who followed. The seventy were not named, though the idea is there, but the twelve were named, and many others who laboured were named; even sisters were named, such as Phoebe, Mary, Martha and Lydia. I mention all these things to make the matter clear, that the type represents the saints personally, how they are cared for, as in a meeting such as this. Ephesians treats pre-eminently of the saints, even saying that we are raised up together, and made to sit down together in the heavenlies. We are thus cared for. The Lord says that He is Himself coming for us, to change our bodies and take us up into heaven, so that there is to be attention to us throughout, and it is for us to be available to give attention to those who wish to serve us. That was what was in mind, which I think you will appreciate.
{418}
The Levites are divided into three families. In the third chapter it is according to their birth, and Gershon is first, being the eldest, but this chapter treats of them sovereignly. Kohath is first according to this chapter, whereas the earlier chapter speaks of the eldest first. In the beginning of the third chapter we have, "These are the generations of Aaron and Moses", and lower down the sons of Levi are mentioned according to their birth.
A.M. You have called attention to the names. In the opening of this book it says, "These are the names of the men that shall stand with you".
J.T. These are the princes, of course. The princes are alluded to there. They are said to be those who are summoned of the assembly, or when anything special has to be done in a military sense. There are twelve of them, taken from the tribes, but the Levites are taken just from the tribe of Levi.
W.A.S. The sovereignty of God and the purpose of God are seen in these passages, are they not?
J.T. That is just what was in mind in chapter 4 as compared with chapter 3. Chapter 4 is the sovereign side, therefore the first taken is Kohath, whereas in chapter 3 Gershon is mentioned first. "Of Gershon, the family of the Libnites" (verse 21), and so on. The apostles were selected according to sovereignty, especially Paul. "He is a chosen vessel unto me", the Lord says, then it is said as to Peter, "first ... Peter", showing that he was given that place sovereignly.
A.M. The family of the Merarites is last. Is that something like Paul, "last of all", and then John himself is a typical Merarite, and he is the very last one who speaks to us.
J.T. The Lord said He would keep John to the end, and so it is that John brings in at the end one hundred and fifty-three great fishes. There were fishes taken according to Luke, a large quantity, so
{419}
large that the net broke, whereas John says, "The net was not rent", although there was a very large number and they were great fishes, which would point to the endurance and intelligence needed at the present time to continue the testimony. So Timothy is told by Paul to commit to faithful men what he had learned from him, and it is to run down to others also. It is a question of Paul's teaching, the most elevated and precious of all the teaching of the apostles, and there can be no doubt that the Lord intends, now, as having passed us through much suffering, to develop endurance in us. Paul says of himself, "What sufferings ... I endured". He is specially mentioned in that light, so that the Lord says of him at the very beginning, "*I* will show to him how much he must suffer for my name". It was a question of Paul learning how to suffer, so as to be an example for all of us, and that is particularly applicable to the present time, especially in certain sections. It is a period of remarkable sufferings, and they are not for nothing. They are not accidental. The Lord intends us to gain by them, and take them on in a special way. The physical sufferings are over for a while, but the sufferings for the testimony are not over. In the second epistle to the Corinthians, Paul enumerates his sufferings, even before they were finished, and they were a remarkable list.
J.L. You referred to the age limit. I was wondering whether it was a matter of youthfulness coming into the service and taking it on deliberately.
J.T. Numbers is characterised by measurements, and especially the age limits specified. The military age is lower than the levitical age. There is no age limit given to the priests. The military age was from twenty years, and for levitical work from thirty to fifty, not from twenty to fifty, although there was a sort of novitiate beginning at twenty-five, which
{420}
means that the younger brethren are to learn. They had to learn everything. When we are converted we know practically nothing. That is very important for young brothers to keep in mind. We all know the difference between the tradesmen and the learners, so the learners among the Levites had to begin at twenty-five, that is to say, they had to respect their elders, and to learn from them. Of course we learn from the Lord, by the Spirit. At the same time we learn from the brethren, and it is important that we should know that.
J.L. Timothy would be an example of that, learning Paul's ways as they were in Christ.
J.T. He was sent to the Corinthians because of that, that they might learn from him Paul's ways as they were in Christ. Hence we might say we are all dependent on each other. If others know more than we do, we should recognise it and get instruction from them, but we are to be dependent on the Spirit.
A.M. Would the age from thirty to fifty mean that the Levite would be strong all the time of his service?
J.T. That is it, it is a question of full manhood. Twenty-years would mean that a man can be soldiering and yet not be able to do levitical work.
A.M-r. Have we a typical setting of it in the opening of the Revelation, when John takes the place of a brother and speaks of the suffering on that line?
J.T. That is so. "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus, was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus", @Revelation 1: 9. That is, he is a brother to the saints. He does not address himself as an apostle here, but he is a brother to the saints in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus. You have that in mind?
{421}
A.M-r. I was thinking of what you began with, that we should keep our eyes on men like that and seek to help and encourage them. 
Ques. How do you understand the difference between birth and sovereignty, as referred to in Gershon and Kohath?
J.T. It is seen elsewhere, and it is seen in the book of Exodus. The tribes on the shoulder pieces were recorded according to their birth, because the idea was that they needed strength, but on the breast-plate they were taken according to counsel, according to selection, hence Judah has the first place. Then again later you have Judah coming into the first place (@1 Chronicles 5: 2), so that God reserves His rights in sovereignty at all times. He distributes as He pleases, and that is what we see in Ephesians, where the gifts are said to have been given from on high. "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men". The Lord ascended up far above all the heavens. It is a very remarkable thing that those who receive gifts can be reckoned as getting them from above the heavens. Therefore we are told "*he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers", this last is one gift, one man having two functions, a shepherd and teacher. All this is very exercising and searching and profitable too, of course. As we are subject, we learn that God has rights over us, to do as He pleases, and send us where He pleases. 
Ques. Does Barnabas shine as a levite in @Acts 11, where in his care for the assembly he went to Tarsus to seek for Saul, in order that the very best might be given to them for a whole year?
J.T. It shows how one brother should be concerned for another, to send for him, or write to him, or go and see him and ask him to come. I think it is
{422}
very important that we should have liberty in that sense to urge each other forward, and the Lord indicates that He would have us to do it. Jehovah said, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" There was work to be done, and Isaiah said, "Here am I; send me", and God sent him, because we are not to go of ourselves, as it is said, "How shall they preach, unless they be sent?" The divine idea of sending must always be kept in mind.
W.A.S. A gifted brother would recognise his brethren's request in that way to come and help them.
J.T. The Acts would indicate that. Barnabas went to Tarsus to seek out Saul. He might have written, but he went. It showed how zealous Barnabas was. The apostles knighted him. He was called that name by the apostles, which means, "son of consolation". He was possessed of land and, having sold it, brought the money and laid it at the apostles¬ feet.
W.B. In saying that we are not to go of ourselves, but are to be sent, you are not ruling out the thought of, "Let us return now and visit the brethren in every city where we have announced the word of the Lord, and see how they are getting on".
J.T. That is a good point. Paul said that to Barnabas. It brought out some feeling, but it was overcome. It is a good thing to go and see the brethren.
A.M-r. Do we see that illustrated in Samuel's moving round to see the brethren?
J.T. Yes. He made a circuit every year.
A.M-r. I was wondering about the expression in the third chapter, "All Israel ... knew that Samuel was established a prophet of Jehovah". That would be an encouragement to the brethren.
J.T. His mother asked God for him. His name really indicated that he was asked for. Paul himself
{423}
was separated from his birth, we are told, but he went on in the flesh in his natural way for many years; still God had separated him from his birth. So Samuel was lent to the Lord, a remarkable thing. Hannah said she lent him to the Lord, that is, she gave him up, she sacrificed him. Mothers and fathers are challenged by Hannah in that sense. She gave up her son and placed him in the house of the Lord. God answered her faith by converting him, and speaking to him, and He let none of his words fall to the ground.
A.M-r. What do you understand by "from Dan even to Beersheba"?
J.T. It is a question of the geography of the country, Dan in the north, Beersheba in the south. Beersheba was the place of the oath, where Abraham went and dwelt after he had offered up Isaac, committing everything to God. 
Ques. Is it important to notice the word used in @Numbers 4: 3 -- "all that enter into the service", or *labour*? (see the Darby Translation note to "service").
J.T. Quite so, it is really work; it is not holiday making. The Levites¬ work is a real kind of work, for instance carrying things over the desert, sometimes in a hot sun. There is a further note as to the severity of the service. It is no light service. Paul's "last of all" service indicates that. He says he laboured more than they all, meaning that he was the greatest levite of all. 
Rem. You are suggesting to us that the persons of the saints have to be carried through in the affections of those who serve.
J.T. We have to care for each other. From one converted from the Roman Catholic system we do not expect so much as from others who know better. He is the subject of the work of God, and we have to be careful so as not to destroy him. Paul speaks beautifully of Phoebe, how she cared for the saints,
{424}
and of Lydia too. She says, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there". She cared for the saints.
G.McK. In @1 Samuel 3: 1 it says, "A vision was not frequent", and in verse 20, "All Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, knew that Samuel was established a prophet of Jehovah".
J.T. The idea is that the knowledge of Samuel became universal. The people knew him. The saints knew Paul in his day, and Mr. Darby too in his day. Persons who serve the Lord thus become known universally.
J.L. Paul and Barnabas were a whole year at Antioch. Do you think we qualify in that way in our local gatherings?
J.T. Paul was sought out by Barnabas, and he was brought to Antioch where the work was to be done. The work was to be done at *Antioch*, and Paul had to learn in subsequent years, when he would have gone to a certain place, that the Spirit suffered him not. Then "a vision appeared to Paul in the night; there stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us. And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us". He did not go into Asia, he came into Europe, and from the outgoings of Europe the work of God goes on. Thus the Lord is assuring that His people know more about the earth, and that is not for nothing. God has made the brethren acquainted with the earth. If He wants to send one to South Africa, he knows where he is going; or if He wants to send one to America, he knows where he is going. God has made the world smaller and better known by the wars. It is a matter of the Lord. "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof". He can use it as He pleases. He takes one day out of each week.
{425}
The Lord is saying, I want one day, hence John says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". He was concerned and respectful of the Lord's choice of a day, so that he would not weaken it and do anything against it. He observed it as much as possible, according to the dispensation, not in a legal way. In Israel He had the seventh day, now it is the Lord's day. The earth is the Lord's too. It is His right to claim it. We are to understand that the Lord has a right, whether to our property; if He wants a site for a meeting-room He asserts His right to it, or to our time, or whatever it is that He asserts His right to, and this enables us to take our relative positions, so that in every thing we are subject to God.
J.L. So if the Lord claims one day of the week, it is for us to give it to Him.
J.T. We are not to sacrifice our privileges on the Lord's day for a bigger salary.
Now, to proceed with our subject, we may allude to the idea of the boards. It says in verses 31 and 32: "The boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and bases thereof, and the pillars of the court round about, and their bases, and their pegs, and their cords, all their instruments, according to all their service; and by name ye shall number to them the materials which are their charge to carry". I think that has to be paid special attention to, because it is only found in this particular service, referring to the saints, as we get them in the epistles, and particularly in Ephesians. So it says in @Ephesians 4: 7, "To each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", and then we have, "*He* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists", and so on. Now that word "some" refers to persons, the persons of the levites. It is not that they get gifts of so and so, but they are
{426}
themselves the gifts. Paul is a gift, and such a gift, and then we have the other designations down to the end of verse 11, and then it goes on to say, "with a view to the work of the ministry", that is what is in mind, "with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ; until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man". That is, all the saints are to be brought to this, to the full-grown man, "in order that we may be no longer babes", persons who do not grow in a spiritual way "tossed and carried about by every wind of *that* teaching which is in the sleight of men, in unprincipled cunning with a view to systematised error". That is what the wicked teachers around have in mind, systematised error. You may say that all the denominations are characterised by this. They are systematised according to men, and therefore they become error. "But, holding the truth in love", that is where real personality comes in.
J.M. Did Paul himself have a good start in regard to that? The Lord said to Ananias, "He has seen in a vision a man by name Ananias coming in and putting his hand on him, so that he should see". Would that help Saul in regard to what the Lord later had in view for him in the work of the ministry?
J.T. The Lord names him to Ananias, and Ananias names him as well, "Brother Saul", showing that he knew him too. The fact is that the Lord mentions these two brothers to each other. He mentions Saul's name to Ananias, and He mentions Ananias¬ to Saul. 
Ques. Would the naming to us of these material things in @Numbers 4 preserve us in our dealings with the saints and help us in regard to our spirits?
J.T. I think one of the greatest things is to love the brethren, and if we are to love them we must respect them, and they are identified by their names.
{427}
The Lord says that our names are written in heaven, so that we are not to speak ill of a name written in heaven.
G.McK. Peter stands up in the midst of the brethren and the names were about one hundred and twenty. The next time he stands up in the midst of the eleven.
J.T. The one hundred and twenty names indicate rather those given by the Spirit. The hundred and twenty are not the gifts, but when Peter comes to identify himself, he identifies himself with the gifts. Therefore he stands up with the eleven, and that is important. The gifts are to be recognised. The generality of the saints must distinguish themselves from the gifts, so that when the converts came into evidence they said to Peter and to the rest, the other eleven, "What shall we do, brethren?" They recognised persons who could help them. It is very important that we should. It is said, "Obey your leaders, and be submissive", @Hebrews 13: 17. So the idea of understanding the names, and the identification of the persons by the names, is most important. We are to use them with respect. 
Ques. Do you mean the names are connected with specific gift?
J.T. If there is specific gift, like Paul. But the names of all the saints are written in heaven, and we are to clothe them with affection. Hence when Paul writes the epistle to the Romans, evidently there were a large number of persons in Rome, and he salutes them, and he has something commendable to say about them, and what he had to say about them showed that they were identified with the testimony of God.
Rein. We would address them properly as holding the truth in love. You mentioned that in reference to the promoting of personality.
{428}
J.T. John says, "to the elect lady". How delicately John speaks about that sister! "The elect lady and her children, whom *I* love in truth", and again he says, "for the truth's sake". So that we have examples there of paying special respect to persons who are distinguished in the service, as "the elect lady", and Peter says, "She that is elected with you in Babylon salutes you". That is another point. We are not to be characterised by socialism, but have respect for one another, and if there is special distinction we have to notice it. I think all these things are very practical, especially now when socialism is coming into evidence perhaps more than ever. We have to recognise whet God honours. "Honour to whom honour" is due, we are told. 
Ques. If the truth were held in love amongst us, especially amongst those who serve, it would tend to growth generally, would it not?
J.T. I think it would. An elder is not to be rebuked sharply. The quality of the rebuke is named, "but exhort him as a father". Then again the younger women have to be treated carefully, "as sisters, with all purity", and the younger men as brothers. The brethren ought to know, therefore, where each is.
G.McK. "Until we all arrive ... at the full-grown man". Holding the truth in love, we are to grow up to Him in all things.
J.T. That leads us to see how the persons of the saints are taken up, so as to arrive at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ. We are to keep clear of systematised error. We have come into a system ourselves; we have to understand that too. Holding the truth in love, we are to grow up to Him. We are not to be promiscuous; we have definitely in mind that we are to "grow up to him in all things, who is the head, the Christ: from whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every
{429}
joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part". So that we cease to be merely listeners or bystanders, but we are in the things thoroughly and know them. Paul says, "That ye should know", @Ephesians 1: 18. The angels desire to look into the all-various wisdom of God that is circulating among the saints. We should be equal to our calling. We are called and fitted together, we are part of the assembly. We know what is meant when the brethren come to the care meeting. We are not to be commonplace in our language, we ought to have a language that belongs to us spiritually, so that we are to name things rightly and name each other rightly. 
Ques. When Apollos came to Ephesus, did Priscilla and Aquila see something in him that was of value? Then "they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly", @Acts 18: 26.
J.T. They discerned at once what a gift he was, and they took him to them, not in a public way, but they would speak suitably to him, especially Priscilla who was a sister. She with her husband would talk to him. One can understand the suitability and the modesty that would mark her. 
Ques. Have you that in mind as an indication of holding the truth in love?
J.T. We do not always have to speak of it. A sister can hold it. She cherishes what she hears.
W.A.S. So we might qualify in our priestly service by appreciating the gift in another brother.
J.T. Very good. The Lord has been pleased to take away many of the elder brethren. We have to bow to that and to remember that one generation is taken away and another comes, and I believe another has come now. After this period of terrible sufferings God has great things for them, and these scriptures that we are
{430}
speaking of help us, I am sure, to hold the truth in love. The Lord would give special ability to speak of it, but everyone is to hold it, and in love. 
Ques. Is this feature seen in Aaron? "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?"
J.T. That is a good point. He is called "the Levite". I do not think there is another called "the Levite". He was the leading one. In @Numbers 3 we are given the generations of Aaron and Moses. It is very remarkable as approaching this subject of levitical service. It is a question of the generations of Aaron and Moses, so that we have to look back to these two heads in regard to the service, and we have to see that Aaron was the brother -- "Aaron the Levite thy brother". Paul in his epistles connects several persons with himself in addressing the brethren. In the first epistle to the Corinthians we have Sosthenes the brother, sometimes we have Timothy, showing that he is going to carry with him the brotherly element in what he has to say.
A.M-r. Does Peter come into that well when he says, "Our beloved brother Paul"? He holds the truth that Paul has been pressing, and he says, "Our beloved brother Paul".
J.T. That is a good point. Paul had to rebuke him at one time, and now he calls him his beloved brother. Paul was holding the truth in love when he rebuked Peter.
G.McK. The Lord in speaking to the woman in @John 4 exposed her, but He held her in love.
J.T. She had disgraced the name of woman, so to speak, but the Lord held her.
A.M. There is only one other brother who has the dignity of being named in Ephesians. Is he a typical product of this kind of teaching?
J.T. I would say that. The subject here in Numbers begins with the generations of Aaron and
{431}
Moses, Aaron representing the levitical service, and Moses representing intelligence and authority. These two things go together, and they go together in these epistles. We do not want to be legal about it, but to hold it in liberty.
{432}
LEADERSHIP
@Numbers 1: 16 - 19; @Numbers 7: 10, 11; @Numbers 10: 29 - 36
It is in my mind to speak of leadership, and to speak of it as it is seen in this book. Each book of the Bible has its own significance, this book specially so. It was written without a name; the name we have here is not exactly its name. The significance of the book really is "in the wilderness", suggesting that the wilderness is of divine appointment, not yet blossoming "as a rose", but -- 'With thorns and briars overspread, Where foes and snares abound' (`151:2).
The book, whilst indicating this, also indicates that it is a place of divine growth and development; that is to say, that these actual things have happened. The truth of manhood is in mind, the age for military service denoting that of manhood, affording a great field for promotion. Numbers is a book of this kind, and hence the Spirit of God in the prophets indicates that God had appeared and that the people had been brought through, for the prophets always afford light, sidelights as I might say, on the Pentateuch. The people were found in the wilderness, but they were taken under God's wing, borne upon it, indeed, as He says, "I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself". So these words were spoken in the wilderness, that is to say, after the Red Sea had been crossed. God was, as it were, rejoicing inwardly, for He said things in His heart; He knows the way to speak things in His heart without saying them aloud. In this case He spoke things aloud: "I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself". They settled down in the wilderness before Mount Sinai, and here God would bring out the manhood, at least in type, that had been developed. They had gone out by fives, meaning that there was an element of
{433}
smallness. The allusion is to the five senses, what we prove in ourselves. They had gone out by fives in military array, as an army in that sense; they had gone through the Red Sea and were brought into the very wilderness and encamped before the mount. Now my thought is to speak of them in type and attempt to make an application of the position. God had brought them through, and not simply that, but He had brought them to Himself. He was pleased with them. It was an exploit of His own, and now He would show that they were men. We all remember the word in the epistle to the Corinthians, an epistle in which it needed to be said, for it was hardly obvious; "Quit yourselves like men; be strong".
Then another thing that comes out is the lesson that had to be learned; how to walk; "how ye ought to walk and to please God" (@1 Thessalonians 4: 1); and learning to be borne; to be carried. We are brought together, dear brethren, and we are given to each other. It is a great matter that God has given Christ and the Spirit to us, but He has given the saints to us too. They are worthy. One has had considerable experience of the saints, and can say that one thinks more of them than ever; they are more lovely than ever they have been in his eyes, and I believe the same was true as to the eyes of God at Mount Sinai. What comes out further is that in learning to walk we are princely. That is why I read these passages, because they speak of princes, of persons who have that ennoblement. I wish to speak of the saints in their princeliness and their ennoblement, and I can say without any sentiment or natural feeling that the dear brethren have proved that they are worthy of promotion. I am not speaking partially of those here, but generally. I believe God always speaks generally of His people. Of course He does speak partially and speaks of them
{434}
locally and so on, but generally the principle is what is universal and that is what is presented at Mount Sinai. God's people have come through, God has brought them through, and He has given us to understand that *He* has brought us through. I put myself amongst those who have been brought through. It has been one whole matter, and God would have it so. Presently we are all going up together and I do not believe any one of us would wish to go up otherwise. You might think the Lord would come and take us one by one, but He is coming to take us up together to finish the matter.
This all comes out at Sinai and the whole truth of the book of Numbers comes into mind. It involves princeliness in the brethren; that is to say, what is based on credit, what is based on what is due, for God is dealing on that principle with us. We are already brought, as it were, before the judgment seat of God, for surely it is due to God that we should keep and hold ourselves in the light of His presence, in the light of the presence of each other too, in the light of His operations and the promotions that are due to the people of God. The book of Numbers is full of the idea of promotion, promotion from the ranks, so to speak.
Having made those remarks, I begin with the first scripture read, which involves princeliness. The word is, "These were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel". These are the ones, and these have been chosen for the purpose of nominating in the ranks, of setting forward before God what there was in a military sense; that is to say, the six hundred thousand that God has. I refer to that because it is a question of what God has now. Many of us here can look back a considerable number of years and recall what there was, but I am speaking now of what there is. One generation passes away and
{435}
another comes, and that one has come. A generation has come into evidence, brothers and sisters have come through, but they have come into evidence as taking part in the service. I am thinking of that; Numbers speaks of it. It is no question of the number of individuals, but of those who are taking part in the service, and when one is enlisted, speaking figuratively, one has part in the system. The woman of Samaria is illustrative of this. As soon as she is recognised by the Lord in her womanly relations, addressed by Him as "Woman", she begins to think of the system. Hence, when the disciples came back, for they had gone into the city to buy bread, which was unimportant from this standpoint, the woman was there. They marvelled that the Lord talked with a woman, but she left her waterpot and she went away into the city; that is to say, something had come into her soul in the way of light involving that she belonged to a system. She left her waterpot and went into the city, and said to the men, "Come, see a man which told me all things that ever I did; is not this the Christ?" It was a testimony, for in her mind she belonged to a system and that Man was the Head of it. I am seeking to bring before the dear brethren at the present time the matter of the system and our belonging to it, of our being systematised and knowing how to take part in it intelligently. So she had results.
Now I am coming to a point of importance; she obtained results in the system. She found the centre and she would direct others to that centre. She had got into the current of things. There was a current at that time, and that current was towards Christ, and the men of the city were moving in it; the woman was moving in it. That is the position; she had results. Now the ministry, as I said, has grown; the ministers have grown in number, too, but this systematising is the important thing. The whole
{436}
universe is a system in many senses, especially in the universal sense, and in the system we learn to be universal, not simply local. The more we are with God the more universal we are. We have been pursuing lines of thought during the past day or so involving the thought of man. The education of man at the outset was not local, it was universal. The garden of Eden was at the centre of the universe. I am coming back to that in a moment, but I mention it now, the necessity of being universal and systematised in it, belonging to it as a system, and getting results. It is no question of the number of meetings I can book, the number of addresses I can give; the question is results, dear brethren, what accrues, and Numbers has that in mind. Hence we have nine chapters, and the most remarkable chapters in a sense in the whole Bible, because of the accuracy and correctness of things in them, because the will of God is so emphasised in them. The presence of the cloud is mentioned in chapter 9 more than it is in all the other part of the book; it refers to the presence of God in a system. God is visibly there. It is no private matter, nor am I dealing with private matters, I am dealing with public matters which can be seen and known in heaven and earth. The matter is not local, it is general; there must be the fitting into the universal idea and the success that accrues from it.
As I was saying, the princely thought has a great place, and that is why I have read these passages. First of all the princes who are nominated to count with Moses and Aaron; they were to count the persons of twenty years old and upward, meaning full manhood. They were to be numbered by Moses and Aaron and one man out of every tribe. The tribal thought is there and the tribal thought is really the universal thought. One of the most baneful things, I think, in the history of the assembly is national
{437}
feeling. You say, It is a right feeling; but it is not a right feeling from the standpoint of God; it is a dangerous feeling, because it localises us, and localisation works out in the disregard of universal interests. The Lord's interests are universal and the whole teaching of the book of Acts and the types is to bring out the superior intelligence of the Lord Jesus in setting up the divine system; that is, Christianity in a universal sense. It is localised later for a purpose but not at first. We have not the word *assembly* until quite late in the book of Acts. @Acts 9: 31 refers to what was general and what was there to be admired of God; the superior intelligence that belonged to it and the love; for what is intelligence without love? But love was there, dear brethren, and it is love that makes the prince. Eleazar is the great prince in the book of Numbers, the prince of the princes of the Levites. The Levites represent those that minister the word and Eleazar is their prince; he represents love. So, as I said, the idea of princes comes in at once in chapter 1; one of every tribe is nominated to have part in the numbering. Then chapter 7 brings out the princeliness of these men; not simply that they were recognised as having distinction. We all know how readily we take on the distinction that any little ability we may have accords to us, and we make much of it.
When we come to @Numbers 7, it is twelve men on twelve days and each man had his day in the sight of the people. What a prince each was! The facts of their offerings betoken perfect unity, but unity in giving to God, in the dedication of the altar; for it is really a question, as I was saying, of this system, of suffering, of sacrifice, and these men are marked off, each prince in his day, it says, as if the whole area and time, the twelve days, were filled with the princely thought. God would do that, and that is why I mention this thought of princeliness because
{438}
of these men, how they offered, each prince in his day. One might say much about that, of the princes who have had their day in our times. Every one of us is tested as to what he exhibits in his day. How God loves those men who have spoken to us the word of God! "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God", @Hebrews 13: 7. Not their learning, not their money, nor anything of that kind, but those "who have spoken to you the word of God"; that is the point in the ministry. It is not the magnificence of the language that may be used, or the eloquence, but the word of God. Some of us can look back many years and remember those who have spoken to us the word of God. It is through them that we have been made what we are; it is a question of the word of God, and who is ministering the word of God. "Remember your leaders imitate their faith". That is the thought, and every prince had his day. You may say to me, You are having quite a long day; you may well say that. I thank God for the ear I get amongst the brethren, but it is not that, it is a question of the word of God. "The word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4: 12. It is a question of ministering that.
What a weapon a person who ministers that is in the hand of God; he is a prince. If he has died, he has gone to be with the Lord; we remember him, we recall him with pleasure; but if he is in life, we have to think of that word, "Obey your leaders". You know there is a great deal of lawlessness amongst young people. I am not speaking exactly of this country, but of other countries well known to many of us here; how much lawlessness there is. Some speak as if the ministers of God were just
{439}
ordinary persons, but they are not that. These princes were not that at Sinai, they were men to be regarded with respect and reverence. "Remember your leaders"; those who have gone. The mind is balanced in that way. But as to those that are alive, we should not only listen to them, but obey them, if they are worthy. It is another matter, as to what moral weight the ministers have in ministering. The ministers cannot hope for obedience in the youth unless there is moral weight.
Now take Caleb, a great prince in Israel who comes in in one of the later chapters, one of the sorrowful chapters. I did not intend to speak about these chapters in Numbers, what histories they disclose, what histories of lawlessness in men who had acquired greatness even, through the ministry. There were two hundred and fifty princes who rebelled in chapter 16 in the days of Moses and Aaron; they were men of renown. How did they get their renown? They got their renown because they were ministers, but they failed. Think of the lawlessness that prevails in Christendom largely through the state of those who have the status of ministers of the word of God!
I had in mind to enlarge on this idea of princes in chapter 7 because of the dear brethren who have gone, whose faith we are to follow and whom we are to remember. It says that each prince had his day. What I am saying, of course, affords food for contemplation as to the princes of Christianity. What days these men, these princes, had! It is a question of the younger men coming on now and acquiring a place in the ministry, as to the results from the ministry, whether it is worth anything, whether they are to earn promotion in it. These men had acquired a place in Israel, they were known in Israel to be men of distinction, and they were recognised as having distinction. But these twelve days were memorable days when these men were allowed to present
{440}
their offerings to God. The list is given, it is a very remarkable list; they were perfectly united in what they gave. Of course, it is all figurative, but it is a remarkable thing how each prince had his day and gave in perfect accord with all the others.
Going on to chapter 10, I want to speak about Moses and the ark, and of the way in which real leadership is reserved till this chapter, just as Paul in his epistles reserved the real thing for the Philippians. The real leadership that could not be improved in the whole universe, and that is in the ark of the covenant. We have to come to that, we have to come to it in Paul's ministry, in the gospels, and in the book of the Revelation; but the great book for that is the epistle to the Philippians, and therefore the princes are in mind. The apostle does not refer to the gifted men in that epistle; he refers to the overseers and ministers, not the preachers. He refers also to those women who laboured with him in the gospel; Paul reserved some of the finest things he had to say for that epistle, and hence the place the Lord Jesus is given. "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus; who ... emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in the likeness of men". That is how He emptied Himself, by taking a servant's form; in the place of a prince, a publicly acknowledged person. He was a servant in that position. A place once occupied by a prince is now occupied by a servant; in fact, the Person occupying it was in the form of God. He "did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form". That is how He did it. Let us learn how to do it; we can only learn it from the Lord, no one else had that place, no one else could do it. He emptied Himself. How did He do it? By taking a servant's form, that is how He did it. Not simply taking a minister's form, the form of one
{441}
who could speak or teach, but taking a bondman's form. The Lord did that before the universe; He did it for all time, for today, for me. The lesson is there, the place is there, and occupied by the Bondman, but the Bondman is God. Let us understand and be reverential about it. The form is a substantial thing, it is a real thing; the word means that, it is a real bondman; that is what the Lord became.
And then again, "Having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross". The Lord Jesus took His place on that ground, as I might say, speaking reverently, in the likeness of men. The word is *men*, not *man*. We read later that He was "found in figure as a man", but He took "his place in the likeness of men". The Lord occupied that ground, as I might say, as a bondman; it is the Lord of glory as a bondman. If He were thought of as an ordinary man, the Lord said nothing about that; the time would come when it was disproved, meantime He was ready to accept reproach. "I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth. Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs", @Psalm 38: 13, 14. When the suffering comes, when the reproach comes, let us take our place in that way. If it calls for reproach, let it be the reproach of Christ. Moses came into it, he deliberately came into that reproach in Egypt, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. That is the outward position, and that is the point we get in the book of Numbers. Now I want to come to a solemn thing -- natural relationships amongst us, what they are capable of and how they are marked out as adverse. Moses would be content with his father-in-law. I want to touch this matter of natural relationships and local relationships, and how they affect the testimony and the ministry, working out in local preferences. They
{442}
may be disastrous unless we maintain the universality of the system we belong to; let the local position, too, have its place. We are told that Hobab declined to go with Moses and the people. It was a mercy he did. The most distinguished relative I may have cannot come into the position because he is my relative. It is a mercy; he may do me harm. Moses said to Hobab in the passage I read: "We are journeying unto the place of which the Lord said, I will give it to you; come thou with us, and we will do thee good; for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel. And he said unto him, I will not go, but I will depart to mine own land, and to my kindred. And he said, Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes. And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what goodness the Lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee". That is all you get of the incident. Thank God Hobab did not go; it was a mercy. I am speaking now practically, dear brethren, of the danger of natural relationships in the things of God. If it be not natural relationships, it may be personal relations influencing us against what is right. The divine thought is what is universal, that is what God began with with man. If it cannot hold universally, it is not right. God is universal; His things are universal too; if things are of God they fit everywhere. All the Hobabs will lose heart if they come. The Spirit of God does not say that he came; the inference is that he did not come, because the ark occupied the place. It is the lowliness of Christ coming in at such a time when natural relationships would spoil us and damage us, interfering with the universal thought that God is pursuing. Hobab does not come; we are left with that impression, and it is proved in the fact that the ark had its place.
{443}
In @Philippians 2 the Lord Jesus is said to have been "in the form of God". He was on an equality with God; He made Himself of no reputation and He did it by taking a bondman's form. The ark occupied a small position, but the position which God was in, and hence the passage which follows. Christ -- the true ark -- took His place in the wilderness instead of Hobab, and, when they set forward from the mount, Moses said, "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thy face". Think of the Lord Jesus coming out into the open as in Philippians! His place was to be carefully guarded in the centre of the camp, but He went out into the open. The place is occupied, not? by Hobab, nor even by Moses, but by the ark of the covenant, the Lord Himself, coming in lowliness into the universal place. True leadership must be in humiliation. Clericalism is distinction from religious causes, but the Spirit of Jesus is humiliation from love's causes. Love would go down to occupy the small place to do the work. Hence the result. "It came to pass when the ark set forward that Moses said, Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thy face. And when it rested he said, Return, Jehovah, unto the myriads of the thousands of Israel". Moses would never have said this if Hobab had been there, but why did he say it? He said it because the ark led the way in its littleness, but also in its power, for it is the power of God and the glory of God. That is what Christ is. We should never have had that if Hobab had gone with them, and, wherever any influence of that kind is working, whether natural or local, we shall be deprived of some universal thought that is profitable to the people of God.
May the Lord bless the word!
{444}
PREPARATION
@Romans 9: 22 - 24; @Acts 9: 15, 16
The verses in @Romans 9 have in mind persons prepared for glory, "vessels ... prepared for glory". The passage in @Acts 9 also refers to persons, or to a person named Paul, a vessel, but prepared for service.
Perhaps you will see that I am concerned about preparation. The word is applied to many things, such as the heavens -- God prepared the heavens, and the ark -- Noah prepared the ark. There are many outstanding things, one most definitely outstanding, namely, the body which God prepared for His Son. He said, "A body hast thou prepared me". I am thinking now of the many sons whom God is bringing to glory, and the preparation connected with them. The passage in @Romans 9 would undoubtedly include them, for it says, "*us*, whom he has also called", meaning the vessels, or the persons, "that he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory".
In @Acts 9 we have Paul in mind, and he is called "an elect vessel". I am thinking of him as prepared for service on earth. We can understand that service on earth requires special preparation, in view of the conditions of the service, whereas the vessels that are prepared for glory in @Romans 9, even ourselves, as it is said, would have in mind what is to be exercised eternally, and therefore I have alluded to the passage in @Hebrews 2 which speaks of God bringing many sons to glory: "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings".
I am thinking of that, particularly in view of what has been transpiring on the earth, and what God has
{445}
in view, perhaps not yet evolved, not fully come to light, but undoubtedly the severity of the testings and the sufferings implies corresponding results. The Leader of our salvation has been made perfect through sufferings. I am seeking to show how the extreme unspeakable sufferings which the brethren have endured in recent times are surely to result in something in keeping with them, and that it is in view of preparation for glory.
The Lord Jesus in His prayer to the Father says, "The glory which thou hast given me I have given them". Further he says, "That they may behold my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". We are not to share that; we are to learn what glory we are to share, and what we are not to share, but what we are to behold, and I would say that what the Lord has in mind is sonship, what He has given us. He has taken great pains with us, especially of late years, and He has included the sufferings I have alluded to, not that I have endured them, but I have gone through them in spirit with the brethren, I hope, and I hope also to share the results, and I connect that with the word *prepared* in our verse in @Romans 9, "vessels ... prepared for glory". What pains have been taken with us, from the outset, and throughout the history of the assembly, so that this work of preparation should proceed unhindered! It is nearing its end now, for events on earth are not accidental in their application to us; they are purposed. They are among the "all things" that "work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to purpose".
You can see the words *preparation* and *purpose* run together, and also that the sufferings of Christ were also purposed. Not that they were imposed on the Lord, for He came into them. "A body hast thou prepared me". Nothing was ever forced by the
{446}
Father on Him. Things that He says of Himself in the days of His sufferings here below we marvel at, such as that which He says of His Father, or of Jehovah, "He wakeneth morning by morning ... mine ear to hear as the instructed", @Isaiah 50: 4. Let no one think of putting the Lord in that class now, or that we should assume to pray for the Lord in those settings, or circumstances. He has gone out of these for ever. He is indeed the object of sympathetic prayer in the Psalms, but He has gone out of these circumstances for ever. He is over all now, exercising His authority "over all, God blessed for ever". Therefore, we require to have in our minds clearly the facts, and yet not fail to learn from all His utterances, which are, like pure gold, to be meditated upon, so that our constitutions should be like His. Nevertheless He is unique, and He is never less than what He was. If He came into these circumstances of suffering, and He did, He *came* into them: "A body hast thou prepared me". That body was not prepared and then entered in afterwards; it was simultaneous. *He* became flesh; *He* did it. We are to understand that, dear brethren, otherwise we become darkened in our minds, and erroneous in our thoughts. *He* did it, He became flesh; "the Word became flesh". The condition He took was taken simultaneously, as by Himself, and so He "dwelt among us". Marvellous that He should, and that He should dwell among us! "And we have contemplated his glory", says John, the one whom Jesus loved. Marvellous! He came in and went out among the brethren. "*I* am in the midst of you as the one that serves", @Luke 22: 27. Who would speak of Him now as a servant? No one who loves Him, or reveres Him, nor would such say of Him, He is our brother, and yet He came in amongst them, singing amongst them, as it is said: "When they had sung an hymn", but He said, "In the
{447}
midst of the assembly will I sing". That was by Himself. I mean to say that is the attitude He took up; He did it Himself. The circumstances were afforded, He afforded them; it was in the assembly. He built the assembly; I am not saying God did not. Christ loved the assembly and gave Himself for it, but God also purchased it "with the blood of his own", as we read in the Scriptures, so that I am speaking now simply in the way of warning, because we are enjoined to be accurate, and I am endeavouring to be. We are challenged as to it. The Bereans searched the Scriptures daily to see if these things were so. I hope everyone listening to me now is ready to challenge what I am saying. I do not want it to pass unless it is scriptural, and so, as I said, the Lord says, "A body hast thou prepared me", and the ark was prepared, and so were many other things, and here in our verses we have persons, or vessels, prepared for glory. I am using the word glory substantially, not as a mere suggestion, but really and truly. It is a time of glory, and the Lord said, "The glory which thou hast given me I have given them". It is not, 'I will give them', but "I have given them", and I would say, dear brethren, it is the glory of sonship. Not that our sonship is equal to His. No, and yet it is sonship, whether His or ours, and the Father gives it to Him, and He gives it to us. So I can understand how, in the blessed Lord's mind, we have been prepared for glory in heaven, because what is in heaven is in mind. It is the heavenly side that is now stressed amongst us. Christianity properly is a heavenly institution. For a little while God lingered with the Jews, and it brought out His patience. He would have His patience known, and He would also carry out His promises made to the fathers, and so this chapter, @Romans 9, begins with that, and then refers to the Lord Jesus, as "over all, God blessed for ever".
{448}
How we love to afford Him that place! In that time of patience, which the epistle to the Hebrews develops, God would have it understood how glorious His blessed Son was in the midst of them, and hence in the first chapter of Hebrews He selects passages from the sayings of the saints, for they are to be glorified; and therefore in all our sayings, words, and conversations, there should be something to contribute to the glory of Christ. Chapter 1 of Hebrews unfolds the glories of Christ, and amongst these is sonship, and in chapter 2 we have this stated: "It became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings".
But it is sonship I am speaking of. I believe it is the time of it. The Lord has been pleased to manifest Himself to us in the opening up of the truth of sonship as applicable to Himself. He took another condition, namely manhood, and in that condition sonship applies. So it is said, "The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father". In @Hebrews 2, God is "bringing many sons to glory", and I believe that the sufferings (we have often spoken of the sufferings of this present time, but I am alluding to the special sufferings, what is recent amongst the dear brethren, especially in these countries where I am now), that these sufferings are in order to bring about glory; that is, to bring about fitness for glory. We are about to enter it. The Lord Jesus has entered it alone. What can we say about Him? What is His occupation, to speak reverently? He is there; heaven must receive Him. It is a definite decree; He was carried up into heaven, and He is there. But He is not on His own throne; He is on His Father's throne, the throne to which sonship belongs. Through all these centuries, what is engaging Him? The assembly is engaging Him. He is not ruling the
{449}
world, nor Israel yet. All these things are in abeyance, but He is thinking of the assembly, what is nearest to His heart.
You will remember the way Isaac dallied with Rebecca (@Genesis 26: 8). That is the word, not 'sporting', as in the Authorised Version; the proper word is "dallying". The Lord, in that sense, speaking reverently, has the assembly in view; it is already said that God has "raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus"; she is therefore constituted suitable to be the bride. Presently she will come out literally as such, a bride adorned for her husband, but the Lord is, as it were, dallying with her now. When thinking of her, He is thinking of the times entering into the service of God which are His part. We read of Moses¬ part in certain scriptures. Well, the Lord has His part in the service of God. He is thinking of His assembly, that part of the service -- the Lord's supper; it is not the Father's Supper, it is the Lord's supper, and we are to understand how He waits for us while we partake of it. How it affects His heart as we take the bread and the cup, and think of Him in it. We are thinking of Him where He is, not where He was, although that may enter into it, but it is where He is, and He comes to us. I have spoken of dallying; I would be careful in using such a word, but it is scriptural and it belongs to the present time, not when He is ruling Israel or the nations. It is a question of what He is doing *now* before the restitution of all things, the things spoken of by the prophets since time began. With all happenings the Lord is conversant, of course, but He is thinking of the assembly, and of it only; not that He is not observant of everything else. He is a divine Person; He is the Christ; He is at the right hand of God, but at the same time He is not on His own throne, nor occupied with what belongs to that throne yet, but
{450}
occupied with His Father's throne, and with the assembly.
He says, "The glory which thou hast given me, I have given them", and then, "I desire that they also may be with me, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". You will see how the Father and the Son have holy converse in regard to the assembly. They have, and is it not worth while to them that the assembly should be the assembly, that the word should apply to us? It is not an abstract idea; it is the *very thing*. I believe the Lord has brought about the recent circumstances to effect it more fully, so that this matter of glory should be before us. We are vessels of mercy prepared for glory, and, as I said too, God is bringing many sons to glory, it does not say "to heaven", for it is a question of glory, and how the glory is brought about by sufferings. The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory to be revealed to us, and then, in addition, there are the moral sufferings resulting in glory as seen also in the Lord Jesus. The Leader of our salvation is made perfect through sufferings. It is a question of what belongs to us, dear brethren, and that our Leader was made perfect through sufferings. God is thinking of Christ, and He is thinking of us; of course, He is thinking of Israel too, and the nations as well, but He is thinking now of Christ and the assembly. I am not saying that God is not governing the universe, looking after it too, for not a sparrow falls to the ground but is known to Him, but then there is this that I am speaking of, what belongs to the Father and the Son, that is to say, the glory of Christ and the glory of the assembly. So these verses have this in mind, vessels of mercy prepared for glory. What a moment it is! I have no doubt many brethren here think of it as I do, but certainly I am
{451}
impressed with it. What is heaven thinking of? It is in a waiting attitude for the advent of the assembly to heaven. That is the great point in heaven's mind just now. It is a great thing to have the thought of heaven. "Whom the heaven must receive", says Peter, "until the times of restitution of all things", and Christ is up there. He is received up there; we are not told what He is doing there; He is at the right hand of God, and carrying on a gospel service, but all in view of the assembly; that is what He is engaged in. This great matter, which has never happened before in the history of mankind, is it not something to Christ? It is to bring about what divine Persons are engaged with. Heaven is waiting for the assembly to go up; the time is ripe for it. I am not speaking in a prophetic sense, but one understands what is going on. Servants are prepared for effective service, and are numerous; surely He has something to carry on. He is carrying on one thing, that is the gospel, and the assembly. These are the great topics in heaven now, and we, dear brethren, belong to that. God is preparing us for heavenly glory, for the position that is proper to Christ and His bride, the heavenly city which will come down like a bride adorned for her husband. She is complete, according to the prophetic book of Revelation. She is viewed as coming out of heaven, not having any earthly history at all; it is a question of what is coming down out of heaven. She is suitable for the Bridegroom. "As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly", and we want to be that characteristically.
I have only a few minutes to speak of @Acts 9. The great servant portrayed there should be before our minds, because the Lord calls him "an elect vessel to me". Ananias was somewhat concerned at first, perhaps in unbelief; but he did his work well after he understood it. After we understand things it
{452}
makes a difference. Ananias was made to understand things which he did not understand, and afterwards he was a good brother, a good servant. He did the right thing. The Lord had called Paul an elect vessel unto Him, and He was to show him what great things he must suffer; and Ananias went and did what he was told. I want to do that, and I hope everyone here has in mind to do what he is told. There is much to be done. What your hand finds to do, do it with all your might, but there is such a thing as being sent, and Ananias was sent; he went and put his hands on Saul, and he said, "Saul, brother". We have often dwelt on these words, and yet it is not out of place to bring before us now the idea of *brother*. I believe there would be no quarrels, not that I have not had to do with them, but Jehovah said to Moses, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?" That word comes down the ages. We had not heard of Aaron before, but this is how God introduces him to Moses; the great mediator was to have the brother. What can any of us do without a brother? How valuable they are, and Jehovah said to Moses, "He goeth out to meet thee", @Exodus 4: 14. A brother is coming to meet you. Will that not make up for many difficulties? It will. "When he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart". If ever there was a brother on earth it was Saul of Tarsus, and Ananias says, "Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus ..." But it was all to make Saul a suitable vessel, a vessel elect unto the Lord. It is a question of doing things, what is to be done, and who is to do it, and the Lord's mind about us, what can He call us, what distinction we are to have, because the Lord is no man's debtor. He has His distinctions, and every brother in the service is to have a distinction, and the brethren ought to know it, and have him in their hearts according to it, according to the Lord's estimate of him. So Ananias went on to make Saul what he
{453}
should be. "Arise ... and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name". If there be sins, secret or otherwise, let them be washed away; the Lord's service cannot go on where they are. Even in a Saul they had to be washed away, and it was his responsibility to do it, to have it done. And so it is with persons who have to be baptised, have it done, we cannot go on with the Lord's service without removing offensive things, anything that can be called sin or sins, Ananias remarked, "Why lingerest thou?" Sins hamper us in our service to men and to God.
I thought I would venture to bring forward this passage as to glory -- vessels of glory. We are to be vessels of glory in our service down here, not what we are up there. @Romans 9 refers, I have no doubt at all, to heavenly glory, and for a period which we call eternity because we have no minds capable of naming it otherwise; it has to have limits in our minds, but not in God's. We read in @Ephesians 3, for instance, that "in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height ..."; all this is a question of limits, but nevertheless we go on to infinitude, namely, "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". That is where we are to be, although always recognising our limitations; it is well that we should, but at the same time we are to be filled unto all the fulness of God. How much might be said of that -- the fulness of God! In Christ "all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell", @Colossians 1: 19. So that, while acknowledging our limitations, as we should, at the same time there is this, that we are to be filled unto all the fulness of God. I now venture to bring forward this matter of Paul. He is our apostle; he is the apostle charged with the ministry of the gospel, the ministry of reconciliation, and the ministry of the assembly. What a charge! What offices! What a man! We may well
{454}
glory in it; not that we should glory in a mere creature, but the Lord has made him all that, and Paul said, "I magnify mine office" so that we are to have him in our minds. The Lord spoke of him as "an elect vessel to me"; then what he was to suffer, and then there is the servant (Ananias) coming forward and he does the thing that was needed.
I might speak of many others as illustrations of vessels for present service, and I feel it important to do so because of the many young men that are coming forward. We learn from Paul and from those who come after him, but especially Paul, who says, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life ..." It is a question of Paul, and he is to be understood in our souls as an elect vessel, a model for all vessels, and all have to be held for Christ. What an array of vessels that will be! What glories are in these vessels -- vessels of mercy prepared for glory!
May God bless the word!
{455}
ETERNAL THINGS
@2 Corinthians 4: 13 - 18; @2 Corinthians 5: 1 - 5; @2 Peter 3: 8 - 13
I have in mind to speak about eternal things, having read from Paul and from Peter. Paul treats, as usual, of inward, heavenly things, while Peter, although not overlooking the heavenly, yet speaks of physical things, as we may say mundane things. He reminds us that of old the world was, as he says, overflowed with water: "by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and in the water: whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished: but the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men". He deals with the physical world, particularly linking it with Noah, but careful to connect the word of God with all that happens -- an important matter. Even things that have recently happened, unparalleled of their kind, were not without the word. The word of God had -- and has -- to do with the matter. We may take refuge in that. The present heavens and the present earth are by the same word reserved unto fire. The word of God is governing all that is happening in physical matters; He can control them and has controlled them. He brought the earth out of the waters and then again engulfed it and brought it out again, all according to His word. So the present heavens and the present earth, whatever may be prognosticated of them, are under the hand of God.
I am speaking now from Peter, whose ministry deals with the government of God, inclusive of material things, what men would call scientific things. But they are things that God has in His own hand; whether it be the water or fire or other things hidden, they are under His hand and can only be used at
{456}
His behest, according to His mind and will. I say these things that brethren may be restful, as Peter says, that we may "be found of him in peace". There are those who would fill us with gloom, and perhaps have good reason, but the Christian takes refuge in the word of God. However much catastrophe may be in the future or in the past, all is under divine control. In a few words Peter would set us at rest as to these physical matters. They cause anxiety in those who rule on the earth, and should cause a certain anxiety in ourselves, but at the same time God would have us to be restful. All things that are in His creation belong to Him, they do not belong to the devil. However great or powerful they may be in their effects, they are God's. Even as to this awful thing which has been found possible recently -- someone remarked to me what is very true, that it is not an invention, but a discovery -- God can frustrate any use made of physical things which would be detrimental to His people or His testimony. I think it should be a matter of prayer, indeed it has been so, and God has given us to understand that He is answering our prayers; that it is largely in our hands, as it were, God putting it there, so that His people should be with Him in whatever may be attempted or done.
I have alluded to the book of Genesis. The account of creation in Genesis is not primary creation, it is a renewal, a revival, a restoration of what was. Yet it is creation, and God so regards it, and it is spoken of in this way in the Scriptures. "From the beginning of the creation" -- the creation recorded in Genesis is that to which the Lord alludes. What is to be noted is that angelic service is not referred to there, whereas we have angelic service attending on us. It is said, "Are they not all ministering spirits?" All of them -- we cannot say how many. God has not been pleased to give any account of His matters
{457}
in that sense, but they are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation. And in all these matters that are happening or seem to be happening, we can count on their service, we can count on God using them. As He has heretofore, so He will hereafter. They are sent out for us, those who are heirs of salvation.
Peter says in these verses that we are not to be ignorant of certain things. Worldlings are willingly ignorant, and perish in their ignorance, whereas Peter says, "But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day". That is to say, God has to do with time; He may use one day. The Lord Jesus uses one day, called His day, the Lord's day, and very often the Lord's people are using it to increase their own salary. The Lord is not pleased with that. If we can use it in His service, it is much better, and we shall not suffer accordingly. The Lord has been pleased to select a day to have a time with His bride, His assembly, and to carry on the divine part of the service of God, for He is the Minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched and not man. If the Lord has set aside a day for that purpose, let us be very careful that we devote it for that purpose. I mention that as of importance, because the Lord's service often suffers for mere pounds, shillings and pence, whereas His day is more valuable. The service of God belongs to it, and we are taken up for that. It is our prime interest, and everything must be subservient to that. And so he says, "A thousand years as one day". That would mean that the Lord is pleased to condense the value of the day a thousand-fold. Why not spend it according to the Lord's noting of it?
Verse 9 refers beautifully to the gospel, like a jewel set in amongst these material things, things that
{458}
will perish. "The heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up". So, dear brethren, we need not be appalled at what is being said as to physical things, because more terrible things are recorded here. Peter speaks of the elements; what they are we may leave, but they will melt with fervent heat. We have been accustomed to read these scriptures prophetically, but these are veritable things we are actually dealing with, some of them being imminent. "The works that are therein shall be burned up". Whether they be mountains and so forth, or man's works, even the monuments built to the renown of heroes, all shall go; in a moment they shall go. There is not to be a vacuum after their departure; there is to be something else, a new heavens and a new earth. "Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God". God comes into all this. We have the day of the Lord, but we have the day of God. He is beyond everything, He is to be all in all. What a relief to turn aside from these terrible things to God. God will make a way for Himself. He is going to have new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness, nothing but what pleases Him. He will be all in us, as indeed we are told in Ephesians, "over all, and through all, and in us all". So that we are living with God, and the thing is to accustom ourselves to this, dear brethren, to live of God; to live by His word in detail, but to live of God, as the apostle prayed that we might be "filled even to all the fulness of God".
These things are a striking and fitting climax to Peter's epistle, linking up as they do with Paul, the minister of the gospel, the minister of the assembly, the minister of reconciliation, the great vessel that
{459}
Peter speaks of here as "our beloved brother Paul". There is a beautiful link between these two great apostles. Peter, as I have said, deals more with physical things, and Paul with the inner, spiritual, heavenly things. God uses Peter as to these physical matters, and it would set us at rest as to the government of God, to live in it and go through it and find Him everything in it, and be restful all the time. He says here, "This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you: in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance". It is not here the remembrance of the Lord as in the Supper, but the remembrance of an historical word, to bear in mind what God has caused to happen, what His word has caused to happen, and which will end up, not in oblivion, but in God. Of course, wickedness -- awful material things -- will act, but God will act through it all. So we are to be restful, not indifferent to what is threatened, but restful, knowing that we are more valuable than many worlds of material things. "All things are for your sakes", Paul says. All things are ours indeed; all things that are current abroad that the eye can see are ours.
Now I turn to Paul's words in the passage read. In chapter 5 the word "dissolve" or "destroy" is used as to our bodies. "For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved", the same word that is used of the elements, the heavens and the earth. It is important to understand, how ever, that our bodies are to be raised; they are not destroyed in that sense. It is said in Matthew's gospel, "Many bodies of the saints which slept arose" -- not simply they arose, but their bodies arose -- "and went into the holy city and appeared unto many". It is not for us to speculate on these matters; God has said very little about these bodies, and He does not expect us to say a great deal about them, but the fact remains; many bodies of the
{460}
saints which slept arose after the Lord arose -- not before. He is the first-fruits of resurrection, then those that are Christ's at His coming, but these who are mentioned in Matthew are said to have arisen in their bodies. Their graves were opened, it was a physical matter. God would have us, while not speculating on these things, to be conversant with them, and to think of ourselves as having bodies that may be changed in a moment, not destroyed, but changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. The Lord Jesus is to do that. He does not leave it to the Spirit, it is the Lord's own action; He descends to do it. But then they are called mortal so far. We are living in a provisional time, and God says to us that He will raise the very bodies in which we came into this world and have lived in it. The woman of Samaria left her water-pot and went her way into the city; she understood that her body was a vessel. The Lord has claimed our bodies as His. Still they are mortal, they may be dissolved according to this chapter. Moses tells us by the Spirit of God how long we are likely to have them -- threescore and ten or fourscore years. I have no doubt that, from the time that Moses said that, eternal things became more real to the saints of God than they had been before. If our bodies are not to last more than seventy years -- maybe a half or a quarter of that -- our wisdom is to think of eternal things. God is saying to us, 'You are not to live as Methuselah lived, nine hundred and sixty-nine years, nor even as Noah or Abraham'. We come down the line and find ourselves with people who are short-lived. David lived to about seventy, Paul perhaps to not more than seventy. So Paul himself tells us that our bodies are earthly tabernacles and may be dissolved. But our bodies of humiliation are to be changed into the likeness or image of the Lord's body of glory, a marvellous expression, and one intended to touch our hearts and
{461}
stimulate us as to our bodies; they are to be made like His own body of glory, what He is now. Philippians is most stimulating experimentally for the saints.
"We having the same spirit of faith", -- not simply the ordinary formula of faith, but the spirit of it -- "according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak". That is the title to speak for God in any sense, on the principle of faith. Anything spoken outside faith is hardly worth hearing. Christianity is a matter of faith, and Paul says that which is not of faith is sin. A most sweeping statement, covering the whole lives of persons who are not converted. The books are kept accurately, and what is not of faith is put down under that heading -- sin. But then Paul says, and I speak of it thus to the dear brethren that they may drink in the spirit of it, "We also believe, and therefore speak; knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by [or *with*] Jesus, and shall present us with you", as if the apostle would say, I do not want to go without you. It was thus he loved the saints, he would not go without them, although he could say that to depart and be with Christ is far better. I may say, in my humble way, that I would wish to go with the brethren; as knowing them, they are more lovable than ever. And Ephesians would show how you go with them, raised up together and made to sit down together, that is the principle.
"For all things are for your sakes". "All things work together for good to them that love God". If we could only take things in according to Paul, beloved! Why not? I can hardly visualise what the dear brethren in these countries have suffered, but God is in it all, and He has been thinking of us. Many a time one yearned as one heard of persons being instantly killed, not without God, for not a sparrow falls without Him. And so it is that fruit will
{462}
be abundant after all, perhaps beyond our expectations. For there must be fruit -- not young people aspiring to get on in this world; no, these sufferings were not to make us fit for this world, but to make us fit for "that world, and the resurrection".
"That the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God. For which cause we faint not", -- Paul is himself encouraged in it. "Though our outward man perish". Let us not forget that the outward man may perish, indeed it is so in every one of us, even the youngest. When we begin to live we begin to die in a physical sense. "Yet the inward ... is renewed day by day". That work is constantly going on. "For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal". Eternal things are not seen, therefore we have to learn to perceive things in that sense, see them by faith. Some are so careless and taken up with ordinary things that they forget they were purged from their former sins, a terrible thing, but possible even for Christians. Therefore, there is nothing else but faith; without faith it is impossible to please God. That is what the apostle is aiming at here -- the spirit of faith, and the element of faith is active as we begin to look at eternal things. It is an experimental thing. No one can give an account of eternal things unless he looks at them in this sense, perceives them in this sense. We are enjoined to "apprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge". I would impress upon us the necessity and importance and profit of being engaged with eternal things. Moses says of God, "From eternity to eternity thou art
{463}
God"; @Psalm 90. In that same psalm, he tells us how long we may live, and he, like Paul, would have the saints to look at the unseen things which centre in God.
"For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven ... that mortality might be swallowed up of life". This is the great victory of God; the whole being is to be swallowed up in life. That is what the Lord Jesus is coming to do. What days are ahead of us! Let us look into these matters, live in them, prove their reality, their blessedness! We ourselves are in the imminence of these things.
"Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God" -- I have been endeavouring to keep God before you in this matter of eternal things -- "who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit". The earnest is our present portion. There is more in the Spirit than that, but the earnest is our portion, and it for us to get that portion and not to lose it. The Spirit of God is ready to grant it to us. May God bless these important thoughts, dear brethren, to all of us!
{464}
ENERGY
@Judges 13: 24, 25; @Judges 16: 21 - 31
I have in mind to speak about energy, knowing that it is greatly needed. The nations have put forth their efforts to overcome the blasphemous opposition that arose against right in the earth, and God in His providential mercy, in view of the assembly, that is in view of us, has given deliverance. But the enemy is not defeated in his great and general efforts in this dispensation, the greatest of all dispensations, and the most resultful, and so the need for watchfulness and readiness to defend what is of God, to put on the armour of God, the panoply of God, so that he may be met, and that there may be ultimate success in what has marked the testimony from the beginning; that is, from the advent of the Spirit. It is the day of the Spirit, the greatest of all days, and He is seeking to acquire the liberty that belongs to Him, not in the world, of course, although there may be something in the general providential ways of God to furnish the Spirit with what He needs in the sense of liberty, but it is a question of what He needs among the brethren for the accomplishment of what He has come for.
The Lord did much at the time of the Reformation, as we call it, but it was only a reformation, and reformation is not enough. What we read of as occurring in the future is the time of setting things right, and that is not by reformation. God has appointed a day in which He will judge the world in righteousness by that Man whom He hath ordained. In the meantime the Lord Jesus is in heaven waiting for it, but at the same time carrying on His service to the assembly, calling persons out from the world to the assembly through the gospel. That is what He is engaged with now. He has had no part in the current war, the past war or other wars of man.
{465}
Whatever has been done by God is in a providential sense, through material means, angelic means too, no doubt, for the angels are at God's bidding for His purposes. The Lord Himself said that in the day of His distress He could ask His Father and He would send Him twelve legions of angels, but He did not. It was a question of doing the will of God, and so it is today, dear brethren, doing the will of God, and the will of God is to be carried out by the means furnished, namely the Spirit, involving all the principles that are brought in here, and our observance of them, if we are to be of service in the great conflict that is now current.
I read these scriptures because they correspond to the present time, a time of stress, of spiritual stress, and weakness too, one may say, in the responsible element. They do not speak merely of the so-called systems of men, which in themselves deny spiritual power and energy, but they speak of weakness in regard of those who know, who have been called, like ourselves, and so in this chapter in Judges the head of the house, that is Manoah, was marked by weakness. There was some exercise with him, and some right desire. He was evidently honoured of God in some way, for God sent His angel to Manoah's wife; but, though the honour was paid to her, if the wife is honoured, the husband in one sense may regard himself as honoured too. The angel came to the wife. I speak of this advisedly, because of these great opportunities, and for brothers I would urge they must not stand in the way of them. Manoah did not, and yet he was weak, as many husbands are, and so the angel came the second time to his wife. I would say this is a mild rebuke to Manoah, and husbands here would do well to notice that the Lord is using households. It is a household time. The twelve did not bring the truth of the household out in their ministry. It was brought out through
{466}
Paul. To him we owe the thought of households, not baptising; he was not sent to baptise, that is another thing to be noticed, though he did baptise the household of Stephanas, which means that he would honour that name. It was victory for him. The name Stephanas signifies a crown, and Paul would not weaken that name, but strengthen it, and so he would strengthen every husband and every house, and in strengthening the house he honours the husband as well as the wife. It is well also to remember that the wives are to guide the house, which means that the husband has no right to claim to do everything, because the function of guiding the house belongs to the wife, not that she in any way usurps the husband's rights, but she exercises the guidance of the house in a comely way. Every husband thus becomes victorious, and every wife will become victorious, and all the children too. That is how the matter stands. I am simply stating what no doubt most of the brethren are aware of, that Paul used in his ministry the truth of the household. He applied it to Lydia at Philippi, and also to the jailor. At the very gateway of Europe the truth of the household was stressed and seen functioning in a remarkable way both in a man and in a woman, that is in the jailor and in Lydia, and I believe the Lord has maintained that principle ever since. No doubt it has lapsed through ignorance as to household baptism, but, nevertheless, the thing is standing, and in recent times has a greater place than it ever had, the truth of baptism, not simply the truth of the mere ordinance or act of baptism, but the principles governing it, and I believe, as in other things, the manifestation of Christ in modern times extends not simply to His own appearing, but to the working out of principles in His service, so that He shows Himself, and honours the brethren in showing Himself.
{467}
It is in mind now to speak about Samson and what marked him, especially his early and his late days. I am not going to speak of his middle life, but of his birth, his early days, his boyhood, and his late days, after he was captured by the Philistines, and then his death. His incoming was illumined by a wonderful event. The angel who appeared to Manoah's wife, and to Manoah himself afterwards, calls himself "Wonderful", as if God would signalise the advent of Samson, no doubt because of the typical significance of his service. He is said to have judged Israel twenty years. That is said of him twice, first as "in the days of the Philistines" (chapter 15: 20); and then after his death (chapter 16: 31), as if it were to call attention to the actual service of judging Israel for twenty years.
As I remarked, Samson's birth and boyhood were prefaced by wonderful occurrences on the part of God, and these wonderful occurrences were undoubtedly to characterise the life of this judge. I make bold to say we have had wonderful events in recent times. I am not for a moment referring to the events that have taken place during the last five or six years, because of their military, national or international significance; I am speaking of the wonderful events that have happened in a practical way by the power that has been given to the brethren to go through the terrible things that have happened. I have sought to lay hold of it myself, although not in the midst of it, but I have sought to lay hold of it in spirit and in principle, so as not to miss the gain of what has really been employed on God's behalf in the wonderful things that have happened. I am not speaking about the providential ways of God, although these are wonderful too, the influence of God in His providential ways on certain nations, and what has come about, too, in a providential way by means of these nations, but I am thinking of what
{468}
has come to the brethren, to the sufferers, and whether the brethren are really alive to the moment we are in, the extraordinary conditions that have arisen, and what makes them extraordinary is the divine visitations in the midst of them and the divine intervention on behalf of God's people.
Referring now to the verses read, I call attention to Samson, not only to his birth, but to the movement of the Spirit in the boy, because the moment is a time for young people. It is so in the assembly; the number of young people, men and women, who are affected by the testimony of God is remarkable. I could call attention to this very audience here today, and to many others like it in all parts of the world. I do not include Asia, because Asia has been reserved by God for a later period for His wonders to His people. He will do wonders then of a peculiar kind, but what He is doing now is characterised by the direct presence of God, God dwelling amongst us of a truth, God here by the Spirit, especially since the change over in Paul's attitude in Rome, when the Jews visited him and left him, and he said, "This salvation of God has been sent to the nations". This turn was a direct movement of God at that time, and it implied that the testimony henceforth would be among the nations, and so it has gone on ever since right out to the Pacific Ocean. One has often marvelled at the immense stretch of land from the Canadian border down to Mexico. I am not dealing with geography, I am dealing with God's rights on the earth. The earth is the Lord's, and He is taking out of it this one and that one for Himself, converting them away in the distance, bringing the light of the gospel into their souls in so doing, and the light of the assembly too, and men who can teach the truth of the assembly, even though they may be small as to the number of persons. Yet the facts are very wonderful.
{469}
I am mentioning that because many here are not conversant with these actual facts, but they are momentous.
Now, Manoah was not going to be honoured because of his knowledge of the angelic visit. He came in by and by, and again I urge the husbands to be on their guard lest they may miss the point at any given time. He came in in the second visitation, and the angel rebuked him. I do not want to be rebuked by an angel in that way. We want to be awake to any happening of the kind and able to take our part in it, to act the man in it as Abraham did when Jehovah came to him -- Jehovah and two others; in fact, we might say the Trinity, speaking in a figure, came to Abraham, and stood under the tree. The words have been noticed by some of us. They stood there, stationed themselves, waiting on Abraham, and he took advantage of the opportunity and did the part of an intelligent saint or pilgrim in the opportunity that was divinely given. I need not go into the details. You are all conversant with the remarkable visitation to Abraham in the plains of Mamre.
Now, the angel did not come to Manoah, but to his house. He twice came to his wife, and undoubtedly he had Samson in mind. He had Christ in mind, for Samson in a certain sense was a type of Christ, and all these wonderful events had Christ in mind. One of the greatest things to be said about the millennial day is that one of the names the Lord Jesus will bear will be "Wonderful". It will be a wonderful time, though not as wonderful as this. It will be a wonderful time, nevertheless, a time in which God will show what He can do with men in the flesh, as we are here today. It will be men in the flesh that God will act through then, not unconverted men of course, yet not converted in the sense in which we are converted. It will be another wonderful
{470}
intervention of God that will take place, but not equal to our time. I would emphasise that it will not be equal to our time. There is no dispensation equal to ours, but I am now speaking of the time as bringing in the Lord Jesus. The great Judge of Israel was in mind, and an angel came in and calls himself "Wonderful". Manoah is not informed as to this at first. He asked his name, as if it were to honour the angel. We have to remember that, whilst they are at our service, they are great beings, and they have to be respected, as they represent God, and so the angel did here, and hence his name is Wonderful, and he did wondrously.
Now I pass on from that to speak about the birth of Samson, and what a moment preceded that, the birth of this remarkable servant and judge. I am not thinking of the adverse things that happened in his life, the things that were unsuitable to him, that were a dishonour to him, but I am speaking of him in an abstract way as a type of Christ, and it is said twice over that he judged Israel twenty years. The Spirit of the Lord began to move him in his own camp. There are many here today, each and all of us might be graded and placed in a local setting. Each one has a local setting; even Paul had a local setting. After he had finished his first journey he went back to Antioch and became a local brother. We should each understand the importance of being a local brother, the taking up of things with the Lord locally. The Spirit of the Lord began to move him locally. The word "moved" means energy, strong movement, as if the Spirit was forecasting what was coming to light in the servant, and there are potential servants here today, a great many I would say, and there are more elsewhere, but the time of your service, young brothers and sisters, may not have come. The point is that, before it comes, there is a movement of the Spirit in you, so that the brethren
{471}
will all know. The note in the Darby Translation to verse 25 clearly shows what the word implies. The Spirit of Jehovah began to move him, and it is said the word is expressive of powerful emotion. I am speaking to young men and young women who, though they may not have entered on the service of the Lord in any formal way, have it before them.
You may be ordained for it; it is a time of ordination, a time to be taken up by the Lord and to enter upon His service. Paul was an elect vessel to the Lord. I would ask if there is any indication in us of being elect vessels to the Lord, because the word "vessels" applies. It is a very good word. It is applied to Paul, and he is the only servant who is called an elect vessel. "He is an elect vessel unto me", the Lord says, not unto some church or so-called religious organisation, but the Lord's own word is, "This man is an elect vessel to *me*", and then He adds certain things about him. There are brothers and sisters here who are elect in that sense, elected of the Lord for His service, and He is looking for some indication of the power that is to mark you later, some indication, however little, of the power that is necessary for such a service. It must be of the Spirit; there is no other power available or that could be effective in the service of the Lord, save the Holy Spirit. Paul says himself as regards what marked him, it was "in the Holy Spirit".
Well now, Samson was marked off by heaven, and eventually before men, in his own camp, the camp of Dan; the geographical position is given, and a remarkable movement was seen in him already as a boy. Why should boys and girls not be marked by the Spirit? As brought up and nurtured in the truth, why should they not have some indication of spirituality as born again? Even though they may not be anointed, for anointing is public, as born again there ought to be some indication of spiritual power
{472}
in boys and girls brought up in Christian households, even if it be only the power of refusing what is evil, because of the teaching they have acquired through their parents; some little element that would indicate greater things to come.
I come on to chapter 16 to show how energy marked Samson in his great service. There was shame in Samson's history, but it is an Old Testament period. We wonder at times how it is that the Lord would record even such things as are mentioned, but He does, showing how God can take up things and speak of them for His own purpose, and justify Himself. If He enters into judgment with us, God is ever justified. Even in the life of Samson God is justified. An analysis of the facts would show that God is justified in what came out in Samson, for it says in the last verse read in chapter 16, "He judged Israel twenty years". I want to point out what is said in verse 22, "But the hair of his head began to grow after he was shaved". He was shaved, it was a shame to him, a denial of his nazariteship. I would feelingly urge on young people the idea of nazariteship, the vow taken in baptism; it is a vow, not a mere religious show, but a vow, an undertaking to be for God. You were born into this world that your life should be devoted to God. Everyone of us is in this category, and especially the dear young ones here. I should not like to say anything that the very youngest could not understand, but what I am saying is understandable. The Nazarite's vow is a resolve not to give one's life to sin, to what is modern, but to refuse the wicked ways of the world; God will be with you. Although you may not know very much, great things lie ahead of you, and it is for you to take them on at the earliest possible age. The Lord Jesus Himself, after He was seen in the temple at the age of twelve years, said to his mother, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?"
{473}
That is to say, He is representative of a young person able to speak of the Father, not his natural father. Why not learn to speak more to your Father? He asserted his sonship, and even although young we may manifest some little movement that indicates what is of God.
Now you see Samson is in shame. He has denied his Nazarite's vow. He has told Delilah the secret of his nazariteship, the secret of his power, a terrible disaster, and every young person would do well to take it to heart, not to give away the secret of your power, not to give it away to the world and to make yourselves like the world in practising the world's ways. It is here that the mercy of God came in. The recovery of everyone of us who has come to the light of the assembly is by the sovereign mercy of God, and He has never given up that. "According to his mercy he saved us". That is the truth in which we stand, in which we must ever stand before God -- according to His mercy. And so Samson's hair began to grow. That is a beautiful word, it really *began* to grow. It had been growing and was shaven in shame, but now it has begun to grow, it is already growing. You may wonder why I am saying so much about his hair, but it is because life is seen taking effect in him. He had lost his power. If we turn away to the world we lose our power, our colour, our taste, but as we judge ourselves and confess what we have been doing, presently the hair begins to grow. The brethren notice the change beginning. You begin to come to the meetings again, and the brethren begin to notice the sign of returning spiritual life. The physical hair is a type of what is spiritual. When our hairs grow grey life is waning physically, but when the hair begins to grow it is a question not simply of entering into life, it is a question of life being in the person. The point here is life becoming effective in the person; the hair is the evidence of it. In the
{474}
millennium they come into eternal life, and Paul says to Timothy, "Lay hold of eternal life". The point here is that you judge yourself and the Spirit is free to act in you, so that life is working. As Paul said, "Death works in us, but life in you". That is not eternal life; it is life working in men. So it is that the hair begins to grow. It means that the life I have lost, that I have forfeited for the moment, is beginning to take effect in me, and the brethren notice it. It is a question of life in the Spirit. The Spirit is life in view of righteousness. Righteousness is the outcome of life, but it is life in the person by the Spirit, and that is the point here, that life is returning to Samson, and now there is afforded him the opportunity of doing the greatest thing in his life. There may be someone here who has forfeited the great part of his life, and God may give you the opportunity to do the greatest thing of your life before you die. I would urge upon anybody who has failed, who has gone into the world and lost the sense of life, that God is willing to reinstate you in your place in the fellowship, so that you may be in it in power, and perhaps do the best thing in your life before you die.
In verse 22 we are told his hair began to grow, but in verse 26 Samson said to the lad that held him by the hand, "Suffer me to feel the pillars upon which the house stands, that I may lean upon them". The Darby Translation would help us as to this. The idea is that Samson has now become alive to the position, and he has given up the world. He is not going to be influenced again by the lad. The lad is an influence of the world, a Philistine agent. He is used by the Philistines, but Samson would understand that he was simply an agent of the world, and he says to him, "Let loose of me", meaning, I recognise you are doing your duty, but I want you to let loose of me. He did not want him to influence him any more.
{475}
I am not straining the passage, that is the meaning of it. He was deputed to be Samson's guide in the midst of the great congress while Samson was making sport for them, but he comes to the point when he shakes him off, and that is what anyone has to do who is being influenced by the world. This is what Samson understands now. The time has come to shake him off. If it be a lad that is influencing you, shake him off -- "Let loose of me". So, as the Darby Translation says, Samson said to the lad that held him by the hand, "Let loose of me, and suffer me to feel the pillars upon which the house stands, that I may lean upon them". It is now the time for Samson to do something, and that something will mean the overthrow of the world. Think of what may happen with anyone of us. God in His mercy restoring us, you shake off the world, but feel the world in order to destroy it. So it says, "Suffer me to feel the pillars upon which the house stands, that I may lean upon them". He meant to do more than that, he meant to pull them down. The house was full of men and women and they have caused damage to us, but now they are mentioned to show they are about to be overthrown. "All the lords of the Philistines were there"; that represents the government of the world. Think of what one Christian might do if only he is restored today so that he may be in the testimony! The house is full of men and women, "upon the roof there were about three thousand men and women" -- as if God would count the world before He destroys it -- "who looked on while Samson made sport". Think of what was in their minds while Samson, the great vessel of the testimony, was making sport for them. But what is he going to do now? He is going to pull down the whole system. Samson called upon Jehovah and said, "Lord Jehovah, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may take one
{476}
vengeance upon the Philistines for my two eyes. And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house stood ... and he bowed himself with might; and the house fell on the lords, and on all the people that were therein", that is the world figuratively coming down as the life comes into the Christian. As the assembly is seen moving in life the thing happens morally now in testimony, the system of the world is broken up, so that we may enter on the service of God. So we read that Samson "took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house stood (and he supported himself upon them), the one with his right hand and the other with his left. And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines"! The same power that is seen in Samson at the beginning of his life is now seen at the end. It is a marvellous thing. Samson failed, but is recovered by the mercy of God; his hair began to grow, and this is the result. "He bowed himself with might" -- an evidence of power as he is now free from the world -- "and the house fell on the lords and on all the people that were therein. So the dead that he slew at his death were more than those whom he had slain in his life".
Then it says, "He had judged Israel twenty years", as if God would honour him at that moment, the greatest moment of his life. He brought down the world in his might. For us it is a question of the Spirit of God.
May the Lord bless the word to everyone of us!
{477}
WHAT IS YOUR OCCUPATION?
@Jonah 1: 8; @Genesis 46: 31 - 34; @Genesis 47: 1 - 10
From what I have read you will understand that what is in mind is the enquiry as to *occupation*. We find it with Jonah, and we find it in Egypt with Jacob's family; it is found elsewhere, as in Paul, who, before Agrippa, spoke of his manner of life; that is somewhat different from the idea of occupation, but the allusion is to his unconverted days. Later he sends Timotheus to the Corinthians to tell them about his ways as they were in Christ. It is a matter of note that the Corinthians were to be acquainted with the manner of life of the apostle.
But to speak for a moment of Jonah, it is a question of what is the *cause* of the evil which had come upon him, or as the seamen said "upon us". That is a very pertinent question now, for it is right morally that we all should make enquiry as to the cause of the evil which has come upon mankind; a terrible disaster falling upon all, and we may well enquire *for whose cause*? The seamen say to Jonah, of the evil that had befallen them, that it was for *him* to tell of it. Not much is needed to be said, the story is well-known, but the danger which befell the seamen in whose boat Jonah was had worked out to wonderful matters; God made them so to work out. One is reminded of an incident in the history of the people of God; that is in Ephraim, into whose house, we are told, calamity had come -- @1 Chronicles 7: 22, 23. It was evidently caused by the fault of his children, or largely so, but whatever it be, if a calamity such as came into Ephraim's house fall upon us, it is wise to enquire as to the cause, and to take into account what has been recorded as to such things, because they are recorded for ourselves, upon whom the ends of the ages have come. For whose cause is this calamity come?
{478}
Ephraim had a son born named Beriah, which meant that he was born when calamity was in his house. That is the meaning of his name, and what names, dear brethren, can be given to children at the present moment, in the present days, the present years? There are, I understand, an unusual number of births, and what names are applicable as each parent recalls the calamity which has befallen him! The Christian enquires, what is meant by it all, whether it be the case of Jonah, or the case of Ephraim, one of the distinguished sons of Jacob; although the fact that he was distinguished did not save him from calamity, which may come also on the most esteemed of us. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. He gives much to us; He lavishes things upon us, whether the ordinary blessings or gifts, and they are without recall; but still His gifts and calling will not, in themselves, save us from calamity, and calamity *has* come. Whatever we may think of it, those of us who have not been through it fully, although we have in spirit, can hardly name the things that have happened. I can say that, and speak of it feelingly too, as thinking of the brethren. At the same time this question comes to everyone as to the cause, why this evil has come about, and how it is to be worked out.
The failures of Jonah occasioned most extraordinary experiences. He had to go through the depths, to the bottoms of the mountains, the weeds being wrapped about his head; but he was brought up to the dry land. And God has now brought His people up out of a great death! It is well to see that it is a death, and as death works in us, those who have been through it, life works in others who have not been through it. That is God's way. The enrichment has come to those of us who have not been into this death, it has extended to those who have not been through it; but the dry land is ahead. The salvation
{479}
of which Jonah speaks is ours indeed; also the great fish prepared, pointing to what our God is ever ready to provide for His people in their extremities. What salvations can be recorded! And may we not say, dear brethren, God is amongst us of a truth! The very evidence of His presence amongst His people is that these salvations have been accorded to us, not because of our prowess, but *God's* mercy. It is a question of God. God has had us all in hand, and there is going to be a crop. There has been the sowing, and there is going to be the reaping; so it is for each of us to see to it how he goes through this peculiar time in which we are, involving suffering. But not what it has been, that is gone we may say, for ever; some other sorrow may befall us, but this one God has dealt with, no one else could deal with it, but Himself; no combination of nations could bring about what has happened. *God* has done it, and it is surely that we might know God better and bear the fruits which He seeks in us in the little while that remains to us to continue for Him. It is a learning time, and a *quick* learning time; it is a time of quick learning, to get things into the mind and heart as going through them with God, so that there is the formation which He has intended should come about in us.
I would refer further to the enquiry, "For whose cause this evil is upon us?" Each will have to say, I have had something to do with it; everyone of us will have to say it sooner or later, and the sooner the better. I have something to answer as to it. It is the answering time now, as in the presence of the delivering power of our God, and God amongst us as having delivered us, as Paul says, "and will deliver!" He is amongst us as a delivering God, and it is for us to challenge ourselves. Why has it all come about? It looked as if it would never come about. Well do I remember when the clouds were darkening, and
{480}
wondered whether such a threatened calamity would happen. God in mercy kept our eyes from it. But it *has* come about and it has, we may say, come to an end. We have had to do with the coming about of it, and God has had to do with it, and God only could deal with it successfully, in bringing to an end the awful thing. Now, it is a question of working out the result and answering the question in our own hearts, and giving thanks at the same time, because it is a wonderful time of thanksgiving, and thanksgiving is always pleasing to God: "in everything give thanks". So Jonah came into the result of his disobedient course. I suppose we should never have had his book had he not come to the truth of it, and the truth of it is for us, not for him now, but for us. What may come about through one of the greatest calamities!
Coming now to the scripture in Genesis, a well-known passage, it is a question of the family of Jacob, speaking literally, the most renowned of earthly families. We have had it today already; the Lord said of Nathanael, "an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!" He represented the thought fully; the Lord's own word indicates that he was without guile, an Israelite indeed! But still the Lord did not stop there. Nathanael had his answers from the Lord in a most remarkable way; he learned quickly, he quoted @Psalm 2; but the Lord could speak of greater things than even @Psalm 2 in itself contains, although they are very great -- King of Israel and Son of God. But as I said, the Lord spoke of greater things, and He intimated He had in view more than Nathanael, for in verse 51 He changes to the plural, saying, "Henceforth ye shall see the heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man". If we have one man signalised it is only to bring out that in principle all the saints are to be signalised. So, as I said, the Lord changes to
{481}
"ye" in verse 51. We are in a time in which we can expect to see greater things, and these greater things are to deliver us from what might hold us, as the world puts on its best clothes and presents its attractions and possibilities, and young people become interested. The greater things of which the Lord spoke are intended to save us from the wretched things that this world affords. It is good for the young to see this. "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world", @1 John 2:15. The world is against the Father, and *we belong* to the Father. We are entitled to take the place of sons of God, children of God, children of the Father, so that we might be saved from its attractions, as the world puts on its best to attract us into its allurements.
It is for us, dear brethren, not to be deceived by these things, but to resolve in the light of all that has passed, to profit by it, to resolve not to be attracted by the allurements of the world, but to stand against them in the faith by the aid of the Spirit of God. It is a faith time, it is not a time for sight; what is seen is temporal, what is not seen is eternal, and eternal things are the greatest things, beloved brethren; and it is not for us in the slightest measure to fritter away the very best for the very worst; not only bad but the worst morally. We have already spoken today of the two things which stand out in John's ministry, the greatest blessings, and eternal punishment. John has no hesitation in presenting the latter in his gospel and in the book of Revelation. The strongest language is used in the way he sums up the terribleness of eternal punishment. And Matthew says, "These shall go away into everlasting punishment", @Matthew 25: 46. The Lord makes it imperative to believe the things that are true as to God's judgment of sin.
Now, to speak further of the family of Jacob, and the enquiry, "What is your occupation?" we
{482}
know how Jacob experienced the idea of occupation, of toil and wages. These things loom up now very largely, and they are apt to affect the brethren. I am venturing to speak now in an admonitory way to save us from the damaging things which may happen, that we may be on our guard against them, because the question of wages as I am touching on it is most pernicious. If a man is working on the Lord's day because of the extra wages he gets on that day, he fails to honour the Lord Jesus in keeping the day He has selected for Himself out of the other days. The Lord is pleased to take out of time one day in the week for Himself, and He is looking to us to be sympathetic with Him in it. He has all the days before Him, He has made time, but He has just now selected for Himself one day, hallowing it, calling it His day and also "the first day of the week", the day on which the Father raised Him from the dead. What a day was that on which the Father came forth and raised His Son out of death! Three days He had, in a sense, been deprived of Him in His burial, but now He is raised by the *glory* of the Father. What glory it was! God is looking to us to be sympathetic with Him in this matter, this day which belongs to Him, and the Lord Jesus is looking to us, too, to have sympathy with Him in that day which belongs to Him peculiarly. So John says, "I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day". That is how he spent that day. It is a challenge to us as to how we spend the first day of the week. God has afforded it to us in His providential ways. But when the Lord calls a certain day *His* day it is more than a providential matter, it is His direct matter, and He is calling us into it and expects us to be in it every week; even if we have to sacrifice for it. He is looking for us to be sympathetic. It is no small matter to Him. He would say to us at any time, The Father raised Me on this day! Can we not signalise it? Surely we can, and
{483}
surely I ought to be with Him in it, understanding that I am a participant of the glory of it.
The family of Jacob is now in the test, and this question is asked: "What is your occupation?" How often such questions have been asked lately, both of sisters and brothers, as an agent of the government claims them, and even now governments are claiming them; how often this question comes up, "What is your occupation?" What I would say, dear brethren, is that we are living in a mediatorial time; the Lord Jesus is pleased to serve us as our Joseph. The whole matter of his brethren is set under the influence of Joseph; and our Joseph is in a mediatorial position, but particularly so in this matter of which we are speaking. So Joseph goes before and instructs his five brothers, whom he had chosen, as to what they should say to Pharaoh. How sweet it is to be chosen by the Lord in this sense! Joseph chose five out of the whole number, and of course he knew them, he knew their histories, he knew their proclivities, he knew what they would be as presented and left to themselves, left to answer for themselves before the great potentate. Many of our young people may be called before the tribunals, and how glad they are to find they have one like Joseph with them, standing by them, having a sympathetic look to support them in a time of pressure. How sweet it is when the brethren join in with their sympathy, when a young brother or sister is faced with the question, "What is your occupation?" He may say, I did not cause the war. Of course not, but are you wholly immune from any charges as to it? Each one has to challenge himself as to what the calamity means.
It is not here a question of calamity, but of Joseph's brethren and their occupation, and he carefully says to them, 'Tell Pharaoh what your occupation has been'. It would tend to make them truthful.
{484}
I believe all these matters which we have had to go through challenge us as to truthfulness, as to transparency. We are all naturally deceitful, the heart is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked. So it was that Joseph saw to it that they were not left to themselves as answering Pharaoh. And I say to all the young brothers and sisters here, You will not be left to yourselves. If there are these questions to be answered the Lord will stand by you, He will give you the strength to answer them. It enters into the gospel of Matthew, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world". In all that we have to go through in meeting the authorities He will see to it, as we are faithful, that we go through them according to Him. If any be suffering, He has suffered too; it is a time of suffering. Paul felt it was a time of suffering when he spoke of the sufferings of Christ being filled up for the sake of the assembly, so let us not shirk it. It is a wonderful time for working out the truth, but it is a suffering time too. Questions are being asked, and we have our Joseph; He will not leave us alone, He will be by our side to help us to answer the questions. We have proved it and *will* prove it! It brings out what is really in the saints, not according to nature, the deceitfulness of the heart, but transparency; new birth is the foundational principle in us in view of all that is put upon us. It is a question of what man is to be in a new way, brought into a new order of things, born again throughout, so that each one seeks to answer his questions truthfully. "Speak every man truth with his neighbour". Unless dependent, how easily we slip into untruthfulness!
So these men are asked, "What is your occupation?" And that brings out in an important sense their histories and those of their fathers. I wonder sometimes why Jacob's history is given in such detail, but what is it if not that they and ourselves
{485}
should learn to be truthful, to be transparent, to be fair in all our dealings? God is putting it upon us, He is looking for "the new man which according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness", @Ephesians 4: 24. That is the only man that can be trusted. Adam could not be trusted. It is the *new man* that is to be trusted. The true believer is not alienated from "the life of God", he has part in it, he is created in righteousness and holiness and truth. So, like Jacob's family, we are now under the test of the governors of this world. We are not yet out of the matter. God has allowed it to come and He has made a certain deliverance, but it is not all finished, far from it. Brethren have to set themselves to be according to God in these circumstances. Now the authorities have changed round somewhat in favour of the saints. Thus the importance of our avoidance of what might antagonise them.
Jacob himself is seen here under a test, for he also is presented to the king. Many of us here are old brethren. We should glory in the old brethren who have stood for the truth. They have peculiar value: I need not go outside of Jacob to show this. Pharaoh does not ask Jacob what his occupation is; he does not say a word to Jacob as to this. Jacob blessed Pharaoh; it is the *moral greatness* of the old man. The patriarch in the presence of the monarch is truthful and dignified. Twice it is said of him here that he blessed Pharaoh, and "beyond all gainsaying the inferior is blessed by the better". So I would say by deduction that Jacob was the greatest man in the world at that time. He blessed Pharaoh when he came in, and when he went out. But he told the truth to Pharaoh and that is the idea to be maintained before the rulers of this world. The new man is the great feature. What we see here, at least in type, is putting on the new man. As I have said, he is the only man that can be trusted. Let us remember
{486}
that he is created in righteousness and holiness of truth. So that Jacob is an old man amongst his brethren, and at this point he adorns them. What I am stressing now is a truth in Scripture. Old brethren who have been going on with the truth for years, heaven is looking down on them with pleasure, and is going to safely conduct them to glory. They will all go through and go through in victory. There is one finishing his course now, well-known and honoured by us all. We rejoice in what he is as answering to the enquiry: "How wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?" That is the point to come to. The old men have to face it; it is their wisdom to face it, that they may acquire a wise heart. "So teach us to number our days, that we may acquire a wise heart", @Psalm 90: 12. The word in Peter greatly encourages this: "Thus shall the entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ be richly furnished unto you", @2 Peter 1: 11.
We are now speaking about young men; five of them are in our scripture, and they are told what to do. It is as if the Lord would make the most of us; whatever God has wrought in us He would make the most of that, causing it to shine out in power before the tribunals as each has the opportunity, causing the truth to shine. Tell the whole truth; it is a question of the truth. So these men are tutored by Joseph; everything is made to hinge on Joseph in his day. But he is never greater than his father; his father says, "I know it, my son, I know it". He knew better than Joseph at a critical time, and that is the whole truth as to Jacob's position; the old, characteristically, especially in a crisis, are more reliable than the young. Whatever knowledge the young may have, the old brethren through experience, are pretty certain to have the reliable knowledge of God. The Lord said to Peter, "When thou shalt be old". That would be a test to Peter, but he would submit, he
{487}
would stretch forth his hands, which means submission to what God may permit. In accord with this, Aaron was told to go up to Mount Hor to die. What a test that was to a man! Moses and Eleazar went up with him and he went up to die in the mount. The allusion shows freedom from natural influences in nearness to God. God loves His people and would make the swellings of Jordan easy for them.
These five brothers are directed by Joseph as to what they should say and evidently God blessed them in their obedience. Thus it is said, "And Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying, 'Thy father and thy brethren are come to thee. The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land settle thy father and thy brethren: Let them dwell in the land of Goshen; and if thou knowest men of activity among them, then set them as overseers of cattle over what I have'", @Genesis 47: 6. How favourable Pharaoh was to the family of Jacob! In type it is a question of vindication of the divine family. What was their occupation? They were occupied with live-stock, not with bonds, nor shares, nor grocery, nor hardware, nor dry goods. No. It is live-stock, that is, those who have affection. You say, Have cattle affection? They certainly have. They are represented in Scripture as having affection, and in this they are a type of affection in men. It is a question of what our occupation is, whether we are occupied with *such* live-stock, that is to say, the brethren, those who *love*. You cannot find love according to God anywhere except amongst the saints, but it is amongst the saints; no one else has it. "Hereby we have known love because *he* has laid down his life for us", @1 John 3: 16. "Beloved let us love one another; because love is of God, and every one that loves has been begotten of God and knows God", @1 John 4: 7. God has placed love in the saints -- in the assembly. The Spirit of God is in the assembly. He sheds the
{488}
love of God abroad in our hearts and develops it in us.
And so Pharaoh, as I said, is favourable to the family of Jacob. This is a type of what God can do in these circumstances. So Pharaoh says, "The land of Egypt is before thee ... *my* cattle", @Genesis 47: 6. Pharaoh has cattle, yet the Egyptians abominated them! Corresponding with this, Pharaoh's daughter saved Moses. I am speaking now of what God can do with the powers that be, and if we have to continue to face them and answer their questions, let us trust in God, He can turn things round in our favour.
The passage goes on to show that Jacob was brought in under Pharaoh, and the whole position in Egypt is clarified, and the people of God are there now; they have the advantage of the favour of Pharaoh, and God can bring like conditions about for *us*. It is a question of *God*, what He can do, and what we are *occupied with*, what our occupation is, whether we love the brethren, whether we are going on with the brethren, whether all our interests are there, whether we dwell amongst our own people and refuse worldly associations and the like. We are to dwell among our own people, and God is with *them*; and we learn that God is with them of a truth. God is true and the victory is ours on these lines, as I said. It is for the young persons especially now to take to heart these things. The measure of the favourableness in which we stand under the government of God in this country and the western countries generally is to be carefully observed. God has come in for His people, at least in measure. But how long the advantage will remain is with Him, and if we fail Him we may have to own like Jonah the "cause" lies with *us*. Thus the need of "having denied impiety and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and justly and piously in the present course of things", @Titus 2: 12.
{489}
GOD'S PROVISIONAL WAYS WITH MEN
@Genesis 5: 28, 29; @Genesis 8: 20 - 22; @2 Corinthians 2: 14 - 16; @Revelation 21: 1 - 3
These scriptures afford us intelligence as to how the prophetic word made known before a catastrophe, that is the deluge, appears in its application afterwards. In these two days we have spent together we have reminded each other of how God brings His people through disasters, always leading to triumph, as Paul says in the verses read in 2 Corinthians -- "Who always leads us in triumph in the Christ, and makes manifest the odour of his knowledge through us in every place", that is to say, God being God, is "over all, and through all, and in us all", @Ephesians 4: 7. He has right of way everywhere; at all times and in all places. His thought is to make Himself known, to make His love known, always bringing in Christ. So it is in this present moment in this hall, to speak simply; we are reminded of how God can make a way through the, greatest difficulties for His people, setting us down in a convenient place to reveal His thoughts to us, imparting His knowledge to us, but always through Christ. We are in a mediatorial system -- the Father, the Son and the Spirit. They are all active, love being behind every action.
So, as I said, our first scripture is a prophetic word. A son is born to Lamech, one of the men noted in this chapter. Prophecies were not frequent in the period before the flood, but they existed, prophetic ministry from God having a present bearing, preparing men for sorrows, affording later the application of the prophecy. So we have from Lamech a prophetic word at the birth of his first son. It was a son destined for great things indeed, and also a remarkable type of Christ too. So a prophetic
{490}
word was befitting. At the time of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ messages were conveyed through Gabriel, a great angel, a priestly angel, suitable for the moment, for it was the birth, not of Zacharias, but of the Messiah, the High Priest of God. He was foreshadowed by Melchisedec, but He was *born*. A priestly angel announces the coming birth, and in due course other angels announce the actual birth; they are all full of instruction and encouragement for us. So Lamech had his part, Enoch had his part too, and Noah also, coming after; thus there was at least a prophetic ministry at that time, immediate and pointing on to the great future.
The prophecy of which we read was in regard to Noah -- what he should be, as his father says, "This same shall comfort us concerning our work and the toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed". That was the prophecy, and it was an assuring one; what God would do, and He is ever ready to do things and give us inklings beforehand as to what is to be gone through, thus fortifying us. Now we have gone through the recent terrible trial, and we must consider the prophetic indication going before, going along with it, and coming after it. We shall not fail then, by the help of God, as later occasion arises for prophetic ministry; it is from heaven, it is a provision of God to warn us beforehand of things that may happen, and to comfort us in view of them, direct application bringing out what is in God's mind, for nothing transpires without Him; not a sparrow falls without Him, how much more a saint? The prophecy is in chapter 5 and the birth of a son at the same time, and then the disaster, the terrible thing that was in the mind of God; for the time had come of which men were told 120 years before. They were told that God would make an end of all flesh.
{491}
In moving on to chapter 8 I desire to bring in the positive side, how Noah carried through what had been said at his birth, and it is an important matter to carry things through, however long, until the application of the prophecy concerning them can be made. Noah had gone through six hundred years but he carried things through, even as in the days of Samuel, nothing fell to the ground that Samuel had said. So this prophecy did not fall to the ground, as far as Noah was concerned; there were many who cared nothing for it, for the world had gone astray from God, but God was about to deal with it, and He did; He made an end of things as they were.
Now I want to bring out the subject of the prophecy; that is, Noah, and how Noah carried it down and how he acted in the spirit of it. Scripture brings out the spirit of things as well as the actual things, and Noah brought in the spirit of the thing; that is to say, he offered up burnt offerings; he built an altar and offered up burnt offerings on it, of every clean creature, and Jehovah smelled a sweet savour, 'an odour of rest'. All the offerings are to God, as the angel said to Manoah, If you bring a burnt offering, offer it to God. We are to learn things by the way in our experiences, that God must come first at all times and in all places. Now the time has come for the fulfilment of the thought in Noah, for the sweet savour, a savour of rest,, and God smelled it. That is, you might say, the renewed earth is now clear, sin has been dealt with, and the earth is filled with an odour of rest. I am not saying that the word filled is there, but I am thinking of the house in which Mary of Bethany offered. The Lord said, she had performed a good work on Him. She anointed Him and the house was filled; not the earth nor the world, but the *house* was filled with the odour of the ointment. This has always been
{492}
open to us, dear brethren, to offer to God, to keep God before us; God in Christ, of course, but *God*, and the odour of rest will be always there.
Here God had something else in His mind, He had another world in His mind, He had another heaven and another earth in His mind, but He is not saying anything about those things. God knows how to conceal things. He concealed the mystery until the time came for it; God conceals knowledge. God made known the savour of His knowledge through Paul in every place; but then there are conditions that arise which would shut the key of knowledge from us and hence there is no revelation. Sometimes the ministry meetings are not profitable. One hears of these things, and I am speaking of them so that they may be remedied wherever they exist. But the earth was God's and the savour of Noah's offerings was there -- Noah provided it for God. Noah unselfishly offered every clean creature on the altar, without any thought of reserving anything for himself. That is the principle on which the new world stands. God had brought in the idea of a new world, but still He had another in His mind which He did not disclose; but He *began* to say things *in His heart*. No doubt in time men would hear about these things. But not even to Noah did He say anything about the things which were in His heart. But there was the principle of a new world, and we know it now. The heart of God has been disclosed as to all these matters; there is nothing held back. Paul says he completed the word of God, everything is told out, love would tell out everything, hence the disclosures of love to the people of God. It is said here, "The Lord smelled a sweet savour; and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more
{493}
every thing living, as I have done. While the earth remaineth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease".
Now I read that Jehovah was saying something in His heart; it would come out in due time for the prophetic ministry had begun. Peter tells us that the Lord Jesus has been received in heaven until the time of the restoring of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of His holy prophets since time began. God had the thought of prophecy in mind; He had things in His mind that He would bring out bit by bit by the prophets, through Noah and through Enoch down to the last prophet. That is to say, the spirit of prophecy is still current and God is keeping on this ministry, keeping us going, awake to all His mind, making applications in order to stir us up in the present time. It is now specially important after we have been through the recent terrible ordeal -- such as Noah went through, not to such an extent, but it has been an awful thing, I refer to it not because I know what it means, but because I know *you* know what it means, and I want you to understand that I have thorough sympathy with you in all the unspeakable experiences that you have been through. And you have not finished yet. We may as well face things, and the prophetic ministry will help us to do so, because what is happening is that God is setting up governments; it is a provisional situation, God is using certain governments for the moment. I believe it is manifest that things are not settled, and therefore we have to accept the provisional state of things that God is pleased to afford us even for a little moment, but not for long. There will soon be a change and it will extend for a thousand years in the mercy of God; but the happenings have begun already to introduce what is called the millennium, the era of
{494}
blessing that God has designed for this earth. Anyone who has any spiritual intelligence knows that we need not look for anything very great or permanent here; what we may certainly look for is the mercy of God; we may count upon it as applying to the circumstances that have come about and exist involving sufferings for us in a greater or lesser degree. So what God was saying in His heart here implies this very thing: "while the earth remaineth". What He is saying refers to the continuation of the earth, not the heavens; "while the *earth* remaineth". The prophecy referred to it, but what God said in His heart was not covered by Lamech's prophecy; he did not hear from God as to what was in His heart. Now we understand what is in the heart of God, all is revealed.
But I want to say a word as to this matter of provisional conditions, what God is saying in His heart refers to provisional conditions. In His mercy He said He would not destroy the earth as He had done, and He adds, "Neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done. While the earth remaineth, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease". Noah had to wait for God's disclosures, and we are told in @Proverbs, "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing" (@Proverbs 25: 2). We are sometimes tested by what God conceals, as to what is for His glory; there may be something that God cannot disclose to us, because of some moral state in us that is not pleasing to Him. It is *God* with whom we have to do. He is our God, and our God is Noah's God and Enoch's God. He is a God who can conceal things and disclose them as He pleases. "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of kings is to search out a matter", and the ministry of the Spirit is to search out things and make them known. Those qualified
{495}
to minister to the people of God will search out things and if we do not search the Scriptures, comparing them and understanding them by the Spirit of God we cannot really prophesy. The ministry meeting will not be very much unless there is the searching out of things. That means, praying and enquiring, looking into all that is available to furnish us for the great work that God may put into our hands.
So, as I said, God was saying things in His heart, and these things referred to a provisional state of things on the earth, and that provisional state of things remains now and will remain to the end of the millennium -- "while the earth remaineth". It is not a question of heaven or of heavenly things, but of what God does and what He does provisionally, and how merciful He is in the provision that He affords to us and to men, all men being involved in God's mercy, what He makes available to us to carry on, otherwise we can scarcely have anything. See how God is preserving the whole race. I should not think the number has been greatly diminished in modern times, the births have been greatly increased, and God is thus speaking to men as to His mercy, for He is not willing that any should perish. It is a question of what God would do in His mercy provisionally so as to keep things going and carry out His ways in men as they are. In the millennial day He will show what He can do even in a positive sense with men as they are, men and women in flesh and blood. But we are now dealing with the world as it is, and that is what God was saying in His heart at the time of which I am speaking.
I would seek to present to you what that means, what history enters into it! *We* can look back, but Noah had to look forward. What could he see? What could he think of the world to come? He had no power to gauge what might happen, but yet his
{496}
family would be spared, and what has developed out of it. Take the sons of Noah, God has done great things for Japheth in this dispensation, more than any of the others, and we are amongst them, this very meeting is in his territory, showing how little Noah could define what would come about in the history of the world; but God knew. All these things which have happened just recently were well known to God as far back as Noah's time. He alludes to Noah many times in Scripture. He alludes to him as of great importance in His mind and ways, but at the same time Noah could not have known what has happened within our own times. But God knew, that is my point; God knows, so let us have recourse to God, for that is what Noah did. He did the thing that pleased God, that had been prophesied about him; all came about in his time; a sweet savour of rest was afforded from the creatures of God, and Jehovah smelled it; hence, in what He said in His heart, we can understand how the leniency of God, the mercies of God, have been disclosed, and are being disclosed; and what He does through others, that is Noah, what He can do among the nations in mercy for His people and for mankind too.
I am now speaking of the provisional time indicated in what God is saying in His heart. God was having to say to this world but mercifully. "While the earth remaineth" certain things would continue, "seed-time", that is mercy, and there was to be a harvest. Take the American continent; what harvests! What a provision for the death-stricken lands of other continents! God has done it. God has been watchful over the western continent, north and south; and Australia and New Zealand. He has had His eye on these territories in view of emergencies such as have arisen, and it is for us to understand, to bring God into conditions that have arisen.
{497}
And let us be ready for the *continuance* of the provisional state of things.
But we are to look for the *new heaven* and a *new earth* in which righteousness shall dwell. Let us be ready for that! This is a great matter indeed; it is not a provisional matter, it is not for occasional emergencies, such as the angel coming down as at the pool of Bethesda once a year; that was mercy, but only once a year. God is bringing in a world which He calls the new heaven and the new earth in which His righteousness dwells, and that is our outlook. Let us look for it; let us learn to look "afar off". Those who are purged from their former sins are likely to forget that they have been purged if they do not look afar off. Let us take a further look and see what God can do. And let us have patience in waiting for it. What patience Noah needed in view of the development of the purged world! But God does say much to him, though He kept things in His heart, He did not say all; but ever since the time we are considering He has been disclosing what He can be and do for men, and the sublime result is the new heavens and the new earth in which righteousness will dwell. It is the duty of the servant to strengthen the hearts of the brethren and remind them of God.
The Scriptures are full of that. How prophecy strengthens the hearts of the saints! So the prophetic word now is intended to strengthen the hearts of the brethren, and surely for those who minister it is needed that they should look into the Scriptures more thoroughly, to search out the truth like the kings; it is the glory of kings to do this. Every gifted man is in that position, he is qualified by God to search out things for the brethren. You get that in the book of Proverbs, how the men of Hezekiah searched out certain proverbs of Solomon, and they
{498}
transcribed them. That is the idea, and God has qualified many to serve the saints; but this involves suffering. The Scriptures must be looked into prayerfully and carefully, so that truth needed for the moment may be understood and ministered to the assembly. The great and glorious future that is before us requires that the hearts of the saints should be strengthened. The Lord says, "Behold I come quickly". "I am the root and off-spring of David, the bright and morning star", and immediately there is the response. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". That is what heaven is looking for. And we must in prayer say *Amen* to the desires extended to Him. "Let *all* the people say Amen", every brother, sister and child -- let all learn to say *Amen* to the prayers which go up to God. But then there is what is disclosed in the ministry and for that we are thankful and honour the ministers too. Let them have always the respect which is due to them to carry on the ministry unhinderedly, for the brethren need it.
Now I am speaking in a certain way to encourage our hearts and at the same time to bring in a measure of light as to this matter of provisional conditions which God is affording now to the human race, as indicated in the scripture read in @Genesis 8. It is a question of mercy, that God is merciful to all His creatures, not willing that any should perish. The provision of the government of God is a testimony to it. The general government of God is a testimony to God and bears on the gospel. What He has done in certain nations in recent times to ease off the opposition of the enemy is certainly a matter of thanksgiving to God. But it may stop; in the hardness of our hearts we may forget and cease to pray, and it may be stopped, because He is the *living* God. It is well to bring these things forward so that we may be real in the whole position and know how to approach God and to serve and to
{499}
please Him. We are taught how we are to walk and to please Him.
As to the provisional conditions, of which I have spoken, much could be added as to what may happen in the seed-time and in the harvest-time in the way of loss or damage to crops of which God said nothing to Noah; but He sometimes speaks in *facts* and such facts are in part the wonderful provision in the western continent, and of course the British Empire. *God* is doing it every day, and He is doing it for the whole race. He wills that all men should be saved; that is His attitude. So the saints are to be in accord with God in all they are and do in relation to the provisional situation and outlook. It may be well to say here that the provisional position which is contemplated in what I am saying is in contrast to the *final* state of things expressed in the new heaven and the new earth.
I go on to the passage in 2 Corinthians for a moment, so that we may see more clearly how God can go on with men provisionally. He is doing it for a purpose; He had something at least from the Corinthians, a great deal from Paul, therefore He was not carrying on for nothing. God has His rewards in what He is doing provisionally. The providence of God is a wonderful matter, and we are gaining from it as well as other men, but we are gaining much more. But I especially want to show how God has His portion, and as to whether we can shine in any giving to God, affording God some reward. So Paul says here, "I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother". He had a great regard for his brother Titus. It is no small matter to speak of a brother like that; those who minister characteristically value a brother, one who is sympathetic with the truth. "But taking my leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia". Thus the question comes up as to sufficiency in
{500}
ministry as to that which affords God pleasure; that is, in all His liberal beneficent doings for the race, from Noah's time to the present, God has not been without fruit. No doubt in Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and many others who followed in Genesis, one might enlarge on what God had in those ages. I speak of God and His provisional government and how it extends to all men, but especially to those of God's family, including the assembly.
Now I go on to the last passage in the book of Revelation, a book intended to enlighten us especially as to Europe in regard to the present situation. Wars have been current all these years, from which many have suffered, but God has His little book as we see in the book of Revelation. It is not a big book; it says the very opposite, it is a little book, but it contains light, and that afforded support to the prophet John. I am speaking about John as a prophet; it is a prophetic book. John is, we may say, the prophet; and what a prophet! The beloved disciple, the beloved apostle, now faithful as a prophet, faithfully making known what God had in His mind as to the seven assemblies, and then as to Europe. I am speaking simply; the little book refers to Europe; that is to say, God's ways in regard to Europe. In all these terrible wars Europe has been the centre, and Gods gives us understanding as to it all. John had to eat the little book, it was given to him that he should eat it, and at the same time the Angel, representing the Lord Jesus, puts His right foot on the sea and His left foot on the land, as if to say, I am *coming*. I am taking charge! This is the situation. He puts His right foot on the sea, and His left foot on the land; He is asserting in testimony that the sea and the land belong to Him, and that He uses them as He pleases. So He directs John what and how to eat, and he
{501}
ate the little book, and He says what it shall be in him, that he might prophesy *again*. That is how the prophecy becomes complete. Whatever the circumstances may be John goes through them. Thus John had to eat the little book and experience the effect inwardly. Hence the continuance of the prophecy through him. If we are to continue the present ministry let us be sure we go through with God everything that happens. Let us go through things with God, then we shall be able to prophesy again. We shall not do it if we depend on what has been prophesied already -- books and the like. It is a question of what each one who serves *eats*. Whether bitter or sweet; it is both, and we have to discern what both mean to prophesy again.
So the book of Revelation is a finished matter, and completes this wonderful final disclosure, the secret of God, what He has embodied in the assembly. That is what I want to finish with tonight. Although Paul had completed the word of God, the whole range of the truth, yet John had this special revelation of the Lord Jesus signified to him. Paul has told us everything about the assembly; as I said, he completed the word of God. Paul spoke to the Corinthians in the most touching way as to the assembly; he said, "I have espoused you unto one man", and I appeal to the young people who are not espoused to Him, that Christ should be *in the heart*, the hidden Man of the heart. Learn to keep things hidden. We are not to cast our pearls before swine, we are to learn to be mysterious, for the mystery of God *is* a mystery to those who are not Christ's; and we have to be mysterious in order to hold to it, and that it may work out in our ways and walk and enjoyment. So we have this wonderful scene, and John writes his name down to show he is a competent witness of it. He understands what he is saying: "I John saw the holy city,
{502}
the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband". John the baptist said, "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom". Now we have the *bride herself*, the secret of God, what He cherishes. God has been pleased to make it known after centuries, as Paul tells us in the epistle to the Romans, "By prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the eternal God, made known for obedience of faith to all the nations -- the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever, Amen". Paul did not tell it out when he was before the gentile monarchies. It was not for them, nor revealed to them, not for the world; the world knew nothing of it, and can know nothing of it. But God had it in His heart, and it is now brought to light, as already noted. John had light as to the assembly in a peculiar way, as the Revelation was signified to him; the Lord Himself having received it from God.
The last word from God is through Paul, because it says he completed the word of God, and that "by revelation the mystery has been made known to me", @Ephesians 3: 3. It is not that other things were not stated, but as to the general range of truth, what is in the mind of God is all disclosed through Paul. As has been urged by a great servant when departing to be with Christ: 'Do not forget John, but cleave to Paul'. He is the minister of the assembly. So now John *knows*, the Revelation confirming Paul. A great point in this book is that it is made known to the *bondmen*, not to the apostles, from heaven; but to the bondmen, those who are bond-servants of Christ. In form and character it is a new thing; "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his bondmen what must shortly take place". You can see therefore what a place John has in this book; he is the writer of it, and the Lord tells him how to divide it, how it should be
{503}
written. He shows him the subjects and the order in which they should be written. It is all done according to the Lord's direction. Hence we have this wonderful book: "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him". It is wonderful that the Lord should take the place of receiving a revelation from God and giving it to His servant John! This is the book, and we are told there is a premium on reading it and understanding it.
Now the great final thought is this: "I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea". A great change from mere provisional conditions, rain and snow and sunshine and heat, changing all the time, but here things are fixed, they are settled. It is a question of what comes out of heaven from God "I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea". Then he says, "I John, saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband".
Let us be encouraged, dear brethren, to look into these matters that have been before us and weigh what they are intended to convey, and the Lord will give us understanding as to them. We ourselves are part of the heavenly system, part of the assembly, this very thing that is called here "the holy city", the word 'city' pointing to a system of things, and we ourselves are part of it. Can we read anything more encouraging than this very thing, of which we form a part, coming down from God out of heaven having the glory of God and prepared as a bride adorned for her husband? How much there is for our hearts in all this, as we read, sympathetically with the Lord Jesus, what He will come into publicly, and what God will come into! It is *God* here, and what He has in the heavenly city, Christ having part in it.
{504}
All is told out, it is a matter of love told out, this wonderful theme now disclosed in time, "which in other generations has not been made known to the sons of men, as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the power of the Spirit, that they who are of the nations should be joint heirs, and a joint body, and joint partakers of his promise in Christ Jesus by the glad tidings; of which I am become minister according to the gift of the grace of God given to me, according to the working of his power", @Ephesians 3: 5 - 7.
{505}
RIGHTEOUSNESS
@Matthew 3: 13 - 15; @Matthew 5: 6, 20; @Matthew 6: 33
I have in mind to speak about righteousness and I have selected Matthew to read from because he speaks of it more fully than do any of the other evangelists; indeed he speaks more of it than do all of the others put together. One reason for this is undoubtedly that Matthew is what I might call the ecclesiastical evangelist. Ecclesiastical, or assembly, difficulties are usually the most difficult, occasioning cloudiness, the enemy being set against the assembly, or more accurately -- against Christ and the assembly. So that we have the word, "the controversy of Zion", @Isaiah 34: 8. So that in the main the conflict is in relation to the assembly now, and Matthew affords us a great instrument of righteousness, a great weapon, I may say of righteousness, "the breastplate of righteousness", @Ephesians 6:14. Without it our conflict must go dead against us, we shall come in for irretrievable defeat. And so Matthew begins with great personalities; they are not mentioned simply as by themselves, but because they are in the line of Christ. They begin with Abraham; it is very apt indeed that it should be so, that Abraham the righteous should head this list of @Matthew 1: "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham" (verse 1). The personages are usually written prefaced with the article, as if they were known personages; that is, known not in the history of the world -- though it has its great personages -- but in the history of the testimony of God. No dignity is of any value outside of that. Matthew gives us a wonderful list of personages, of personalities, and the element of righteousness runs down in these personalities, beginning, as I said, with Abraham, the righteous. He
{506}
was *accounted* righteous: "Even as Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness" (@Galatians 3: 6); that is, he had righteousness directly from God on God's principle, that is, the principle of faith. Now Matthew brings in Joseph, the Lord's reputed father, as an example, for usually Scripture in dealing with a great subject exemplifies it in some person. There are many persons in Matthew who are exemplified as righteous; indeed, it is he who tells us about righteous blood. There is a good deal made about blood today by certain classes, but righteous blood is blood of some account. Abel's blood is called "righteous blood" by the Lord Jesus in Matthew. Joseph is addressed by an angel in a dream as the son of David after he had just been designated as a righteous man. He was righteous in relation to a most delicate matter, which I might classify as an assembly matter. Issues that come up in Scripture are not always crystal-like on the outside. They are to the anointed eye, but not always to those of others, And so Joseph had a delicate matter on hand, a matter that was not outwardly clear, the most important matter conceivable to a righteous man, as to how to deal with it. He pondered the matter. In an assembly crisis, dear brethren, matters have to be pondered. They come up from time to time, and they never will cease to come up while the assembly is here. They require delicate handling. Here, it is a question of Christ and the assembly. We are not to be too hasty in dealing with assembly matters, we are to ponder them, and that is what Joseph did here. In the pondering he had time for the exercise of his own righteous senses and sensibilities, but God had time, too. Let us give God time. He deserves time. He made time, He was the first to use it, and certainly He should be allowed to have it in helping us in
{507}
assembly matters. So that while Joseph is pondering he has a dream in which he is directed what to do, and he does it. He is a righteous man. A righteous man is never wilful, and a wilful man is never righteous. Joseph was a righteous man, and he was a subject man. Matthew makes more of him than Luke does; he fits in with Matthew's line of thought, the line the Spirit of God gave him in the presentation of the truth. He sets him in the front page, as it were, as an example for us. A man who is righteous ponders things: "But in the multitude of counsellors there is safety", @Proverbs 11: 14. Everything in this case had to be weighed carefully from all sides and that is what Joseph did; he pondered the matter, and then the angel appeared and spoke to him and told him what to do. He did it, and he became the custodian of the precious Babe. "Take to thee the little child and his mother, and flee into Egypt", he is told, @Matthew 2: 13. He was the custodian at the time when the Lord needed him. As custodians under God, as we pursue His way, we shall become entrusted with things, dear brethren, in the assembly, because there is great need of custodianship in the assembly. One has often said that there are many more preachers and teachers than elders and deacons. It is not the service of the preacher to be a custodian of the truth, an elder is entrusted with that; I mean that he is the custodian of the saints; he has to take care of the assembly. Joseph was entrusted with the most precious charge with which any one ever was entrusted, and he faithfully kept it. Now that is a good prelude to what I have to say.
Joseph has a great cloud of witnesses behind him in the first chapter, a cloud of witnesses not present or living, but persons who attested the great principle of righteousness in their service here below, whether as kings or judges or whatever they might
{508}
have been, or fathers like Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. "Joseph, son of David", that is how the angel addresses him, an honourable title; he was a carpenter by trade, but that is not Matthew's line, a great person worthy of the gospel in which he is found. And so he is entrusted with the greatest charge that any one ever had. Next in greatness to the charge as to Christ is the charge of the assembly, and the elders are to take care of the assembly. So that we do well to lay ourselves open, brothers and sisters, to be elders and deacons or deaconesses, to take care of things; because there is great exposure abroad, the enemy going about like a roaring lion devouring whom he may, and the elder is to stand between the object of the devil and the devil, to stand between, just as David did when he took charge of the lamb and saved it from the lion. He was more like an elder than a king at first. His haughty brother says, "With whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness?" He had left them with a keeper. So I refer to this as most important in Matthew's gospel in view of the assembly, that there should be persons like Joseph who ponder things. His dreams show that heaven reveals its mind and directs what is to be done, and he does it, and this qualifies him for greater things. He obtained for himself "a good degree, and much boldness in faith which is in Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 3: 13.
Well now, coming to my first scripture, this is the Lord Himself, as you might expect. We are to get the clue from Him in its fulness. He came to John; He came from Galilee, He did not come by way of Jerusalem. Of course it would have been a long round-about way, but He could have done it and come through Jerusalem with a certain dignity. But He came from Galilee to John, in a lowly attitude, to be baptised of him. John, a righteous man, says, "I have need to be baptised of thee", but the Lord
{509}
says, so to speak, We, you and I, must study this question of righteousness. Let us do it; why not do it? "For thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". What an order! What an obligation! John did not shrink from it. We are told later by the Lord Himself that he came in the way of it. There is such a thing as the way of righteousness and John came in that way. Let us see to it that we are on that way; not simply to ask for fellowship, as we say, but to enter on that way. The word 'way' in Acts is a symbol of Christianity; it is the divine way. John came in that way; the Lord Jesus came in that way too. He came to John, because it is a question of divine appointment and John had an appointment. He was a baptist. John says, "*I* have need to be baptised of thee", which was true as regards personalities, but the Lord says, You are to do the baptising now. Let us not shrink from anything that is appointed to us, for God makes appointments that sometimes surprise us, and the point is to be ready. God's eye runs to and fro among the brethren. He has so many offices to be filled. One wonders how Washington and London can get through with all their appointments, but think of heaven and all that is in the hand of Christ! Think of the whole world that we have never compassed and never will. And then the worlds: heaven is occupied day and night with those worlds as well as with ours. What are we conversant with? The saints, and then the myriads of humanity? Heaven is engaged with all. It is engaged with the nations, with matters of national importance, with armies and navies: all are the objects of heaven's interest. Think of what is going on up there! So that God has a great many offices to fill. I am not speaking now of ourselves being up there but down here. The greatest personages at the moment are those who are engaged in the assembly service. That is, we
{510}
are looking at things as servants, and heaven is full of vacancies, if you will allow me to use that simple expression; heaven's eye is upon us and sometimes puts us into positions we are not equal to. Not that we should be unequal to such appointments, for if heaven makes an appointment it will work out. Be in line for such, for that way is the way of righteousness. Be in the way of it. Heaven is looking at the way of righteousness. John came that way; he was spoken of in connection with it long before he was born. So the Lord brings in that great principle here: "For thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". Let us not put it aside. It becometh us wherever we are.
Now I go on to chapter 5 where the Lord sits Himself down on the mountain to lay out principles; for that is what these three chapters are, chapters 5, 6 and 7 of this gospel; they are chapters of principles; they are the Lord's unfolding of Himself. It is the mountain of righteousness, this first mountain in Matthew, and I shall read the verse that tells us from the Lord's lips that "Blessed they who hunger and thirst after righteousness for *they* shall be filled". Think of a man filled with righteousness! The suggestion is that you have an appetite; food goes down easily with an appetite. When it becomes a matter of hunger and thirst, how ravenous the person is! But ravenous for what? For the greatest thing -- righteousness. Let it get into the very inwards, dear brethren. If it is hungered for and thirsted for, you will be filled. The idea is, there is an appetite sufficiently keen to swallow it down, so that you are filled. That is one of the first principles of this great chapter of principles, of these three great chapters of principles by Matthew.
The next one is comparative righteousness. The Lord says to His disciples, "For I say unto you, that unless your righteousness surpass that of the
{511}
scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of the heavens" (verse 20). This is comparative righteousness. We are often far too general in dealing with the things of God. Sometimes generalities are right: Scripture affords us examples of generalising things; but it also affords us examples of the principles of gradation. That is to say, in dealing with persons we have to learn to grade them. There are @numbers 1, 2, 3, 4; that is a principle with God, the principle of grading. Now it is a question of righteousness and the Lord is dealing with His disciples. They are going to take His place here, and He is going to heaven. Matthew supposes that the Lord stays down here in some sort of way. Of course you cannot set aside Luke, for Luke tells us that the Lord went to heaven. In fact, if you look at Luke you would think that the Lord went up to heaven immediately after He was raised. The urgency is that that Man should be up there, the Centre of things administratively; that is how Luke presents Him. Matthew does not, Matthew is speaking, as we might say, as to the Lord's presence mystically. Do not be afraid of that word, because Matthew deals with the word 'mystery'. We have to use words in a balanced way, and the word 'mystery' has a great place in Matthew; therefore we have the idea of mysticism, but only in a very limited degree. How is the Lord here according to Matthew? "And behold, I am with you all the days, until the completion of the age" (chapter 28: 20). It must be true; it is true to certain persons; it is true to persons who understand mystery. Why should we not understand mystery? Well, if we do not, we shall not understand this verse. For in it heaven and earth are brought very near; in fact they are here in Christ. So that He says, "*I* am with you all the days". I ask myself, Did I find the Lord today down here? But, you say, He is
{512}
up there. Certainly; but He is down here. And if He were not, where should we be? What would happen to us? We should be swallowed up in the furnace of war and politics, society, and business. We could not keep ourselves balanced. Paul says, "But the Lord stood with me, and gave me power", @2 Timothy 4: 17. That was not in heaven: He "stood with me".
So here it is a question of the scribes and Pharisees. They are people to whom Matthew alludes frequently. He is dealing with Judaism, his standpoint is what is Jewish, and the church coming in to take its place. The church taking the place of Israel is not arbitrary; it is a matter of superiority, a thing that must be. Judaism was simply put out by the superiority of the assembly. Well, the Lord says, if you are going to be in that you must be a little more righteous than the scribes and Pharisees. I am speaking now for the moment of grading things, and the Lord says, If you do not exceed them in righteousness you have no part in the kingdom of heaven, and of course that shuts you out of the assembly. I cannot attend the care meeting if I am not righteous, but not only that, if I am not more righteous than the scribes and Pharisees. I must compare myself with others. It is not true that anything will do for the assembly or for the care meeting. God is particular, and He says, Look at these persons and grade yourselves. Certainly as regards the scribes and Pharisees they are out of the matter, and if you are like them, then you have no part in the kingdom of heaven, that is administration; you cannot attend the care meeting.
The third scripture is in chapter 6: "But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you" (verse 33). Here we are dealing with the highest thought, with God's righteousness. This brings up another
{513}
thing: not only the thought of righteousness, the quality of righteousness, but persons who are called righteous. The Lord says that "he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward", @Matthew 10: 41. So that if I am moving about with a letter of commendation, seeking to be received among the brethren, it is a question of whether I am a righteous man. It is not just anybody being received. God has a great regard for righteousness, and if I am moving about it is a question of my being righteous. This great country affords much opportunity for travel, but very few righteous men. So the great conversation takes place between Abraham the righteous and Jehovah as to this matter of righteous men. They were together and the two angels went on. It was a question of Abraham and Jehovah. That was something that came into Abraham's experience of great importance. Jehovah would link Abraham on with Himself and say, I and you. That is God's gracious way of dealing with us. How delightful it is after a long journey to meet a righteous man at the station; not just anybody, but a righteous man! And so God was on a journey. The angels went on, but Jehovah tarried with Abraham. How remarkable that was! And Abraham knew -- he was conversant with what was current. All righteous men, all really righteous men are conversant with what is divinely current; not with what men are doing, but what God is doing, and God is doing things all the time. Every righteous man wants to be in the current of God's mind and Abraham would say, I know where You are going, You are going down to Sodom. He was; He says, I am going down to see if the city is just as bad as it seems to be, for the cry of it has come up to Me. Think how righteous God was. You do not accept everything you hear; God says, The cry of
{514}
it has come up to Me and I want to see if it is so. Is it just so? These things are intended to make us worshipful, that God is so simple and gracious. That was the righteous thing for God to do. But Abraham said, so to speak, I want to have an interview with God; and God is open for that with all righteous people. So Abraham says to Jehovah, Suppose there are fifty righteous people in the city of Sodom? Well, Jehovah says, I will spare the city for those fifty. That is what God is.
Think of what God brought into that land of Palestine on the plain of Mamre -- He brought heaven down! What is up there is righteousness in the city of God. The city is pure gold, and that is what is meant, that it is unvarying in its value. You cannot depreciate righteousness in heaven. You can on earth, but not in heaven, righteousness has standard value in heaven. God says to Abraham, I am bringing it down here, and I want to know if there is any of it in Sodom. Abraham says, Suppose there are fifty righteous? That was the subject of their conversation, the question of righteous people. God says, I will spare the city for fifty. I do not know if Abraham would even have gone so far as to say that Lot was righteous, but Peter says he was. By the Spirit of God Peter says that Lot was a righteous man. That is a comfort, because it would be hard to get him into fellowship today if his case came up at the care meeting. I do not think that a man who goes to the cinema, who goes where he likes, is fit for fellowship, or that he is a righteous man. Still, Lot was a righteous man, and he had a righteous soul too, as the Spirit of God says, so we must not forget that. That is the only basis there is for recovery. If a man is not righteous in some sense, then he is hopeless. Abraham goes on, Forty-five? I will save them for forty-five. Forty? I will save them for forty.
{515}
Thirty? Yes, I will spare them for thirty. Twenty? Yes, for twenty. Ten? Yes, for ten. Well, that is wonderful, but Abraham is saying in his heart, Poor Lot! He would go down the list of names of his sons and daughters, and say to himself, Can I look at them as righteous? He would think, I could not have the heart to go to Jehovah and say, There is my nephew Lot and his wife and there are his daughters and sons: they are righteous. And he did not; he did not go below ten. He saw that God was getting down to the real facts of the case; God was ready for anything in regard to righteousness, and Abraham stopped. Well now, that is our position. Whom can we designate as righteous? I was speaking of going with a letter of commendation around this country hoping to be received: the point is, I am to go as a righteous man and be received in the name of a righteous man and so someone is to get the righteous man's reward. Who will get the righteous man's reward? The man who receives me in the name of a righteous man. Let us look into this matter and see if we cannot set ourselves up in the grace of God in practical righteousness. It involves three righteous men. The letter is addressed to a righteous man. One righteous man writes the letter, one carries it, and one receives it, and the reward comes. That is really the way things are going, and it is a wonderful way too. And so peace goes with it: "Righteousness and peace have kissed each other", @Psalm 85: 10. Righteousness and peace go together, "But the fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for them that make peace", @James 3: 18. So that it is a question now of the multiplication of righteousness, and that brings us to this last verse: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness". His righteousness -- that is not ordinary righteousness; that is not the righteousness
{516}
of the scribes and Pharisees, nor is it the ordinary righteousness of each of us. It is God's. Surely there must be a standard in the quality of righteousness, and that is what the city means, it is the standard of everything in it. You cannot excel any commodity, any article, any metal in the heavenly city; there is nothing better, it is the very best in the universe. That is the principle of it as to everything, and above all as to righteousness. It is the standard of righteousness. That is what is being worked out in these visits all over the world. At the moment there is not very much crossing of the ocean, but I hope there soon will be, and then it will be a question of the carrying out of righteousness; that is, the brother who writes the letter and the brother who carries it and the brother who receives it, and then there is the reward. Where is that coming from? Putting these three together you will get the reward. That is to say, the visits to the places and the participation in the meetings bring a reward. That is God's way.. So that you get ministry, however far away the place may be. The further a brother travels the more likely he is to be helped. It is a greater test to serve in one's own locality than one thousand miles away, because distance lends a certain amount of glory to a man as he visits other places; but in truth righteousness is righteousness.
Thus, the idea is building up the assembly, so that it is all pure gold. Therefore, the Lord says, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God", that is the administrative side; "and his righteousness". His righteousness must be finally garnered, it is so precious. It is the standard of administration; the kingdom of the heavens is all a question of promoting this thing, so that it becomes qualitative in the assembly and quantitative too. There is plenty of it and of the finest quality. That, I think, is of the
{517}
highest importance in our movements. As I said, it is the righteous man who is to be received. His name is honoured, his name is honoured where he is known; then some righteous man who knows him writes a letter and the man is received in his name. But he is also received by a righteous man, and the result is the reward of a righteous man, wherever he is. You might say that is a fourth, but it is a question of the kind of man. He must be there. I am speaking about righteousness, the thing itself, and how it culminates under the title of God's righteousness and how it appears in the heavenly city which is said to be pure gold, like transparent glass. A righteous man has no dark parts; all he is doing is bearing in one direction, and that is on the assembly, so that the assembly is pure gold. There is no part dark, "and the city pure gold, like pure glass", @Revelation 21: 18. Think of that! We are moving on to that. We have just sung, "God's righteousness with glory bright"; we are going on to that, but then we are carrying it with us. It is not that we find it there, we go with it; we develop it, we have it, we belong to it, we are walking in it, as it says, "that we might be made the righteousness of God in him". So that we have part in the heavenly city, in what is pure gold as transparent glass. Think of belonging to that! We belong to that already, it is being worked out now, and it is on this principle, dear brethren, that I have been speaking of it in the assembly. The current of our exercises is in that direction, that there might be righteousness in the building up of the assembly in righteousness.
{518}
THE PROVISIONAL CHARACTER OF THE KINGDOM
@Matthew 17: 1 - 9; @John 18: 28 - 37
J.T. These scriptures are proposed for comparison's sake. The first is to call attention to the glory of Christ's kingdom, which appeared to these apostles, clearly in order to affect them in view of their ministry. The second is to bring out the character of the kingdom now. The Lord was rejected and crucified and His royal position and rights here were affected, so that things did not proceed according to what might have been expected. There needed to be an adjustment in that He was not received by the Jews to be their King. What form has the kingdom taken now? Is it a form which is to be continued, or is it just provisional, necessitated because of His rejection? We shall see, I believe, that it is not to abide, as many of us already know.
It is a provisional kingdom and does not carry all the characteristics of the kingdom of David. When the Lord was born the angel told Mary that He should be given the throne of His father David, and that He should rule over the house of Jacob for ever. So the kingdom of His father David is evidently in abeyance. The conversation between the Lord and Pilate opens up to us much instruction as to the present provisional time in which many things, which will be seen later, are in suspension. But the glory of the kingdom, that is, the glory of the Son of man coming into it, should affect us in our service just as it was intended to affect the early servants in theirs. At the same time we are sobered and challenged by what the Lord says to Pilate in John's gospel.
It is clear that the incident in Matthew was designed by the Lord. In the previous chapter (@Matthew 16: 28), the Lord says, "Verily I say unto you,
{519}
There are some of those standing here that shall not taste of death at all until they shall have seen the Son of man coming in his kingdom". Notice that it is not the kingdom of God in this gospel as it is in those of Mark and Luke. It is the kingdom of the Son of man, and yet the facts presented are similar in all three gospels.
A.B.P. Do you have in mind that the kingdom of God come in power, according to Mark, is a present thing; whereas this looks forward to the future?
J.T. I think it is the Son of man coming in His kingdom, which is a coming matter, now deferred. It is the Son of man coming, but it is glorious; whereas Mark and Luke call it the kingdom of God. Mark says it is the kingdom of God come in power; and Luke says it is the kingdom of God. Matthew has in mind what is more personal to Christ, and therefore it can be compared with John, because the Lord says there, "My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought that I might not be delivered up to the Jews", @John 18: 36. So it brings up this whole matter of conscientious feeling now, as to whether we are really conformed to what He says to Pilate.
F.N.W. At what point does the stone cut out without hands in Daniel, smite the image?
J.T. That is more future, I would say. @Revelation 11: 15 says, "The kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ is come". That is a future thing. It is cut out without hands and it breaks in pieces the other kingdoms and continues for ever, but this of which the Lord speaks to Pilate is clearly a provisional situation pending the time when He takes on the kingdom according to Daniel, because that will be a public matter, and the sword will be attached to it clearly, according to many scriptures especially @Revelation 19, but in the provisional state of things in this scripture, the sword is not in evidence.
{520}
We are not to destroy it, for it will be used later, because they will beat their swords into plowshares, but it is not destroyed; it is just put back in its place. Peter used the one that he had, and the Lord says, "Return thy sword to its place; for all who take the sword shall perish by the sword", @Matthew 26: 52. It was a question of not using the sword to defend Himself or His disciples either, but of suffering. The will of God required suffering.
A.R. When Peter refers to "having been eyewitnesses of *his* majesty" (@2 Peter 1: 16), does he have in mind Matthew's account, His face shining as the sun?
J.T. Yes; that would be His majesty, the glory of the Son of man in a coming day. It is here just to influence the saints in service, and we can see that Peter was very much influenced. How different his mind was when he wrote his second letter from what it is here. He did not have much more thought here of Jesus than he did of Moses and Elias.
J.S. Is it to enhance His personal greatness?
J.T. That is the idea, the Son of man coming in His kingdom. It is a personal matter. His movement and appearance in it, so that His countenance is like the sun.
A.N.W. Is the thought you have before you seen in the Lord saying, "Tell the vision to no one" on the one hand, and His enlarging on His path of suffering on the other?
J.T. That is what comes out both before and after. Chapter 16 specially speaks about what they were going to do to Him. It says in verse 21: "From that time Jesus began to show to his disciples that he must go away to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed". And then in verse 22 of chapter 17, He says, "And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man is about to be delivered
{521}
up into the hands of men, and they shall kill him". That is, the Jews first; and then, men. So that it is clearly the order of things coming down from the Old Testament as held up by this mediatorial attitude, so that we are told elsewhere, "A certain high-born man went ... to receive for himself a kingdom and return", @Luke 19: 12. That is a primary thought; that is final. He is to receive that, but what is going on in the meantime? That is what I thought we might see. What an extraordinary state of things it is, not heralded before, not prophesied of before, really; so we are to accommodate ourselves to the change-over.
G.V.D. When the disciples in @Acts 1: 6 asked, "Lord, is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel?" does not the Lord go on to refer to what is to take place in the meantime?
J.T. Yes; He does not satisfy their inquiry at all. He says, The Spirit is coming and you will be My witnesses. It is left open. It is the time of the Spirit; it is just left open pending the final set-up of things. It is a most nondescript state of things, and we are to be that too. It is not easy to make clear to people the extraordinary change that has come in.
R.W.S. It was not clear to the disciples. Their minds were not clear about the kingdom.
J.T. They were not. After all the instruction they received from the Lord they said, "Is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel?" That was clearly what was in their minds. They did not say a word about the assembly. He had spoken to them about the assembly -- "My assembly". Why did they not ask Him about that?
C.A.M. "Shall not taste of death at all". They did not put any meaning on that expression perhaps.
J.T. Well, it has been said they did not understand anything He said.
{522}
C.A.M. I suppose that is true, of course. What do you read into that? "There are some of those standing here that shall not taste of death at all until they shall have seen the Son of man coming in his kingdom".
J.T. I think it is to bring the thing before them vividly. They were to see the Son of man coming in His kingdom. It would be a great matter. They might have thought it would be the final setting up of the kingdom, that the time had come for it, as He says in @John 12: 23, "The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified". The time had come. The kingdom required the setting up of things, but everything was knocked on the head because of what the Jews were going to do to Him, and what men were going to do too. What could He do with the Jews and men if their attitude is murderous? He has to go back to heaven to await the change. But in the meantime is heaven to be idle? Is He to be idle? What is to be done? That gives time for God to disclose His hidden purpose in the assembly and that is the present time.
C.A.M. I suppose as these men drew near to death and evidently faced it, the glory grew brighter in their souls?
J.T. It was evidently to affect them. It was eight days after at the longest, according to Luke, that the word was fulfilled. So these men would not die for these eight days anyway. I think the wording is intended to make the thing impressive, that it is going to happen immediately. But then is it really to end finally? Is it a settled matter? Or is it a provisional appearing for the sake of the testimony? Clearly that is what it is. After the scene of glory the "disciples demanded of him saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias must first have come? And he answering said to them, Elias indeed comes first and will restore all things" (verses 10, 11). We have to
{523}
understand what He is saying here, as to whether it is going to happen immediately or whether it is just left open. "But I say unto you that Elias has already come, and they have not known him, but have done unto him whatever they would" (verse 12). We have now to turn around and see if Elias has really come? It is rather that John the baptist fills the function provisionally. It is not really Elias according to Malachi. It is John the baptist, but the function of Elias as far as the provisional state of things is concerned had taken place. That is how the matter is put. Elias is still to come. What one is impressed with is the need of getting the brethren to look at things as they are in Scripture, not to put them in pigeon-holes, but to get alongside the Lord and see what He is working out, what is provisional and what is final. We are in the provisional, and it is not so easy to explain it.
A.A.T. What kingdom is Paul referring to when he wrote to the saints in Rome and said, "The kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14: 17?
J.T. That is the kingdom of God as it is now. As we said already, this same event is called the kingdom of God in Mark and Luke, but it is not called the kingdom of God here. Therefore we have to look at one thing in two aspects, or a dozen aspects maybe, and not say it is just that and nothing more. We have to be on the alert and move spiritually all the time.
J.S. Is the kingdom of the Son of man a much wider thought than Israel only?
J.T. The Son of man is a wider thought. It is the whole race of men.
A.R. The idea of what is provisional is seen in that we are not told the duration of this vision on
{524}
the mountain. It is just said to be six or eight days after.
J.T. No. We have to be on the alert all the time. You cannot put things down with your pencil; this is this, that is that. It is a changing or provisional state of things we are in, and we want to be with the movement; it is not easy to show from the prophets this present provisional phase of the kingdom of the Son of man as it is. If we were to describe the kingdom of David, it might be thought to suit the present time; but we are at a disadvantage because that kingdom will have the sword and there will be real fighting, so that is not the kingdom today at all. It is a provisional state of things today.
T.W. This period that the Lord speaks of as "my kingdom" was just for that time. He came to die, and the period would not extend to now.
J.T. That is not so. It does extend. It is just how things are now. He is rejected and has gone to heaven, and He told them at this particular time they were not to use the sword, but put it back in its place. They were not to destroy it. "My kingdom is not of this world". Well, David's would fit in, and it will again, because all the nations will be dealt with in a coming day when the Lord Jesus takes up His kingdom, sitting on His own throne; but in the meantime, He is on His Father's throne. That shows us that this is a provisional state of things, that it is not fixed.
A.B.P. Peter speaks of the power and coming of our Lord in relation to this. The power therefore is moral power; not the power of the sword, but there is power nevertheless.
J.T. Power to carry on what is to be done; that is, it is a question of the gospel and the calling out of the assembly. The assembly is a hidden matter, and we are brought into all this. It is a question of
{525}
being able to speak about it intelligently when the matter Comes up.
J.S. Do you link grace and truth with the Son of man?
J.T. Quite so; that enters into it. It is a personal matter here, to enhance the testimony they were to render, but they were to have it in their souls just as Paul, having been in paradise, was to have it in his soul. It is a question of making us great inwardly; so we are to know how to accommodate ourselves to whatever the word of God may require, what the mind of God, the Spirit of God, might require at any time, and to be ready for it. 
Ques. What is the difference between this and the kingdom of the heavens? I was thinking of the man who brought things new and old out of his treasury. Does that enter into it?
J.T. The kingdom of the heavens is another matter. We might speak of the British Empire. It is the kingdom or empire coming from Great Britain. It is not a question of the emperor of Great Britain but a kingdom or empire emanating from a certain section of the earth. So the kingdom of God takes the form according to Matthew of the kingdom of the heavens. He is stressing this that it is a kingdom that has its existence or control there instead of being controlled from Jerusalem down here.
W.R. Do you think that being of the kingdom enhances personality, and the glory of the person of Christ is carried forward?
J.T. Yes: this chapter is a chapter of personality, and that is why we have sonship introduced in such a striking manner at the end of it. But instead of the glory of the kingdom, you have a murdered Christ, and sonship is to enter into the provisional state of things; that is, we have to deal with people demanding from us such things as the temple tax, and we have to know what to do about it. It is an
{526}
extraordinary state of things, because you have to get down before God and ask Him to tell you how to act in these continually changing circumstances.
R.W.S. Luke says, "Lo here, or, Lo there" (chapter 17: 21), as if that might cause some disquietude of mind; whereas the matter is one. There is the same standard in the testimony in the minds of all our young brothers in Australia and England as well as here. It is not, "Lo here, or Lo there". It is a standard matter.
J.T. Just so; I think John's gospel is for the last days. The more you see it, the more it impresses you that he has really written in view of our times; so we have no healing of the ear of the bondman of the high priest in John, we have no repentance of Peter because he denied the Lord. John would say to us, Well, terrible things are happening, you must just accept them. What an awful thing that Peter should deny the Lord, and not confess anything about it, and he could cut off a servant's ear, and the Lord does not do anything about it. Things are to go on. Things are to survive in the presence of all this. That is what John means, so that the conversation with Pilate is peculiar to John, and we have to follow it, because the Jews did not want to come into the praetorium. It was the passover time. Pilate does not break that up. He just leaves it, the great religious status as it was before. The government recognised it. Pilate has to go out to the Jews; instead of their going to him into the palace, he goes out to them. That is not an advantage to the government. It is really a breakdown of government, because while the Romans were professedly governing Judea, they were not, not at this point anyway.
A.N.W. That was on account of their religious scruples.
J.T. There is the tremendous system now after fifteen hundred years, and they do pretty well as
{527}
they like wherever they go. You just have to accept that. Sometimes they have more power than the government.
A.B.P. Is not the secret here in what Moses and Elias say? Both of them seen on the mountain were speaking of Jesus. Apparently there is a message in that.
J.T. Matthew does not record as much as Luke does, but says, "He was transfigured before them". The point is, they are to see this transfiguration. It is not a universal matter. It is for these three persons to see. They represent the ministry, and then we are told, "his face shone as the sun, and his garments became white as the light; and lo, Moses and Elias appeared to them talking with him". Notice "*to them* talking *with him*". They are in mind as we are now in this reading. It is what impresses us. It is for certain ones, not for the universe. Then what is Peter's reaction to all this? Well, "Peter answering said to Jesus, Lord, it is good we should be here. If thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles". He is missing the point, which we are very apt to do. He thought he was taking the lead in making a proposal in a wonderful scene, and he was just unable to do it. He did not know his measure, nor did he have a right apprehension of the Person that was there.
A.B.P. I thought perhaps if they had listened to what was being said there certainly would not be anything in the word of Moses and Elias that would give a distorted view of the thing.
J.T. Just so; if they had profited by the great experiences they had, especially that of Peter in chapter 16, they would not have thought of a proposal like this. That is, he is showing he has not been learning, and that is one of the great points made, that they have not really learned from their advantages all along. Therefore, Peter is blundering
{528}
here, so that it is said the cloud came in immediately to settle the matter. "While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them, and lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying, *This* is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight: hear him". That is to adjust Peter. So we have to come to that and see whether we are listening aright and learning in our opportunities, and then if we have not been, we are to correct ourselves and not leave our correction indefinite.
C.A.M. Sonship was the thought. In this next paragraph there is the terrible thing happening to this man's son; would you think that the happenings of the present time are in order to supplement the ministry as to sonship?
J.T. I would go with that. There is one thing that encourages you here; that is this blundering of Peter, and then the matter with the boy, as you say. Is the thought not to expose us as to our slowness, because He is speaking of this now, their slowness in taking in things in advantageous circumstances? The man says to the Lord, I brought him to thy disciples and they could not do anything. The Lord says, "O unbelieving and perverted generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you?" So the disciples were included in that. That is a most solemn thing. It would look as if the teaching in the chapter is to impress us with how slow we are in taking things in and being formed by them. This thought of sonship seems to be the only way to set us up in dignity, so that we take in things according to the mind of Christ. We have the mind of Christ; that is, His power of thinking.
C.A.M. Perhaps if we took that in and were cast on the Lord in faith those things would change in view of the saints.
J.T. Well, you can see right through this chapter, Peter, and Peter, and Peter. He was ready to pay
{529}
the tax. He told the Lord. He knew the order of things among the kings of the nations. How did he know that? Had he read history? Had he read accounts of royal houses and the condition in Rome? He is able to tell the Lord what they did in these royal places, but he did not know how to act in regard of the Lord's royal economy. He was at a loss right through.
W.R. How do you account for this in Peter? It seems as though in the previous chapter when he confesses Christ it is by revelation. The Lord is unique over against others.
J.T. He would have turned the Lord aside from death immediately after that. 'Pity thyself'; again he is at fault, and yet in spite of all that, the Lord says, This is the man I am going to use, so that we are encouraged all the time. For it is, "First, Simon, who was called Peter" in @Matthew 10: 2. So that we are not to be discouraged, but acknowledge our faults.
J.S. He is not left out of the cloud; the cloud overshadowed them.
J.T. And the voice out of the cloud says, "*This* is my beloved Son". It is a question of being set right, but we cannot be set right without telling others we have been wrong.
A.B.P. Would you say that while Peter did not show up very well in the main, his salvation would be that he must have gotten on his knees before the meeting and gotten adjustment after the meeting?
J.T. Luke tells us he went through much and made confessions.
F.S.C. When he says, We "were eyewitnesses of his majesty", he was speaking of the King.
J.T. Just so. He had got right there. He was about to put off his tabernacle. What a fine finish! What a glorious thought that is as to a man who made so many blunders, and of course there is not
{530}
one of us that has not made blunders. We make them and do not say anything about them; I mean, even in the meeting.
A.A.T. In his epistles, he reviewed the incident himself, and he speaks of it and says, "He received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son", @2 Peter 1: 17. He speaks of it there as the excellent glory.
J.T. What a great impression he has of Christ now! That is the only place in his writings, I think, that he calls Him Son. He calls Him Son when he made his confession, and then here in the second letter, showing how thoroughly he was under divine impression in his ministry. It was not for him to stress sonship. That was for Paul in his ministry and John in his gospel. 
Rem. He makes much in his ministry of Paul. He calls him "beloved brother". He had made a mistake as to him.
J.T. That goes with the recovery. We make much of Christ and make much of the brethren. That is true recovery. We make room for the brethren too.
A.R. Why is it that Matthew calls attention so much to the idea of the King including this thought of His face shining as the sun? Matthew speaks more of the Lord as King than any other.
J.T. He does. "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ". He begins with that, and it runs through in his gospel. I think the idea is to support the truth of the assembly, that royalty must be behind to support and govern the assembly. Matthew makes more of the King than any other.
A.R. Would the idea of royalty in Matthew enable us to stand before men in royalty? The Lord says, I am a King. He came before Pilate, and then
{531}
He says, I have servants. Would the servants as understanding royalty in Matthew, be royal in standing before men?
J.T. They would, quite so; when we come to John, that is what is in mind; that we might make comparisons. Matthew would set these three men up in the light of Christ in His glory coming in His own personal kingdom, for He is coming in His kingdom. They were to have this light in their souls. It would give dignity to them in their ministry, even though they were not speaking of it. It is what you have in your soul. Our thought was that we might see in the conversation with Pilate how the Lord calls it "my kingdom", not the kingdom of God: "My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought that I might not be delivered up to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not from hence". This is to the governor. It is a circumstantial position. Pilate is the governor, representing the four monarchies that God had set up, and the Lord tells him about them. Pilate represents these men that we have to deal with today, and we have to learn the Lord's mind from what He said to Pilate. It shows us the light governing the position; not that He is seen as a great royal Person, or as coming in His kingdom as in Matthew, but that He has been rejected, because He is here in the presence of Pilate. Pilate is walking in and out from the praetorium, really subordinating government to Jewish or religious feeling. But what Pilate is engaged with is the greatest possible thing, and the Lord is pleased to speak to him as He spoke to no other man: He spoke about the turn the kingdom was taking because of what was happening, so the Lord met the situation in this way, and we are to understand how to meet the situation. It is an extraordinary situation.
{532}
A.B.P. He did not do it to save Himself. He did it on the basis of the truth.
J.T. Quite so; He was born for this. So it is not an accident. There are no accidents with God, but there are changes on account of circumstances with God, and we have to learn to change with the changes. The will of God requires it. 
Rem. It makes the position somewhat complicated.
J.T. It does, it makes it very complicated. These men would say, 'David was a great warrior; Christ is the Son of David and He is going to reign over the house of David for ever, and He will have swords'; so He will. Well, I have to learn how to answer and to point out that the Lord before Pilate is not saying anything about David's kingdom. He is speaking about His own kingdom. Things have to be set out -- what belongs to David and what belongs to Jesus.
F.N.W. He does not enlarge on His kingship. He leads on to the moral side of the truth in speaking to Pilate. You might have thought He would have enlarged on His being born King.
J.T. That is one of the last things He says. The order is, He had been before Caiaphas the high priest, and then we have Peter's denial and Peter's use of the sword. And then we have in verse 28: "They lead therefore Jesus from Caiaphas to the praetorium; and it was early morn. And *they* entered not into the praetorium". They go that far and did not go in to the governor. Well, there is a defect there. It says, "Pilate therefore went out to them and said, What accusation do ye bring against this man?" He had to come down from his bench in the court and go outside to these men. It is an anomalous state of things, even though it is Judaism.
{533}
A.N.W. You are inferring that the Lord's recognition of kingship extends beyond "King of the Jews" in this statement, are you?
J.T. O yes, in the Lord, you mean? The question of royalty is raised here; it is not premeditated by Pilate but seems to come out. That is what I am seeking to press, the way things turn unexpectedly, and how am I to meet them with intelligence? So He entered into the praetorium. "Pilate therefore went out to them and said, What accusation do ye bring against this man? They answered and said to him, If this man were not an evildoer, we should not have delivered him up to thee. Pilate therefore said to them, Take him, *ye*, and judge him according to your law". Well now, you see, there is a breakdown again. It is an extraordinary state of things. There is the governor, and they bring a man to be tried by him, and he throws him back on them. "The Jews therefore said to him, It is not permitted to us to put any one to death; that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled" Now notice this! That is not overlooked. There is no breakdown in the words of Jesus. They fit perfectly, even here in this extraordinary state of things between the governor and the Jews. "That the word of Jesus might be fulfilled which he spoke, signifying what death he should die". That is brought in by the Spirit. "Pilate therefore entered again into the praetorium and called Jesus, and said to him, Thou art the king of the Jews?" Why did he say that? That came in. "Jesus answered him, Dost thou say this of thyself?" The Lord was going to put everything right, and the young brother before the tribunal has to put things right, because you cannot expect them to be right. As a rule they are never really right at all if you come to examine things.
A.N.W. Do you mean the authorities?
{534}
J.T. Yes; they never have the right view of things. You will always find some defect in it. The Lord says, "Dost thou say this of thyself, or have others said it to thee concerning me?" That was a bold thing of the Lord to do, but it was necessary. This "King of the Jews" -- that is hardly a proper term to hang on the truth. The wise men had come with the same thought. "Where is the king of the Jews that has been born?" @Matthew 2: 2. Pilate has the same thought in his mind and the Lord says where did you get that? Who told you that? You must get things right. The Lord will be with anybody that patiently and humbly and courteously suggests that that is not right. If it is not right, there is a way of saying it is not right without offending anybody.
C.A.M. The name that is given to the Lord seems to govern the situation. I was struck with what you said just now about the name of Jesus and David. The name of Jesus seems to characterize the present situation, whereas in @Revelation 19 what wonderful names the Lord has: Faithful and True, etc.
J.T. When He comes out with His military garb no one knows; it is an inscrutable situation, and this is too. Pilate is using wrong terms. So the Lord says, "Dost thou say this of thyself, or have others said it to thee concerning me? Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thy nation and the chief priests have delivered thee up to me: what hast thou done?" Well now, the Lord says, "My kingdom is not of this world"; He does not say, 'I am King of the Jews'. They would make Him a man of this world for they would fight. Earlier in John they wanted to make Him king because of what He could do in the food question. So the Lord now uses a phrase and could Pilate understand it? It is not God's kingdom or David's kingdom, but *My* kingdom in these circumstances.
{535}
W.R. In the present crisis the younger brethren appearing before the tribunals have brought out how much they have gained in impressions for themselves. Pilate evidently had nothing for himself. He was questioning whether the Lord is King of the Jews. He is not sure of his ground.
J.T. It is clear that I am in a crisis when I am before a tribunal. The whole question of the present provisional kingdom of the Lord Jesus comes up, and over against that the four monarchies which God maintained to govern the world, to police the world in the meantime, running parallel with "my kingdom" as the Lord calls it. The Lord is not taking a hand at all in the government of this world now. Presently He is going to do this, but this conversation means He is not going to do it now. Pilate, you are to do that. Heaven is giving you power to do that.
A.R. It is very difficult to convey to the authorities that you are praying for them but that you cannot fight because you belong to another world.
J.T. What we are saying is the crux of the whole matter; whether I can speak of the position today in this way. The Lord said to Pilate, This is the position. The tribunal is Pilate. There are religious systems around, and they are ready to tell you to recognise Pilate. They recognise Pilate. There is the religious position and Pilate. The Lord said to Pilate, Heaven recognises you, but He did not say that to the high priest. There is no religious system that God recognises at all now, no manmade system. That is the position we are in. So I have to turn my back on the high priest, as it were; whatever he says, I am not going to go by that; I am not going to recognise him as authoritative at all, but Pilate has power from heaven. Here is Jesus, and the trembling young brother who loves Him. Well, what can he say? I am a follower of
{536}
Jesus, and I am going by what He said. That governs the position at the present time. He has a kingdom according to @Matthew 17; it will be a wonderful one too. He is coming out in it. But in the meantime He is put to death, and in being arrested and put to death, He told Peter not to use the sword at all, but to put it back in its sheath. "All who take the sword shall perish by the sword", @Matthew 26: 52. That is the position, so that we cannot use the sword.
C.A.M. Would it be safe to say that the great religious systems that recognise Pilate could really never give the Lord a right name? I mean they never say, "Lord Jesus", by the Spirit, whereas the power in the confession of one that is before these tribunals seems to lie in that.
J.T. There is power in that confession. Quite so. Here is a Man whom I love, and to whom I am responsible, and whom I represent. He has a kingdom, but that kingdom is in abeyance. It has taken on a provisional character, and I want to be in accord with that provisional character until He comes back. He will rule the world and I will be thoroughly with Him, but I cannot take the sword now, because He told one of His disciples not to do it, as plainly as possible.
-- .E. When the Lord said to Pilate, "Dost thou say this of thyself?" was the Lord testing Pilate's personal knowledge of Himself?
J.T. Well, He had moral power to do that. He said in the presence of the high priest, "I spoke openly to the world; I taught always in the synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews come together, and in secret I have spoken nothing". I am not a fifth columnist. What I am doing, I am doing openly, and you can ask those that heard Me. They will tell you. That was a bold thing for the Lord to do in the presence of the high priest, and they smote
{537}
Him on the face because He did that, but He did it and it is infinitely right. Why should He not say that? A Man with power, Christ! When everything was going wrong and the government was being miscarried, He is putting them at the bar, both Pilate and the high priest, but in such a way as to have power. That is the thing, that the Lord gives me moral power in facing these men.
-- .E. Do you think, especially now when our young brethren are away in camp, that having a personal knowledge in their souls of the Lord, they are able in power to confess Him before the men they have to do with?
J.T. That is just what we are seeking to say. The Lord is in power here. You or I might be timid to say such a thing in the presence of the governor but He did it, and He will give you the power to do it too, because the light is in the disciples of Jesus, for all of them, the governors and everybody. There is no other, and if we do not speak, who will speak? But speak in such a way as to have power in what you are saying.
G.V.D. It is a question of moral power and not leaning on any set formula?
J.T. Quite so; it always tells, and the Lord makes it tell.
A.N.W. In addition to moral power, has a young man the right to quote the law? The apostle when they were just about to scourge him said, "Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a Roman?" Is that a right principle -- to appeal?
J.T. Quite so; he cited that he was a Roman. Of course all a brother would say is that the President and Congress have passed a law, and I am taking advantage of that law. He does not say, I am a citizen, or I have a right to be heard. There is a way to do it. I do not see why he should not do it in a comely way. Why should I not take advantage
{538}
of the law of the land? I am to obey the laws. Well, here the Lord says, "My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought that I might not be delivered up to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not from hence". There is the good confession in the presence of Pontius Pilate that Jesus bore. 
Ques. Would you say more as to what the Jews represent? It does not say that he was delivered up to Pilate but delivered up to the Jews.
J.T. Well, they were the ones who were accusing Him. Pilate was abstractly in favour of Christ, and the Lord respected that. It was only through the influence of the Jews that he scourged Him and put Him to death. The Jews were the ones the devil was using. We have to be on our guard against that.
A.B.P. Religious impressions that the public authorities have, have been derived from a faulty source and instead of being helpful to Christians, as the government seeks to be, they are antagonistic.
J.T. They are, and they are trying to convict us against the truth.
A.B.P. It is the religious impressions that cause them to act that way.
J.T. Even a chaplain of a regiment has more that feature. He is not with the government. Why should he not be? I know well these chaplains endeavour to influence men contrary to the law.
A.B.P. That is why I thought it would be helpful to see that the religious impressions which the authorities have should be dissociated in our minds. There are two elements, the Jews and Pilate.
A.R. The chaplains do not know these scriptures, and they do not know God either, generally speaking.
J.T. The Jews represent the religious element here, and they are the ones who are advocating the death of Christ.
{539}
R.W.S. The Lord Himself seems to get somewhere with Pilate to turn away from this religious error, in that he comes out again in verse 38 and says, "I find no fault whatever in him".
J.T. That shows that governments as a rule, abstractly any way, are right; whereas the religious element do not need to be with the right; they have their own interests to serve. They have no mandates from God at all. The Jews had lost their governmental position; the gentiles had superseded them so the Lord honours all that in what He says to Pilate. He recognizes what heaven recognizes. He did not say anything to Herod. He is recognizing what heaven recognizes, and that is what the tribunal is. It is Pilate; it is for the brother who has light to present it respectfully but intelligently. They are the only ones that are right. People say it is ridiculous to say that, but it is absolutely so. The Lord is the only One right here in this particular position, and He is using what He knows to put others right.
C.N. Would you help us a little as to the present activities of the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ?
J.T. I think it works out in Romans. It is called the kingdom of God but on the same principle as Mark and Luke; Matthew views it as the kingdom of the Lord Jesus, and the kingdom of the Son of man. In Mark and Luke it is the kingdom of God, and I think that helps us to see how the epistles present the kingdom of God, for the kingdom works out as the kingdom of God in a moral way. It is "not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14: 17. It is a great general thought, and I think @Romans 12 is where Paul begins to write up the principles that should govern us in regard to the kingdom of God. "Vengeance belongs to me ... if therefore thine enemy should hunger, feed him; if he should thirst, give him drink; for, so doing, thou shalt heap coals
{540}
of fire upon his head", @Romans 12: 19, 20. Do not exercise vengeance; that belongs to God. Then the next chapter tells us that the powers that be are ordained of God. That is just Pilate; so I am in the kingdom of God, or what the Lord Jesus called "my kingdom" and I know what to do in it, but at the same time, I respect the powers that be, so the position is very clear in @Romans 12 and 13.
C.N. I was thinking, the Lord in casting out the demon said to the Pharisees, "But if by the finger of God I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God is come upon you?", @Luke 11: 20. Furthermore, He gave to the apostles power over the demons, etc. Would that help in the operation?
J.T. Yes; I think the kingdom of God is a question of the Spirit, "Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". It is the form things have taken in this the Spirit's day.
A.R. Paul tells Timothy to be a good soldier of Jesus Christ. Would that be working out what we are speaking of?
J.T. Just so. That is the kind of soldiership, not the sword, but that kind of soldiership.
A.R. Our young brothers, in principle, are really in the front lines.
J.T. Just so. How remarkable it is that God seems to put them there to be lights in a world of darkness.
A.C. What sphere is that in Colossians: "Who has ... translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love"?
J.T. That is a good question.
A.C. Prior to that Paul speaks of the glorious power that is for us, walking in all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness. Then he refers to being translated into the kingdom of the Son of His love; so that we should have all that is before us, as being in the good of sonship.
{541}
J.T. Yes; he has delivered us from the authority of darkness, which alludes to the darkening religious conditions around, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His love. That is a remarkable thing. You do not find it anywhere else, the Son of His love. It alludes to the sphere of love in which Christ rules. It is not any more than that. It is not to bring out that the Son of man comes in His kingdom; it is simply that love prevails where we are; where God has delivered us from darkness and translated us into the realm of the Son of His love. That is the kingdom in which He rules us now, as we are in this meeting, in our houses or wherever we are. It is a love matter. The book of Proverbs opens it up to us. It is the rule of the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love.
J.S. Does John define the issue between the Lord and the religious world?
J.T. He does. They brought Jesus to Pilate and we are dealing now with Pilate and what the Lord is saying to him. 
Ques. Would you say more about Proverbs?
J.T. It is Solomon viewed as the son of David; what he was to him; what he should say to us as a young man or a young sister. He uses the word *son* himself, but he says to us, "I was my father's son; tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother", @Proverbs 4: 3. He is the one to listen to, because he nurtures you in love and tells you what to do in the most remarkable choice of language; the very best phraseology you can get anywhere is in the book of Proverbs.
R.W.S. In the parts of the world where there is darkness in regard of this matter, how do you act? Suppose the legal positions are being maintained through darkness and religious profession and otherwise. What do you do?
{542}
J.T. There are countries like that. We can thank God we are not in them, in conditions like these. The question is whether these countries, such as France and Germany and other European countries, have had sufficient prayer, whether there is not a governmental element entering into that. Certain parts of the world have allowed light; they have opened the door to light and they are gaining from it. It is hard to say much but it is a thing to be noted and enquired about; people have had to suffer in those circumstances, whereas we have not.
A.R. Where the light is shining as it is today, the majority of the saints are not enduring this. Most of us have not to endure what we are talking about.
J.T. We have to endure it. We are with them, at least if we are spiritual. We are to be sympathetic with those in bonds as bound with them. The more spiritual we are, the more we are with people who are suffering for the truth. That is how I would look at it.
A.A.T. Is that not what John says in the isle of Patmos? "Your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience", @Revelation 1: 9.
J.T. That is exactly what he says.
A.A.T. There are three thoughts in one.
J.T. There are three thoughts under one article, showing it is one great thought of the present position. It is the tribulation and kingdom and patience altogether. That just covers what we are talking about.
F.S.C. There was seldom any mitigation for any of the apostles as to their sufferings. There were no laws to hinder their sufferings.
J.T. Not much; they were just to accept it. Paul, as has been remarked, on several occasions asserts his Roman citizenship and the like, but we are not doing that. We are not bound to do that. We just claim that the law of the land is favourable to us,
{543}
and we are taking advantage of it. Why not? If the government extends favour, why not accept it? They represent God.
A.R. Every young brother who faces the tribunals and the military, as standing the ground, will have experiences that will make him gain spiritually. The exercise should be that we might gain spiritually.
J.T. Quite so.
R.M. Sometimes the authorities inquire as to the moral basis on which we include ourselves in this kingdom. They say, How do you consider yourself part of that kingdom. What would you say?
J.T. Believe on the Lord Jesus.
R.M. @John 3 tells us about the kingdom of God. Would you include yourself in that?
J.T. Quite so. What Matthew calls the kingdom of the Son of man, Mark calls the kingdom of the Son of God. Jesus is God anyway. His kingdom is God's kingdom.
A.B.P. We should not have any difficulty in getting into the category of His servants, should we? "if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants *fight*".
J.T. Quite so.
{544}
HEAVEN AS ABOVE
@John 3: 27 - 34; @James 3: 13 - 18; @Psalm 133: 1 - 3
My message at this time will bear on heaven as above and that it has priority as regards place. I have selected, I hope wisely, these three scriptures and I have in mind also their writers, or the persons whose words are reported in them. There are three, and they form a testimony that should be adequate, the testimony of John the baptist, the testimony of James the apostle, and the testimony of David the king. They all qualify to speak about what is above, as well as what is below. They qualify to make comparisons between what is above and what is below.
John the baptist was not yet cast into prison. He was not just at the end of his service, but still he is morally at the end of it. He speaks of Christ, who is replacing him, and replacing him as from above. John is not assuming to come from above, he is of the earth. He is making a comparison between himself and Christ and makes a very good reliable one, and in making it adds much to the comparison. He makes Christ final because He is from above. And he shows that what is above is to be represented below by what comes from above. Now, John had not come from above but he is telling them to hear Jesus. He was listening to Jesus. Many had listened to John. He was a great preacher. Crowds went out from Judea and the surrounding districts to be baptised of John. They heard him. He was a great preacher, but he did not come from above. But in his preaching he had come in contact with Jesus. He met the Lord. He was a relative of the Lord after the flesh but made no claim on that. He says, "I knew him not". "In the midst of you stands, whom ye do not know, he who comes after me, the thong
{545}
of whose sandal I am not worthy to unloose", @John 1: 26, 27. And then in verse 31 "I knew him not". John the baptist came to know Him; he was told of God how to know Him. Not by His personal name or by His history, but by the Spirit of God descending from heaven as a dove on Jesus. He was to know Jesus by that means. It was heaven that made John the baptist acquainted with Jesus. Heaven did not leave it with John to find out Jesus and become acquainted; no, heaven acted in the matter itself. And that is how the matter stands. If we are to become acquainted with Christ, heaven would introduce us. Heaven has various means of doing this. At that time it was by the Spirit, not there in Person, but coming down on the Lord Jesus as He came to John to be baptised. John says, "And I knew him not; but he who sent me to baptise with water, *he* said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit. And I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God", @John 1: 33, 34. Heaven knew what to do and did it and the result was perfect. And now John has borne witness and is still bearing witness and he is telling us that even he is not from above. The Holy Spirit was from above and Jesus was from above, but he was not from above. But one great enough is on the earth to be introduced by heaven to the Person who came down from heaven, and John speaks of Him in that way, "He who has his origin in the earth is of the earth, and speaks as of the earth. He who comes out of heaven is above all", @John 3: 31. Well now, John calls attention to Christ. There are certain persons enquiring about John and he says to them, You know I do not assume to be Christ. We are never any use to heaven if we assume. Heaven is not dealing with persons who assume. It is what we *are*. Each one challenges himself as to who he
{546}
is and what he is. If we are taken account of by heaven it is through confession and repentance. Heaven recognises that. It is how we become singularised in heaven. There is joy in heaven over such. It is not a small matter that one becomes singularised in that way by confession and repentance.
So that the work of God goes on in that way and John the baptist is now acting as a witness to what is in heaven and to the prominence of what is in heaven and to the wisdom of it seen in result here below. John says, "What he has seen and has heard, this he testifies; and no one receives his testimony. He that has received his testimony has set to his seal that God is true; for he whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives not the Spirit by measure. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand. He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him", @John 3: 32 - 36. That is to say heaven is represented by such a one and the results are perfect -- that earth is brought into accord with heaven whether in one person or in a million persons, the testimony is perfect. The Spirit is not given by measure to Christ. The measure down below is what is up there. And the result down below is what is up there. However little in quantity it is the same quality. God is looking for quality and heaven is looking for quality. What comes down from heaven effects what is according to heaven. However small, the position is great. John says, No one receives his testimony. But then who does receive it? "He that has received his testimony has set to his seal that God is true". That is an assembly man. There are myriads that do not receive the testimony, but one does and he has set to his seal that God is true. If he writes you a receipt in any transaction he sets his seal to that -- that it is a reliable document.
{547}
If there is anything needed it is reliability! The dispensation is very nearly over.
"For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God". They are not received generally. In general the testimony is rejected, but the man who does receive it has set to his seal that God is true. That is a very important testimony at the present time, that God is true. The word of God is true. The inspired page is true. A converted man or woman is true. John's epistle tells us that such a man is born of God and does not sin. We have to accept that. It is what is called abstract truth. He is a witness to God in heaven. I am speaking in a very practical way because this is a reliable standby in our business affairs. We must have our seal with us. "He ... has set to his seal that God is true". It is not God's seal, it is my seal that God is true. God is true and every man a liar. There is my seal -- that which I have set my name to. God is looking for persons like that. One man like that is important in the eyes of heaven -- a reliable person, in my transactions setting as my seal that God is true.
Well now this is John's testimony and his service is to be ended in a very definite way. But there is Jesus. "For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives not the Spirit by measure". That is to say, there is a ministry of Christ here below in perfect keeping with what is above. It was not simply because of who the Person was but because of the Spirit, the Spirit given in an unmeasured way to Him. That is to say Christ has effected Christianity. The Spirit is given to Him in an unmeasured way and the Spirit is given to the assembly in an unmeasured way. So there is perfect testimony here to the effect that the Spirit is given without measure. Well, what a great matter it is to be in that! It is a matter for everyone of us, as to whether we are here to hear the words of God and whether the
{548}
words of God are spoken and whether the Spirit of God is here in the transaction. And whether there are final transactions, for divine communications are final in their character and to disregard them is a matter negatively final. Oh, you say, I did not think that was Christianity, there are other things besides Christianity, you know. There is the judgment of God of which we have been speaking today. Oh, you say, I thought it was a day of grace! It is. But we must not forget that God cannot be limited. He destroyed Jerusalem. The Lord Jesus speaks of the days of vengeance. "For these are days of avenging, that all the things that are written may be accomplished", @Luke 21: 22. These things are happening in our dispensation. God does not reveal all to us. I may learn His way, the principles that govern Him in His ways, but He is not obliged to reveal every detail of what He does. "But if also our gospel is veiled", the apostle says, "it is veiled in those that are lost", @2 Corinthians 4: 3. Not *to be* lost, but *are* that. God knows them. He knows those that are His. He also knows those that are not His. God has got a judicial disposition as well as one of mercy. This is a solemn matter. God is not mocked, we are told in Galatians. The Spirit of God says that -- God is not mocked. In @Galatians 6: 7, 8 He says, "Be not deceived: God is not mocked; for whatever a man shall sow, that also shall he reap. For he that sows to his own flesh, shall reap corruption from the flesh; but he that sows to the Spirit, from the Spirit shall reap eternal life". That is whether from flesh corruption, or from the Spirit eternal life, he reaps. It is a judicial matter with God. And so God is dealing with us so we may not be trifling, but may take things up in a final way. The Spirit of God is here and the words are here all pointing out that God is acting judicially and finally. Do not forget that -- judicial and final is the judgment with some people;
{549}
it may not be in your case or mine, but God knows. Enough for us to know that there are such persons, and that our ministry cannot avail anything with such persons. The matter is settled for them.
So here we have in John's record, "For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives not the Spirit by measure". Now that applies to Christ and the same principle is found with the assembly. The Spirit is on earth as when Christ was here. He is here personally. And think of the delight of the assembly sharing the Father's thoughts of the Son. And so it goes on, "He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him". Not 'will abide' -- but *abides*. God is saying, I have an Object supreme for My affections, and He is also saying there are persons not subject to that Person and My wrath abides on them. Paul speaks of the wrath of God revealed from heaven but does not say it is executed -- John is saying that, it is being executed. Persons who are not subject to the Son -- the wrath of God abides on them. One of the most solemn things I can say, but it is true. The point is, you see, to listen to the words that are coming, that are being spoken. God is speaking by His Spirit in His assembly, the oracles of God, and they are final. God is speaking, and we are listening and these words are to be effective so that we set to our seal that God is true. We are dealing with true things, and we ourselves are true. So the matter is settled either way. The point is that here there are subject persons who know the love of the Father for the Son, the infinitely satisfactory Object of His affections. And then there are those upon whom the wrath of God abides. There is hardly a more solemn statement than that. And there are such people on this earth now. It behoves us that none of us may be found leaning to the ways
{550}
of the world in our hearts. All these matters require that our preservation comes from heaven.
Well now coming to James, I just wish to confirm what John testifies to us. James like Hebrews deals with the state of things in which there are persons who are called brethren and are not Christians, and persons called brethren that are Christians, who are presumably considered heavenly and who are to represent heaven and they will represent heaven and James is showing how it comes about. In chapter 1: 17 "Every good gift and every perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of lights, with whom is no variation nor shadow of turning". The first word is that the gifts are good, the second they are perfect. That is the Holy Spirit, the most perfect gift ever given to the saints, comes down from *above*. Then in chapter 3 he comes to the point of a person who has wisdom. "Who is wise and understanding among you; let him shew out of a good conversation his works in meekness of wisdom". James is considering that there are such. He goes on to say, "But if ye have bitter emulation and strife in your hearts, do not boast and lie against the truth. This is not the wisdom which comes down from above, but earthly, natural, devilish. For where emulation and strife are, there is disorder and every evil thing". Now that is Christendom of these days; it was Jewish then. James writes to the twelve tribes, not leaving any out. Then it goes on, "But the wisdom from above first is pure, then peaceful, gentle, yielding, full of mercy and good fruits, unquestioning, unfeigned. But the fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for them that make peace". That is, heaven is going to be represented. These are not the persons he has in mind in the next chapter. He speaks there about persons who fight. "Whence come wars and whence fightings among you? Is it not thence, from your pleasures,
{551}
which war in your members? Ye lust and have not: ye kill and are full of envy, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war; ye have not because ye ask not. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask evilly, that ye may consume it in your pleasures. Adulteresses, know ye not that friendship with the world is enmity with God?" @James 4: 1 - 4. You might say, James, these are Christians you are ministering to. And here today it is the same thing. You wonder at the words he uses in writing to the twelve tribes. But then he speaks too of persons that are killed and do not resist. They are representative of heaven. You might say what I am ministering is not in fashion. Thank God what we minister is not in fashion. It is as real as James¬ ministry was. It is of God. The words of God come to us. This speaking is as oracles of God. God is speaking, and warning persons who are warring and striving, You do not come from above but from beneath. Why are they not put out of fellowship? That is not the point; the position in James is the general position of Christendom and God is dealing with it. The recognised thing is Christendom -- that which has the name of Christ attaching to it. Not Christians, but Christendom. It is Christendom in its whitewashed condition. But that is not all, and James has in mind that it is not all. So he says, "Who is wise and understanding among you; let him shew out of a good conversation his works in meekness of wisdom". The wisdom from above is his power. It comes from above. James is speaking of what comes from above, from God. And this wisdom comes from above. Now @Proverbs 8 tells us about wisdom. It is the power there -- when creation is in mind. The same wisdom of God. Now it is necessary to bring in purity if we talk of wisdom. It is first pure -- it agrees with things from above. How is one to be a vessel of what comes from above if one is taken up
{552}
with things that are below? The first thing in connection with this wisdom is purity. "But the wisdom from above first is pure, then peaceful, gentle, yielding, full of mercy and good fruits, unquestioning, unfeigned. But the fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for them that make peace". All this is from above. We are shown what is above. We are from above. John the baptist never saw these things. He was of an earthly family. Everyone of us belongs to the new dispensation, belongs to above; that is our place. And the things that are above come out through us. We are the vessel of the bounty of heaven. It is open to each one. If we are to be able to take account of conditions below the first thing is purity. Let us show out of a good conversation. Not as Lot who was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, but good conversation, peaceful, gentle, not resisting, these are James¬ saints. But the other is there -- the devil is there -- but then James¬ saints are to be vessels of what is above. They belong to heaven and the Spirit from heaven is in them. The wisdom from above is in them. God shows His work, vessels of what is in heaven. What is of heaven, from above, brought down here in vessels and made effective on earth. It is God's great proposal. He is showing what His work is capable of in His people. What the brethren have been through in Europe, especially in the British Isles, God shows what His work is capable of in a physical way. In this country there is not much in a physical way but it is the moral side. The work of God in the youths is tested by the conditions in which they are placed. But then God is saying, They are My nazarites. They have the means to continue in nazariteship. The Holy Spirit is with them; He comes from heaven that they may be the vessels of the bounty of heaven on earth. Thus James describes what may be there. Each one is to challenge himself:
{553}
is it in us -- this wisdom from above which is the power in the vessel? "But the wisdom from above first is pure, then peaceful, gentle, yielding, full of mercy and good fruits, unquestioning, unfeigned". These are the great general principles. "But the fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for them that make peace". That is to say the great peace-making operation is under the Spirit of Christ. It comes out in peacemakers. First purity, then peacefulness, gentleness, yieldingness, mercy. Now this is the plant, as we may call it, the beautiful perfect heavenly plant, and the fruit of it, as it were, the Spirit of Christ. In Philippians we have the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. This is for those that make peace. "But the fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for them that make peace", all showing that the divine mind is to effect conditions down here in keeping with what is in heaven. And so the world to come is to be affected in the making of peace.
Well now just a final word as to David. How this is seen in the beautiful metaphors of David, which have such a great place in the testimony of God. David is speaking of Aaron here. He is alluding to @Exodus 29 which tells us how Aaron and his sons were anointed. David is speaking of Christ's anointing and is mentioning the things that are beautiful. "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!" He likens them to Aaron as he is shown in the Pentateuch. We have already alluded to the Pentateuch as from Moses and containing @Exodus 29 and @Leviticus 8 which tell of the anointing of Aaron. David is bringing you by the Spirit through all that. He is going down over the Person. He speaks of Hermon -- Hermon is the thought of what is above. He is occupied with what is above. In @Exodus 29 Aaron is anointed with his sons, but it is Aaron by himself that David is speaking of here. It is the personal beauty of Christ.
{554}
What a lover of Christ David was! You can sense it in some measure as he goes over the person of Aaron. "Like the precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard". Now you say, What is in that? Well this would enhance the beauty that belongs to Aaron. David had a vision of what Aaron must have been. He is speaking of this anointing oil upon his beard that reaches to the hem of his garment. David can see all that. Can we? It is written by the Spirit of God as to how Christ was anointed from above and how it came down, the Spirit coming down upon His Person even to the skirts of His garment. And David says this is the picture the Spirit of God has caused him to see. Shall we ever see Him thus? Shall I ever see Him? Yes, we shall see Him. A spiritual man sees Him thus without rebuking gaze. He can rebuke many, but He loves to look at each of us without rebuking gaze. He loves to be amongst the saints thus. It is said of one that he was the disciple whom Jesus loved. He never mentions his own name, but just designates himself the disciple whom Jesus loved. It is beautiful that he could speak of himself in that way. God rebukes us at times -- as many as I love I rebuke and discipline. But that is not in a final way. He can always say to the saints, I rebuke you because I love you, because I want to look at you without rebuking gaze. And He can and will do so. He will make us like Himself. What a time that will be! Divine Persons enjoying life eternal not only in one another but in the saints. God has been working for this all these centuries to look at His people without rebuking gaze and with perfect complacency. He rebukes and disciplines to this end that He may look at us the more restfully and joyously. Think of the Lord looking at that disciple, the one whom Jesus loved. How I would like the Lord to look at me in that way. Let us each challenge our
{555}
hearts: does the Lord look on me without rebuking gaze? He will do it eternally. He will have us for Himself for ever and ever.
So speaking of Aaron in this view, the anointing oil ran down to the hem of the garment. It is a matter of the hem of the garment now. It has reference to the finish at the bottom. It is a matter now of the finish at the bottom of the saints, because it is a question of the walk. God has pointed out certain walks and it is for us to walk in them. They are marked ways for us to walk and contemplate a definitely, completed, finished situation at the bottom. So the foot is dipped in oil. And so it is here that the hem would mean that the saints are viewed as a finished product, and all comes down from above and David says brethren dwelling together in unity are like that. That is the thesis of the psalm: what brethren are as dwelling together in unity. The thing is enlarging as he goes over it. "For there hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore". As the Spirit is given and coming from heaven so there is perfect complacency with the head of our Aaron.
Aaron's beard would refer to his beauty. It was not shaved. We all shave, but it is not the original thought to shave the beard. Aaron had a beard and the oil came down on that and went down right to the hem of his garment and as a result we have the blessing of God. "There hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore". It goes right through to eternal conditions. Peter contemplates it, "new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness", @2 Peter 3: 13. God is going on to perfection and we want to be in His hands to that end. He is going to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
May God bless His word to us.
