{1}
THE CONFLICT
@Revelation 12
My thought is to seek to open up to you in a measure the circumstances and occasion of the Conflict, and I read this chapter because, as I understand it, it sets forth the great parties engaged, and also the great principles which are involved in it. I think that the Spirit of God would produce exercise amongst God's people, that we may take our part in the conflict. I believe, if the persons engaged, and the principles involved in it are understood, that every true Christian heart will not fail to come forward, but I do not think that what is to be contended for is much understood. It is not this doctrine or that doctrine, it is what is in God's mind to carry out in connection with, and through, a Man, whether it be on earth or in heaven. Directly that Man is called attention to, the conflict begins. I refer for the moment to @Matthew 2. It is parallel with the opening verses of the chapter I read. You will all remember how in a most remarkable way Jesus is called attention to, as certain men from the East arrive at Jerusalem. They had light in their souls as to Christ. They had seen His star in the East; the stars are guides at night. These men were accustomed to stars, and they saw the star of Jesus in the East and came to Jerusalem, and made known to the king that they had seen the star of Him who was born King of the Jews.
Now I refer to that to show you how the conflict really begins. We may introduce the opening of @Revelation 12 into @Matthew 2. Here is a woman who represented the mind of God with regard to the earth. She is clothed with the sun. What a testimony! She has the moon under her feet and upon her head a crown of twelve stars. She represents
{2}
Israel as the centre of God's government on earth. There was the sun, suggesting supreme authority, and the moon, subordinate authority, and the twelve stars, administrative authority, all connected with the woman. God had His thoughts, and they all circle around this woman. How one would be exercised to convey the mind of God to souls. He has given expression to it, and He is never for one moment to be diverted from it. We know what a time we are living in, a moment of great activity, and one would appeal to the Lord's people, that we might withdraw from it all into the mind of God.
Now I want to show you that the woman is not the real object of the enemy's attack, though she becomes that in the end of the chapter. We can see plainly in @Matthew 2 that the wrath of the wicked one was excited by the testimony of those who had seen the star of Jesus. They had seen His star in the East and they followed it, and their testimony drew forth the innate hatred of the opposer. The Man-child was there, and the Man-child is the object of attack. Directly the Man-child is mentioned in @Revelation 12, His destiny is declared by the Spirit; it was He "who shall shepherd all the nations with an iron rod". Let us think of that word *shepherd*, He is not to destroy, but to *shepherd* the nations. That word opens up a flood of light in the Scriptures. It is to be noticed that directly He is introduced by the Spirit of God you have stated what He is to do, and that draws forth the hatred of the dragon, for he would devour the Man-child. Wherever there is a movement toward Christ you will always find that there is serious opposition. The Man-child, not the woman, is the object of attack; for the dragon is prepared to devour the Man-child. All the names of the dragon are given here, for it is well to have the foe rightly identified and located.
My desire is to engage you with the Man-child;
{3}
He has a shepherd's heart. He is caught up to *God* and to God's throne, not the throne of Jerusalem; that was occupied by Herod, and Herod had not a shepherd's heart. No occupier of any throne in this world today has a shepherd's heart, but *God's King* has a shepherd's heart, and that Man goes up to God and to His throne. He is morally great enough to occupy God's throne. The throne of David publicly was occupied by Herod, and he had nothing like a shepherd's heart in him; *nothing*. Herod had the heart of a murderer. The dragon found his counterpart in Herod, and he has many counterparts at the present time. Herod was a ready vessel for the dragon on account of the state of his heart.
In the Spirit's description of the dragon, we read that he has seven heads and ten horns; the ten horns are symbolical of kings. It shows us what all the kings of the earth will do in the future; they will support him who is the direct impersonation of the dragon. They will give their support to the beast to carry out the dragon's designs in opposition to Christ. What is the secret of it? It is the state of their hearts. Herod's heart was full of envy. The light of God had come into the dark East and illuminated these men with regard to the Man-child. The star guided them to Bethlehem, not to Jerusalem. See the devotedness of these men; they found the little Child with Mary, His mother, and they opened their treasures and they worshipped. What a testimony! Compare that with the heart of Herod, which was a ready instrument for the dragon. He would destroy the Man-child, but He is taken care of by God. He is caught up to God's throne. What light that gives! God's throne is occupied by Him who has a shepherd's heart!
Now I wish to enlarge upon that. We may introduce here the death and resurrection and ascension of Christ, and His relation with His people. What
{4}
did Christ take up to heaven? He went up to heaven with the saints on His heart. You remember the breastplate of the high priest; the high priest went into the holiest with the names of the twelve tribes on his heart. What a wonderful thought that is! Now I want to show you that the scene of the conflict is transferred from earth to heaven. If the Man-child goes up to heaven, the conflict is necessarily transferred from earth to heaven, and in a sense it centres in what is in Christ's heart; for the anti-priest comes to light in heaven. It was not upon the earth that the dragon accused the saints. The ruthless destruction on the part of Herod was on earth, but there is nothing of that kind in heaven. What is the dragon's opposition there? Accusation. Christ went up to heaven with the saints on His heart in order to represent them before God, and immediately the accuser appears; that is the present moment.
We are told in verse 7 that there is war in heaven. We can quite understand that. If the introduction of the Man-child brought about conflict on earth, it must necessarily follow into heaven. So there was war in heaven. Now what I would say, beloved friends, is, that we are of the heavenly warriors, and our qualifications for the conflict have all to be learnt from Christ. I make bold to say that our understanding of what is in the heart of Christ is the secret of our qualification. He went into heaven with the saints in His heart; they were all there; not one omitted. The affection that Christ had for the saints was intolerant of the accuser in heaven. There was war in heaven, not now upon earth, for the scene is changed. I have often thought that a good warrior selects his own battle-field. God has had the scene of conflict transferred from earth to heaven, but war on earth will begin when God resumes His relationship with Jerusalem.
Now I want to engage you with the greatness of
{5}
the position. We have Michael introduced. He is presented as leader, and he has his followers. I do not pretend to interpret the passage, but I call your attention to this, that the Lord Jesus is the great Leader of the war. Gideon said, as you will remember, "As I do, so shall ye do". If you would be a warrior, you must learn from the leader. Joshua was a leader, but he had to learn from the great Leader how to be a soldier in the ranks. You remember how Joshua, when he was by Jericho, was met by a man with a drawn sword, and Joshua said, "Art thou for us or our adversaries?" What a reply he got. The us is the secret of all partyism. The reply is, "Nay, but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come". "Loose thy shoe from off thy foot, for the place whereon thou standest is holy". It is not a question of us, it is a question of the Lord's host and the Captain. It was as if He said to Joshua, "Are you with me?" What an appeal! "Nay, but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come". That is the position.
To return to our scripture in Revelation, we are told that, "there was war in the heaven". Michael fought. He had contended with the devil for the body of Moses, and here he contends with Satan for the heavenly position. The issue is tremendous. Satan is cast out, and his angels cast out too. It is a war for the complete and entire clearance of the heavens from all that is adverse to God's people. The result is, "Now is come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God". Why? The accuser of our brethren is cast out. The accuser. Now notice what is said about him, "who accused them before our God day and night". That is what the dragon is doing. It is a question for us to decide as to whether we are with the great High Priest, or with the anti-priest. The great High Priest has the saints in His heart, and the anti-priest accuses
{6}
them before God. It is a terrible thing to be an accuser of God's people. We little realise how such influences in heaven affect us here. The apostle said, "we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places". That is what we are called to. I have no doubt it is a great privilege to take our place in the ranks of the warriors with the great Leader of the war.
Now I will touch just for a moment upon that which is to mark the warriors. You remember the passage that is often quoted from @Ephesians 6. We are told there to "Put on the whole armour of God". In telling us about this armour, the apostle speaks firstly of our loins, then of our breasts, then of our feet. What exercising thoughts these are! Our loins are to be "girt about with truth". What a servant a man is whose loins are girt about with truth! Such service is most blessed. Saints suffer enormously from having their affections loose. How intensely practical to be girt about with truth; the affections braced up as it were, and then the breast is taken care of; and you must have a good conscience. Satan has no opportunity of attack if righteousness is maintained. And then see that your feet are right. How many of the saints¬ feet are found in by-paths. Our feet are to be"shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace". That does not mean that we are all evangelists, but we are to be prepared to speak a word to souls. And then we have to take the shield of faith. That is a wonderful thing. I cannot enlarge upon it, but it is a wonderful thing if you are called into the ranks of the Leader of the war. Faith quenches all the fiery darts of the wicked one. Then you have the helmet of salvation on your head. You lift up your head. You need never be ashamed in the light of what Christ is, and in the
{7}
hope of His appearing. Then you pray always for all saints, you embrace all, but especially those who are engaged in the testimony of the gospel, and the mystery.
Now see the issue! There, is complete clearance of the heavens. What a triumph! What can be compared with the result. The accuser of the brethren cast out; he who accused them day and night before God. Then the celebration is, that "Now is come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ". The occasion of praise is for the inhabitants of heavenly places, the saints of the present dispensation, the companions of Him who has been caught up there.
In closing, I just want to touch upon the change in the sphere of warfare. Satan being cast out, there is increased activity, not now against the Man-child, but against the woman who bore Him, but she is taken care of; she is given wings. Wings are symbolical of power. God gives her power; He takes care of her for three and a half years in the desert. Then we have the remnant of her seed who keep the commandments of God.
Let us now look at the remnant in a practical way. What is said of them is, that they "keep the commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus". In other words, they have come to learn of Christ. They are not heavenly warriors; they never will be. Their warfare is through their sufferings; they are persecuted and they suffer. Why? Because they keep the commandments of God. What a result there will be for God! When you consider what that nation is now, what has been its history, and what it will be. Judah bore the Man-child, the Firstborn, and all that follow take character from the first. You remember Isaiah alludes to it in chapter 66. "Before she travailed, she brought forth, before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child ... as
{8}
soon as Zion travailed she brought forth her children". They are brought forth after Christ. They keep the commandments of God. How did they learn them? They learn from Christ. The remnant keep the commandments of God. A moment ago I was alluding to how God is going to resume His relation with Israel. God will clothe Israel with all His thoughts; the sun, supreme authority; the moon, subordinate authority; and the stars, administrative authority. God would clothe His people, with all these wondrous thoughts of His. The remnant set forth the subjective state. In that remnant God has placed. His testimony, and now Satan attacks them. He persecuted the remnant of her seed "who keep the commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus".
It is well that we should understand that we are at the end of the dispensation. The occasion of the conflict is just as it was at the beginning, there is no change. God never gives up His thoughts. God's people on earth cherish every divine thought. It is not simply that we are externally correct. Every divine thought is centred in the Man-child. Has *He* a place in your heart? It is not merely that you love Him because He has saved you from your sins, but God's thought is that the Person who is the centre of all His thoughts should have a place in our hearts. And directly Christ has that place in your heart, you may depend upon it, you become the object of the enemy's attack. That is what I understand to be the testimony.
What the Spirit contends for today is the maintenance of the mind of God. God has not given up *one thought*, either in regard to Christ in heaven, or the assembly, or Israel upon earth. The saints have the Lord Jesus in their hearts as the centre of all divine thoughts. The great advantage of instruction is seen in what the assembly can say when Christ
{9}
appears and the challenge is made. "I am the root and offspring of David, and the bright and morning star". That supposes that the saints have light; and their answer shows that they have light. They say, "Come". That is what the Spirit supports.
"And the Spirit and the bride say, Come". Christ is the centre of all divine thoughts. We have to see to it that we give Him full place in our hearts. I have often said, 'If you look after the principles God will look after the people'. You stand by His principles and He will bring the people in. Look at Enoch! He walked with God, and he saw the Lord coming with ten thousand of His saints. Then God finds Abraham and calls him alone and He blesses him. But Abraham was not to be alone. He looked up at the stars and his seed was to be as the number of them, countless. We are not to be alone.
Beloved friends, I have expressed to you these few thoughts, to present what is involved in the conflict. I would seek to enlist every heart as to our place in it. If you *stand by God's principles, God will bring in the people*. May the Lord help us to stand.
{10}
THE LORD JESUS FOUND WHERE HE IS LOVED
@Matthew 2
J.T. What struck me in this chapter is the fact that the wise men found the little Child *with* His *mother*. The Spirit of God pursues this connection in the chapter; the angel directs Joseph to take the young Child, and His mother, and flee into Egypt and then, Herod being dead, to take the young Child and His mother and go into the land of Israel. It struck me as indicating the connection in which the Lord is ever found; He is found where He is loved. As here in this world He was the subject of God's unceasing care. If we see the place that Jesus has in the mind of heaven, as shown in the chapter before us, it will lead to a corresponding care for Him in our hearts. I thought especially in this connection of David in the Old Testament, for he represents our side, and his great aim was to prepare a place for the ark. There were no specific directions, it was a spontaneous act of his own. In the wilderness there were specific directions, for *there* it was a question of God's care for the ark. When we come to the time of David, the ark had been twenty years without attention; it had never been cared for by Saul. David, in his house of cedar, was led to think of the ark; it was in unsuitable surroundings, and there was a very great discrepancy between David's circumstances and those of the ark, and so he goes through exercise of heart with regard to it, and the prophet says to him, "Do all that is in thine heart". I thought that if we pursued this line it would help us.
Rem. David distinctly connected the ark with God.
Ques. Would the ark indicate the place Christ has in our affections?
J.T. The arrangements made for it in the wilderness
{11}
show the place it had in God's heart. In connection with this we have angelic attention overshadowing the mercy seat; but in David's case, it was spontaneous desire, without divine direction or command, to have a place for the ark.
Rem. David was not allowed to make a place for the ark, but his desire was right, and God approved of it.
J.T. It is a great thing to have a right idea in the heart, for then God helps you. It is very beautiful here, Jesus is found where He is loved; love is in evidence, love suited to the occasion, the mother's love for the little or young Child. The love seen at the outset is the love suited to the moment. The chapter is interesting, too, inasmuch as it indicates how we are guided to the Lord. Many have light as to where the Lord is, as the wise men had, but it is another matter to find Him. I refer to that as it has a practical bearing. As we follow we appreciate the means of guidance. The star would not have guided them to where the Lord was hated. This is a point of practical importance; they do not find Jesus where He is hated.
Rem. The star guided them to the right place.
J.T. There is nothing said as to the star guiding them to Jerusalem. Souls assume things often without guidance: they are so lost in man's system, that they assume, on account of the prestige which attaches to the system, that the Lord is there.
Rem. If the Lord is our object, the Spirit will guide us to Him even if it be into a place of reproach.
J.T. It is well to inquire if there is any love for Jesus in a place. I would not stay with a company that did not love Jesus.
Rem. One could not breathe there.
J.T. If a company loves Jesus, His rights are owned. "Surely the Lord is in this place", says Jacob. "This is none other but the house of God,
{12}
and this is the gate of heaven". The presence of heavenly beings indicated that God was there. If the Lord is not in a place you do not want to stay there. You know whether He is loved or not by the indications. Man's systems are not characterised by love for Christ. The idea of love for Christ is that the Spirit pervades: By *the Spirit all pervading*. The tabernacle was anointed with oil. I should not commit myself to a circle in which love for Jesus does not predominate. The proof of love for Him is that His commandments are kept. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". That is really the test. The world is characterised by hatred of Christ; if we love Him we shall be separate from it. In this chapter Jerusalem is under Herod's influence; "he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him"; that shows the influence of Herod. In the second epistle of John, verse 6, we find that love walks according to His commandments. Well, look for that in the company; it is very important, for it is the proof of love. Christendom cannot say it has not His commandments, for the light is all round; therefore His commandment is the test.
Rem. I suppose it would involve testing and affliction, and going against the current.
J.T. The Psalmist said, "Lord, remember David and all his afflictions". He would not go into his house; he would not give sleep to his eyes nor slumber to his eyelids until he had found a place for the Lord. Think of the afflictions David went through in view of that!
Rem. David was in affliction on account of the ark.
J.T. David got light from the outset, he had tidings of the ark when a youth. "Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wood".
*Hearing* of it is one thing, *finding* it is another; but
{13}
when it is brought back, Saul's daughter despises David. The house of Saul is characterised by neglect of the ark. Michal despised what God approved. All that Michal can do is to despise, but God graciously limited the house of Saul. "Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death". It shows that the first order of man, although anointed, can never appreciate the ark; but where he expresses enmity, God limits his influence. Michal had no issue and Saul becomes extinct in time. In the next chapter, David sat in his house and said to himself, 'There is the ark on account of which I was dancing. I have a house of cedar and yet the ark dwells in curtains'. If we have a better place than Christ it should exercise us. Of course, on God's side, we get, "In them (the heavens) hath he set a tabernacle for the sun". God has prepared a place for Christ, but what place has He here? It is a great thing when the Christian is safely guided past all pretension to the spot where there is love to the Lord. When the magi saw the star, the star of Jesus, for *Jesus* was the Object, not Bethlehem, "they rejoiced with exceeding great joy". They have no doubts now; they had misgivings at Jerusalem; the atmosphere there was not suited to Christ. There was a remarkable test at that juncture. These men had come from the East, but the atmosphere was not right at Jerusalem; they must have felt it. Herod was all hypocrisy; he pretended that he wanted to come and worship Christ. If the heart has misgivings there is no certainty as to things being right; but the presence of the Lord carries its own conviction. What a joy to find the spot where there is suited affections for Him! The next thing we see is that the one who loves Jesus has treasure. The wise men opened their treasures; they had not come empty.
Rem. They had found a suited Object upon which to bestow their treasures, like Mary's box of ointment.
{14}
J.T. The Lord's people should be concerned about having something to present, and should not be content with a ready-made service. We should all be contributors.
Ques. What do you mean by we should all be contributors? Is your thought that there is a tendency to leave things to the older ones?
J.T. It is entirely a mistake to do so. God enjoined His people that none should come empty; we ought to have something to bring.
Ques. Something to express audibly?
J.T. Not exactly. If a sister has something in spirit, it lends power to the meeting; it is not limited to any special ones. It is a great thing to have a treasure to open up. The assembly is our testing-place; our poverty comes to light there; that is where we are measured as to whether we are rich or poor. It is a humbling thing if we are not ashamed of being poor.
Ques. May not the fact of what you are saying keep many silent? If we have not a treasure we cannot open it up. We cannot work things up.
J.T. I think, with many, the things of God are a kind of business. You can lock up your shop and leave it, but you cannot do that with the things of God. You have to bring something. There are exercises attendant upon secular appointments, but if you have God with you, you gain strength thereby, and next time you come up stronger spiritually. You come in with your basket of firstfruits; you have something; you yourself are the basket.
Rem. In our difficulties during the week we find the support of the priest.
Ques. I suppose, in connection with what you are speaking of, we have the type of the Levite and the common person?
J.T. The Levite was contributory to the priest. The exercise of a servant adds to priestly power.
{15}
Every service undertaken, if one is supported in it by the Spirit, makes him stronger spiritually. So, as to daily vocation, stay in it with God. If God is with you, you get help in it, it adds to you as a Levite and a priest.
Rem. These men *brought* treasures: gold, frank incense and myrrh; they did not get them at Bethlehem.
J.T. I have often thought of the Lord when they had that last feast with Him. He says, as it were, 'This is to be continued without me'. How are they going to have it if He is going away? He shows them how. He rises from supper, takes a towel and begins to wash their feet. He shows them how they can have the next feast. If there is not the service of love there can be no feast.
Ques. The service of love is feet-washing?
J.T. There is care one for another. If we would feast we must have something to feast on; if it is a love-feast as Jude speaks of them, you must have love. It is not that you expect it from others, nor do you leave it all to one or two, that would be a poor thing.
Ques. What do the gold, the frankincense and myrrh signify?
J.T. They are suited for the moment. The Spirit records that these men brought suitable gifts.
Ques. Would you say that in Matthew we get the mother's care for the Child, and in John the Son's care for the mother?
J.T. In @Revelation 12 the Man-child and the woman are both objects of care.
Ques. Would the fact that the mother is spoken of so often convey the care of God over Israel?
J.T. The mother is alluded to on account of her care for the young Child. God keeps the mother in evidence while the Child requires attention and affection, but the mother is taken care of by God,
{16}
and more especially because the mother's affection was necessary for the moment. It is not the mother and Child, it is the young Child and His mother. The Child gives dignity to the mother; it is a very beautiful thought. It does not say they found the Child, but that they found the Child with Mary, His mother. They found Him where there was affection suitable for the moment.
Rem. It is evident that the ark was what engaged the mind of Jehovah when He gave directions for the making of the tabernacle.
J.T. Yes. The ark was the leading feature in connection with Israel. Israel was never according to the mind of God until the time of David, for the ark never had its true place until he came.
Rem. That was great gain to David spiritually.
J.T. God would bring this to pass with regard to Christ. The ark is taken care of, but is it so in our hearts? God says to David, in effect, 'You have a right thought. I am with you, and I will build you a house'. It shows that God takes account of what is in our hearts. God has prepared a tabernacle for the ark, but how about our hearts? Is the ark out in the cold as far as your heart is concerned? The bride in Canticles is too lazy to open to her Beloved. He is out in the cold, and she has made no provision for Him.
Rem. It is very beautiful, the way the Lord answers David's heart; the house was dear to David's heart.
J.T. One may rejoice at seeing the star, but it is another thing to come into His presence; there the heart is bowed in worship.
Rem. In verse 12 the wise men are divinely instructed not to return to Herod.
J.T. God is taking care of the young Child, and so He does not allow the wise men to return to enlighten Herod. It is a wonderful moment in the
{17}
history of these men; they find themselves in the presence of the Lord in the sphere where He is loved, and they present their gifts to Him, but not like Jacob; he promised to give a *tenth*; we can understand that, however, for he says, "How dreadful is this place!" @Genesis 28: 17. The Lord is found where He is cared for. It reminds us of the cherubim protecting the mercy-seat. When you come into the house, into the Lord's presence, there is no question of giving a tenth like Jacob; he kept nine parts for himself.
Rem. Paul gave everything; he was wholly given up to Christ. Mephibosheth says, "Let him take all".
J.T. It would help us greatly if we were exercised about having a treasure to open up; there is no reason why we should not. We have the Holy Spirit in us; He is the power. David says, "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king", @Psalm 45. It is not something we have heard from others, or even read in Scripture. David had composed something. It may be but a few words, but if you have found out something about Christ in a new way, you can give expression to it in the assembly, and that is what the Lord looks for.
Rem. If we knew Him better, He would have a larger place in our affections.
J.T. What wealth there would be if every one had a composition about the king!
Rem. It might be expressed in a few words.
J.T. One has observed that when there is the audible expression of real exercise, there is power and there is response.
Rem. The word "inditing" in @Psalm 45 might be rendered "bubbling up".
J.T. Yes. It must come out. It shows the spring is there; the Holy Spirit.
{18}
Rem. Things here tend to swamp the sense of divine love.
J.T. If we see the Lord as the Ark of the covenant, we see the One in whom every divine thought is expressed, and when that One has a dwelling-place in the heart, the language of the heart is, "One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord". That is the entire thought, it is not simply what He is to me in my circumstances; it is what He is in His own sphere.
Rem. So, in Romans, eternal life in Christ Jesus is the entire thing, and also the love of God in Christ Jesus.
J.T. If we see eternal life in Christ Jesus, we see what the entire thought of life for the whole universe is, and so as to "the love of God which is in Christ Jesus", and that enlarges our hearts.
{19}
FALLING OR DESCENDING -- WHICH?
@Revelation 9: 1 - 3, 11; @Ephesians 4: 7 - 16
My thought is first of all to show how we are to distinguish between that which falls from heaven and that which *descends* from heaven, and then to speak more particularly of the latter and the effect of it in us. You can easily perceive that descending has reference to Christ, while falling has reference to the adversary, Satan. A very great difference exists between falling and descending. Christ descended from heaven and the assembly descends, or comes down from heaven, whereas Satan falls from heaven. Now a fallen being, one whom God has used and owned, as falling is sure to be filled with envy. There are many persons and things said to be fallen, and what I desire is that we may never be in accord with what is fallen. The whole world is in accord with what is fallen, whereas the world to come will be in accord with what descends. You remember in @Revelation 21 John saw "the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God". The glory of God is not in that which falls, but in that which descends, that which comes down "from God out of heaven". The city comes down! and she has the glory. All that will be seen in the world to come is to be in accord with that, in accord with that which "comes down from God out of heaven having the glory of God".
Now the present world derives its character from that which *fell*, and that which fell has no glory.
One would venture to appeal to you as to that, for we have to see to it, that we are not in accord with that which falls. We know that Satan fell; we know that angels fell; we know that Adam fell; we know that Noah fell, and we know that Israel fell; and the assembly viewed historically fell; and we know that Babylon falls; so that the whole
{20}
sphere that we have to do with is characterised by falling, and what falls is sure to be marked by strife and envy, and that is a matter which has the most serious consequences. The world derives its character from an envious being, and envy is the nursery of every evil work. Satan filled the scene with envy when he fell; he was envious of God and of man who was the image of God. God brought in man and set him up in His own image and glory in an environment that indicated the kindness and love of God, and Satan was envious of that; he was envious of Adam, and he brought about the fall of Adam by injecting that principle into him, or rather into Eve's heart. He suggested to them that they should be as God.
Now the whole history of the world from that day to this has derived its character from Babel, a fallen state of things. Endeavouring to lift up its head in empire was the world's great effort after the fall. In building the tower of Babel man would exalt himself to heaven, but every effort of man to lift up his head comes to nothing; all falls. Now, beloved friends, we should be greatly exercised lest we should be in accord with that. We want to be in accord with what descends. What falls, as we saw in the chapter I read, is a star. Stars are spoken of in the Scriptures as guides. Many men who were guides have fallen. Now this star fell. It refers to something that had place in the government of the world on earth and it fell. That is to say, it did not descend in love, it fell in envy.
Now see the effect of what is fallen! I know of no chapter that indicates the character of what falls, and the effect of a fallen being, more plainly than this. This star has the key of the pit: it is given to him. The Lord Jesus has the keys of death and hades, and, moreover, the key of David. He has full guard of all the evil, and He has the power to administer the good; hence if this star is permitted to open the
{21}
bottomless pit, it is under the permission of the Lord. The flood of evil is let loose. There is every evil work; when the flood is let loose, smoke arising out of the pit becomes the evidence of evil under the control of the destroyer. Satan does not do things haphazard; he acts in military fashion. The locusts, being let loose, become the agents of evil and destruction under the control of the destroyer. And mark! that which falls has no thought of building up. Satan darkens and destroys. I touch upon that to show what has entered the world at the present time.
Now I turn to that which comes down, and it gives relief. What relief to see what the apostle says, "Unto every one of us is given grace"; there is not an atom of envy there. The apostle is speaking of Christ and tells us that "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts unto men". That is what we see in the Man who descends is love. All the wealth of heaven is opened out to us. Think of the Lord Jesus. He descended first in order that He might remove the oppression from the souls of His people. That descent was a descent of love; He descended in love voluntarily. The scripture says, "Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God ... emptied himself, taking a bondman's form". We cannot say what the form of God was; we are not entitled to say. It simply states that He was in the form of God, and being in that form He emptied Himself. Think of that, beloved friends! Think of the descending principle. He emptied Himself taking a servant's form. He took a bondman's form when descending in love. He descended to where the saints were. I know there are other thoughts connected with His descent. He descended in love to remove the oppression from souls; to remove all that here was an occasion of grief to God, and oppression to His own. That is His descending love, and His ascending love is equal
{22}
to His descending love. He descended in love and He ascended to the highest heavens, but He is the same One. I am confining the thought to the saints for the moment. "He that descended is the same who has also ascended". In other words, He says virtually to the saints, 'I have done all that is possible for you on earth, and now I go on high; I can serve you better there'. He said to His own, "It is expedient for you that I go away". They would not lose by it; He went away in love, even as He came in love. So we read, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended".
I want to emphasise the manifestation of the Lord's love in both the descent and the ascent. He was governed by love when He descended into the lower parts of the earth, and He was governed by love when He ascended up into the highest heavens. The One who descends is the One who loves, and the One who ascends is the One who loves. Now I desire to show you the contrast between the one who falls and the One who descends and ascends. The result of the former is darkness; that is the spirit of the world, but love marks the One who descends, and it is He who has moral title to ascend. He is the same, He goes up far above all heavens. Why? That He might fill all things; the Man who loves fills everything. Think of the whole created universe filled by the love of a Man, the love of God, but love in a Man. He ascended above all heavens that He might fill all things. But He is not doing that yet. What He is doing now is filling the saints! We need to be filled by Christ. He is filling the saints now. In order to do that He gives the Spirit and He does it in wisdom. God acts in love and wisdom. Wisdom is the handmaid of love. Christ fills the saints, dear brethren. What a wonderful thought! He fills us. He ascended up above the heavens that He might fill all things. He is capable of doing that, and now for the moment
{23}
He is filling the saints; the saints are to be filled with love.
The apostle begins, "unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ".
That is to say, the measure that we have received is the measure of Christ. We cannot improve that measure, it is wisdom. Everything we get we receive from Christ, and He gives it in wisdom. The Lord descended and He ascended, and He is seated above all heavens that He might fill all things. Now the assembly has the first place in Christ's affections.
In @Psalm 68 we learn that in a day to come He is going to dwell with Israel; as it is said, "that the Lord God might dwell among them", but the first consideration with Christ as having ascended is the assembly. As having ascended on high He thinks of the assembly, and "he gave some, apostles". That was in divine wisdom, for He gave them for the protection of what belonged to Him upon earth; it was that authority might be established. He also gave the Lord's supper for the saints. It is true that as He instituted the Supper the twelve apostles only are in evidence in the record, but they were not the only ones who loved Christ. There was Mary Magdalene, and Mary of Bethany and others, but the apostles were to be the representatives of the Lord's authority. Hence the Lord gave the apostles first, and He gave them from heaven. What I want you to see is that everything in Christianity *comes down*, and the apostles in that sense come down. Now bear in mind that Peter, James and John and all the apostles were the companions of Christ here; in fact their apostleship depended upon the fact, that they were the companions of the Lord, that they were with Him here. But the exercise of their apostleship was in the power of what *came down*, for as having ascended "he gave some, apostles".
That was what the Lord gave first, and what He gave
{24}
was in wisdom. It was what was required. It was imperative that the Lord's authority should be established on earth, while He was in heaven.
Then He gave "some prophets", and that too in wisdom. It is one thing to be established in the sense of the authority of the Lord, but it is another thing to be brought in your soul to God. The prophet brings God to you. The apostle emphasises the authority in the hands of Man, in the hands of Christ. The prophet brings God to you, brings His mind to you. Then He gave "some evangelists". If the authority of Christ is established, if God is here, men will be brought in. Evangelisation was to all the world, to the four corners of the earth. It carries the good news to the four corners of the earth. It is like the four-cornered sheet let down by the Lord to Peter in @Acts 10; that was really the beginning of universal evangelisation. We are to be evangelists in the light of that. The Lord gave "some evangelists", and then fourthly He gave "some shepherds and teachers"; there are four kinds of gifts; the shepherd and teacher being one.
I only touch upon that to show how great the contrast between Him who descends and him who falls, but I wish to touch also upon the great effect of what descends, and what is in view in the gifts. The perfecting of the saints, and not the darkening of the saints is the end in view. The latter was found in the man who falls. There are no darkening influences in the gifts given by Christ, they are "for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ". That is where the disciples erred when they wanted to know who should be the greatest; there arose a strife even amongst them as to which should be the greatest. The apostles have gone, and the prophets have gone, but their work remains, as the Lord said, "I have chosen you, and have set you that ye should go and that ye should bear fruit
{25}
and that your fruit should abide". The full result is "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith". Mark how what is of God *remains*. There was unity between the Jewish apostles and Paul, the unity of faith, and this continues "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". That is the great result, beloved friends, of Him who descends and ascends. We see brought into this world an order of man entirely after Christ. What an achievement! I would, in closing, just appeal to our hearts as to whether we are in accord with what fell or with what descends and ascends. The assembly is formed on the principle of descent; we descend in love. You will never go down otherwise. Love enables us to go down; we belong to what goes down and what goes down in love ascends. The assembly is formed on that principle and hence goes up. It is morally suited to ascend through the work of Christ. In Ephesians, the work of Christ is for the perfecting of the saints, until we all arrive at the full divine end. There is, therefore, that in the assembly which is suitable for ascension, and nothing more will be added. It will go up as belonging to heaven and suitable for it; how marvellous it is when it *comes down*! It will come down after it goes up.
We are here now but for a moment, we shall soon ascend, and then there will be that great coming down, "coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God". The assembly comes out in grace, and in glory; she does not fall, she descends. It is her own act, and a great mark of her liberty as formed after Christ. The fact of her being in accord with Christ is seen in that she has the glory of God. She has the glory, and she comes out in glory; she will give character to the world that is to come. Fallen beings give character to the present world.
{26}
PRIESTHOOD
@1 Peter 2: 1 - 9
In view of the fact that divine things are made to depend for their continuance on the priesthood, what it involves is of immense importance. If the priestly state is absent, we really have nothing subjective according to God. It implies a state formed after Christ, viewed as Man on our side, One capable of sympathy, and One who loves God's people. One great feature of the high priest's dress was the breastplate and the two shoulderpieces. In the breastplate each of the tribes was inscribed, and on each of the shoulderpieces there were the names of six of the tribes; that is to say, he had the names of the saints on his heart and supported them on his shoulders, so that what answers to priesthood now is love to the saints, and what goes with it support of the saints.
The Christian learns these things from the Lord, and I have no doubt that the consideration of Luke's gospel enables us to perceive the idea. He is translated to heaven, according to Luke's account, as a Priest. It is, as it were, heaven approving that kind of a man. It does not say by *what* power He was translated, but it says "he was carried up into heaven". The character and nature of priesthood is presented in Christ -- in a Man who loves the saints, and His shoulders are equal to His heart. So that a man who answers to priesthood now is a man who loves the saints and uses all the power he has to support them. This comes out in many ways in detail. To begin with, you impress upon the saints that you are sympathetic with them, and if that is so, you can enter into their exercises; and then all the power you have is subservient to your heart; you support the saints according to your measure.
{27}
The High Priest sympathises with us in our infirmities, for He has been *with men* here.
Now Luke presents that: he introduces us to a priestly atmosphere at once in order to prepare us for the coming One, the Priest. He gives us Zacharias and Elizabeth, both of the priestly family, and both are equal to it in their measure, all to prepare us for the Priest; and then the narrative introduces Christ, entering as a Babe and growing up among men, so that He might be with men. He knows the exercises of men, and His support is for them. That is the kind of man that is received up into heaven. It is not, as in John, that He ascends to the Father, or in Mark, that He sits at the right hand of God. But in Luke He is carried up into heaven, signifying that that is the kind of man who is to be in heaven, the man that God approves of for that place. He is suited to the place. Love is the great feature there. Now the Lord went into heaven in that sense, and the most prominent feature was the breastplate; that met God's eye, and He delighted in it. Now, if the Priest goes in, the issue is between Him and the anti-priest; that is to say, Satan is there accusing the brethren day and night before God; @Revelation 12: 10. He accuses the people whom the Lord has on His breastplate, on His heart.
The Lord is qualified to have sympathy with us in every *right* exercise. You take the Psalms: they present exercises which are not distinctly Christian, but they correspond in great measure with the exercises that a soul goes through before knowing deliverance. The Lord is able to enter into them with you. He has gone through that, not in His own exercises, but on account of the position that He took up in connection with Israel. He is capable of sympathy with you in the exercise as He shall be in the future; for He shall enter into the exercises of the godly remnant on earth, and we get the good
{28}
of that beforehand. *Now* He is a Priest in heaven. He is a Priest to a heavenly people, and He enters into all our exercises here in connection with the heavenly system. Thus we become attached to Him: succour is a great force to attach your heart to another. Luke really introduces us to the Priest; he throws, so to speak, a priestly atmosphere around you to prepare you for that.
We show that we are priests practically by the way we take account of the saints. I do not say that is all, because a great deal more attaches to the priest; primarily he is to minister to God in the priest's office; but directly you have the dress described it is very noticeable that the two shoulderpieces and the breastplate secure the most prominent place, and it is in that connection that you have opposition. The priest withstands the anti-priest on behalf of the people. We are told there was war in heaven. The Man-child is caught up, and as He is caught up into heaven there is war in heaven. There is war in heaven now, in the principle of it. In the future it becomes literal. Satan is cast out of heaven, but the conflict is really on now, and it arises from the fact that there, is a Man in heaven with the saints upon His heart. The anti-priest is there, and we are told that he accuses the brethren before God day and night; and the High Priest resents every accusation against the brethren. We must remember that the influences in our favour are supreme. The Priest has gone to the highest place, and with the breastplate, so that the conflict really begins there.
His intercession is of a priestly character. He has each saint's name on His heart, and not simply the aggregate of the saints; so that He takes account of each saint and looks after your affairs up there. If your affairs are taken care of up there; you need have no fear down here, because judgment really issues from the priestly influence.
{29}
One can afford to be accused; you need not endeavour to justify your own cause, for that is in the hands of an abler Person than you. That is not your obligation at all. The Lord has charged Himself with that. It is not that the Lord does not place obligations upon us: He does; but they are such as we are able to discharge. He has not placed an obligation upon you to defend yourself. The judgment shall be according to the Priest. The judgment issues really from the sanctuary. *Now* there is an important difference between God's relations with the world as it now stands, and His relations with the assembly which are marked by *direct* government. His relations with the world are marked by *indirect* government. When He undertakes to govern the world directly, all the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. They do not learn it now. They take advantage of God's grace, but when He sets to govern the world directly; that is, when His judgments are upon the earth, they shall learn righteousness; and if not, they will be removed. There will be no room in the earth for one who does not learn righteousness. The assembly is the sphere for God's direct judgments, and when I use the word judgment I do not speak of that which we should fear. It is righteous discrimination enforced by power, not simply things brought to light. "God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints". In the holiest of all God was armed with power to enforce His judgments; that is what the cherubim signify. We are in a sphere in which God's direct judgment applies. Peter says that judgment is to begin at the house of God. One often sees how man presumes in the things of God; but as sure as the sun rises, God's judgments will find him out. There is nothing surer than the judgment of God. We are told that they come to light every morning. The judgments of God in respect of the assembly are in
{30}
view of discipline and correction; that is to say, in order that we might reach priesthood in its true character.
God would teach us how to govern in view of the coming day, and then also He would have order in His house, and thus He would have here in testimony all the principles of the coming world. All are to be seen in testimony now in the assembly. If we have not righteousness, what have we? We have nothing. God sees to it that there must be righteousness; but then it is most comforting to know that the righteous divine discrimination is according to the breastplate; that is to say, love is behind it, so that we need not fear it. It is called the breastplate of judgment. If your heart is right you can face that. If we judge ourselves we should not be judged; everything must be brought into accord with the breastplate. The Lord loved righteousness. We are taught righteousness in the kingdom.
Nothing is more interesting than to see how the Lord in the gospels taught righteousness to the disciples. He *preached* and *practised* it. God will never deviate one iota from Christ. All have sinned and come short of the glory of God, but God is going to bring us into accord with His glory. Among other things inside the veil, God is seen as armed with power to enforce His rights. This is seen in the cherubim. They are called "the cherubim of glory" in the New Testament. They looked down on the mercy-seat, and what was below that spoke of the heart of Christ. God was intimating that all must be brought into accord with the heart of Christ, and there was power to bring all that about. It would save us much if we made up our minds to that; Christ is the standard. Normally we are brought into accord with Christ by the power of the Spirit. It is a great thing to see that the direct judgments of God apply at the present time to His own sphere,
{31}
and if there is not righteousness, there must be judgment, and the judgments of God are going on all the time. "Every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not".
In @1 Peter 2: 5, things are made to agree with the currency of the sanctuary. The priest is the kind of man that God accepts, his sacrifices are "acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". That is the Man whom God has found pleasure in. In taking up the things of God, if we are to be effectual, we are to love the saints. We are said to be a holy priesthood and a royal priesthood. God revealed His mind through Moses. He did not take Aaron up to the mount. He took Moses up and revealed His mind to him. That is the principle of revelation, and Moses comes down with that. He is from God toward men. What is required to answer to that from men is, that there should be a *Man* drawing near to God in all that light; but then He draws near with the breastplate. Moses did not have the breastplate. Aaron draws near to God on behalf of the people. He has been with the people and knows them by name, and he has them on his heart.
In @Hebrews 4, the word of God is said to be quick and powerful, and immediately you get the Priest. Approach is equal to revelation in Christ. The sons of Aaron did not have the breastplate; only Aaron had the breastplate and shoulderpieces with the names across it. We have part in the approach, because the approach is in the Man who has brought in the revelation, but the wonderful thing is, that in drawing near the Lord draws near with the saints on His heart. What a wonderful thing it is, that One draws near to God who is commensurate with the revelation. And He has our names on His heart. Each one has a place in the heart of Christ, and that settles everything, and woe to the person who accuses the saints. He is pleased to impose obligations on us
{32}
to support others, and to care for them. He does not put any obligation upon us to defend ourselves. He has undertaken that, and therefore it is in much better hands than ours. We have to wait. Suppose you are in difficulties, you may have to wait a while, but your "morning" will come. The day of your hearing will come, and the waiting will be good for you; your case will be brought into adjustment. "Every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not". So that it is on the calendar, and the judgment is according to the breastplate; that is, love will do all in its power for you, and will bring you out without a stain. His eyes "run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him".
As a matter of fact, our vindication is all future, and every right-minded person leaves it there. I do not deny but what you get it among the saints now, you will be justified there. The spiritual will see it, but the future will bring to light everything. So we can go on in patience, leaving it with the Priest. It is in good hands, and the judgment shall be according to the breastplate. It is very much better to sit on the priest's throne than on a Levite's throne. It is very much better to be prominent among the saints as one who loves them, than to be prominent for your preaching or teaching. "If I ... have not love, I am nothing". You may pass muster as a Levite, but according to the currency of the sanctuary you are nothing. It is said of the Lord, that He shall sit as a Priest upon His throne, but the passage begins with the fact that, "he shall grow up out of his place". He maintained righteousness here; He did not interfere with the will of God. Capacity to have to say to God in the sanctuary lies in priestly state, and that is love, marked by holiness and intelligence. Ability of discernment, too, is seen in the priest.
{33}
Everything depends upon whether you have love. Love is most skilful. Feet-washing also is the outcome of the priestly state. If we wash one another's feet, it is because we love one another. The Priest will remove all the spots; everything is adjusted according to the breastplate. The "breastplate of judgment" indicated that judgment would be according to love.
There are two phases of priesthood spoken of here. One has reference to our position in relation to God, that we might offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; the other, the royal priesthood, has reference to man, in order that we might show forth the praises of Him who has called us out of darkness into His marvellous light. We are in the marvellous light of a *Man*, entered into heaven as Priest. It is the greatest pity that we are so slow to avail ourselves of what the system provides; that is to say, the breastplate of judgment. Why are things allowed to drag on that require judgment? Why are they not judged? Why is there no righteous discrimination? It is because we are not in accord with the great Priest who is over the house of God. If we require wisdom, the Lord will help us as to that. "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not". We are in the full light of all that. You bring in Christ and it is wonderful how things become adjusted; I mean, bring in the Spirit of Christ in yourself.
Another great thing about the Priest is, that his lips keep knowledge and people seek the law at his mouth, @Malachi 2. The principles that govern the system are taught by the priest. If there are matters that require judgment they ought to be faced, and we ought to have the sense that we are on the shoulders of Christ our Great Priest, as well as on His heart. If we do not face what is wrong we give the enemy the advantage. We have all that is
{34}
requisite for the adjustment of matters. We should be very simple; if a difficulty occurs go into it, in dependence on the Lord; there is no need for putting it off. The book of Leviticus teaches us that where difficulties arise, everything is made to depend on the priest, and he is called into service at once. It is for us to understand how the priest is called into service, for we are all priests by calling. The priest was able to tell how many stones should be taken out of the leprous house, for instance.
A study of the gospel of Luke helps us enormously in the understanding of priesthood. You want to be prayerful and near the Lord. John is the best illustration of a man who had learned priesthood; he was near the Lord; he was a man characterised by love. In Luke Christ is on man's side, for He is looked at as the Son of man, hence His genealogy is carried back to Adam. He is seen thoroughly among men, yet we know how infinitely perfect He was. The point is, that men should be perfectly free to draw near. He is accessible to men. I think it is most touching. Luke introduces you to Christ, so to speak, in a priestly atmosphere. The whole of the first chapter is this, and the second also. Simeon and Anna are in priestly garments. Simeon holds Him in the temple and he is full of the Holy Spirit; he is the suited vessel to hold the Lord in his arms. Then at the end of the gospel the disciples are seen in the temple praising and blessing God. We may say that the Lord left a company of priests behind Him. Heaven received the High Priest. He lifted up His hands and blessed them, and as He blessed them He was carried up into heaven.
The priesthood was for the maintenance of the system that God had set up. That is perfectly obvious to any one who reads the book of Numbers. You find in chapter 3 the generations of Aaron and Moses, but Moses¬ children are not mentioned. It is
{35}
Aaron's sons that are given, the sons of the priest. Although we are priests by calling, we may not be in a state to exercise priestly function. The priestly state is required. There is a tendency to assume that you have everything because you have faith, but you must become subject to the work of the Spirit. The apostles¬ authority remains in their letters, but what is to support the system is not that. If you have not the priestly state, things must fail. Christianity weakened when priestly power declined.
As to the difference between faith and state, faith is largely that you have light; you are illuminated about things. To have them as an enjoyed thing you need more than that; you need the Spirit's operation in you; so the apostle prays in @Ephesians 3 to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we might be "strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man". Paul saw the great need of power in the saints.
What God wrought *in Christ* is one thing; what He works *in us* is another. It is the same power that wrought in Christ that works in us, but when God wrought in Christ He did not work in us; the work in the assembly covers the whole dispensation, so it is going on now. It is looked at as one complete whole, but including every item of the work; there is one item in you and one in me, and so on. @Ephesians 2 has all in view; it shows you the whole work of God in the saints. "We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works".
You cannot add a cubit to your stature. It is God that does it, for the willing and doing of His good pleasure. Exercise comes in on our side, but God does the work, and what God does is done for ever; you cannot add to it or take from it, so that every bit of God's work done in your soul is done for ever. The thing goes on day by day. The inner man is renewed day be day. The outer man perishes.
{36}
It is remarkable how prominent the thought of day-by-day is in Scripture. @Ephesians 2 takes account of the sum total of that work. He did not do it all when He raised Christ. It is day by day the thing goes on, and it comes out in its grand results, @Ephesians 1 presents the work of God in Christ by the exceeding greatness of God's power. Chapter 2 is the work of God in the saints.
I love to look at God's work in creation. It is a kind of parallel to His spiritual operations. @Ephesians 2 shows that in the ages to come we shall come out as the fruit of God's work. What He has laid in our souls day by day comes out then. The effect of His work is also seen in present testimony.
{37}
THE WRITING ON THE WALL
@Daniel 5: 1 - 6, 17 - 31; @Song of Songs 5: 4, 5.
The thought I desire to bring before you is the effect that the sight of the Lord's hand has on the apostate as compared with the believer, for there is a great difference. Belshazzar was an apostate, like many at the present time. We are living in a day which is marked by apostasy. We are living in times which are marked by a turning away from light previously vouchsafed; this is what marks the present time. One feels especially for young people, for this spirit being abroad affects the youth among the Lord's people. We must remember that Belshazzar's father was a converted man. He had light; he had wonderful light for his time, and he did not conceal it. @Daniel 4 is a confession of his faith. It was not made to his family alone; it was a confession of his faith to his subjects as well. He had a very large congregation. He was really a preacher, and he addressed himself to his subjects, to the whole race of mankind, we may say. He was a preacher among the Gentiles; it was a remarkable testimony.
Nebuchadnezzar was an emperor; and imperialism, in the inception of it, was antagonistic to God. I am digressing in what I am about to say, but the idea of imperialism is to unify the nations, to bring all under one head, whereas in the Old Testament the line God pursued was to divide the nations. We are told in @Acts 17 that God had set the bounds of their habitation. He had circumscribed the different races, setting each by itself to the end, that as thus shut up, they might turn to Him, "if haply they might feel after him". Now that was the line God pursued, but imperialism as taken on by man was against that. Nimrod, as stated in @Genesis 10, started it, and Nebuchadnezzar was his successor.
He was the emperor. He had brought all the
{38}
nations which God had separated under one head. I am not speaking of how God met it, but imperialism in its inception and history was against the mind of God. I might add that God has met it in Christ. He has made Christ the Emperor. God meets every attack of the enemy on His purpose in Christ. Everything is met in Christ. Satan said in effect to the Lord, 'I will make an emperor of you. All these kingdoms are mine; I will give them to you if you worship me'. If the Lord is to rule over the nations, it will be as divinely constituted. He is to receive His dignity from God, and He does receive it. He is the only Man equal to it. He is King of kings and Lord of lords. God made Him this, and He comes out of heaven. All the emperors who have risen on the earth have come from beneath.
In Daniel and Revelation we read of beasts that rose out of the sea. Beware of what comes from beneath! What comes from above is being gradually removed. It is well to warn people about this. The present trend is to remove all that comes from above. The democratic idea is that things come from beneath, but the divine Emperor comes from above with glorious majesty and armies attendant, not the Persian or Babylonish hordes. The Lord Jesus alone has title to unify the nations. What a glorious day for them when brought together under the influence of Christ! In principle, you have that in the day of Pentecost. God met Satan's device by the gift of the Spirit from a glorified Jesus, and no other kind of unity will meet with divine approval; all else is from beneath. On the day of Pentecost, Jesus, the great Head of all the nations, gives the Spirit in the character of cloven tongues. This had reference to the different nations. The tongues meant the over throw of the barriers God had raised up. If God raises up barriers, He only can overthrow them. For anyone else to overthrow these barriers would
{39}
be direct opposition to God, and this is the design of imperialism. How does God do it? By the gift of the Spirit. Cloven tongues as of fire appear. If the fire is present you need not fear the unity. If fire is absent the unity is corrupt. There shall be a unity ere long with no fire, no divine judgment in it.
As the Holy Spirit came we are told "it sat upon each of them". A wonderful testimony was the result. "We do hear them speak in our own tongues the wonderful works of God". What did they speak about? The wonderful works of God. If we suppose that the Babel builders had sent out preachers, what would *they* have spoken about? The wonderful works of *men*. Doubtless they would speak about the great city and tower they were building; but look at what the Spirit of God introduces! The wonderful works of God. I have spoken of Nebuchadnezzar as an emperor, and in doing so turned aside to speak of imperialism; but I wished specially to speak of his faith. He had light from God, and was a preacher, as I said. Belshazzar was therefore the more responsible, for he was aware of this. Daniel said, "thou knewest all this". The empire was passed on to him, but not the faith of his father.
Well, I have referred to this that you might have clearly before you the situation in Daniel, whose name signifies "God is Judge". He does what He pleases, says Nebuchadnezzar, "in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of earth". God is to be Judge. He is taking account of the history of the nations, of the emperors and kings of the earth, and of everything; not one thing escapes His notice. So in chapter 5 you have the fingers of a man's hand writing down the deliberate judgment of God as to all that has gone on. Let us not be deceived, God is cognisant of *everything*. He knows
{40}
what is going on in your heart, what kind of a father and mother you have, what kind of an environment you have been brought up in. He knows your opportunities and privileges, and He holds you accountable. God is Judge. He does what He pleases. He takes account of all, and in due time He writes it plainly on the palace of this world, with the fingers of a Man. Daniel set forth God as judging His people and men generally, but judging them in the Son of man. All judgment is in the hands of the Son of man.
If you saw His hand tonight, would it cause you terror? If you saw one of His features, would it trouble you? Would you recognise it? Many here would. It is one thing to recognise the hand of a lover, and another to recognise the hand of a judge. The former is seen in Canticles, although the same hand that wrote on the wall, in @Daniel 5 -- exactly the same hand. I go further, the Spirit that the Lord breathed into the disciples shall meet the Antichrist in the future and consume him, and yet that Spirit or breath is the life of our souls!
Now, look at the hand of the lover thrust through the hole in the door; there is myrrh on this hand; there was no myrrh on the hand that wrote on the wall in the palace of Babylon. Belshazzar was to be the sufferer; the apostate of today, too, will be a sufferer. But the hand thrust through the hole in the door was the hand of a lover, the hand of a suffering lover, and it was recognised. How many souls in this company and elsewhere gladly recognise the hand of the suffering Saviour! Every time that He puts out His hand, it is a suffering hand; it is the hand that suffered for us. It endears Him to us.
His hand reminds us of Calvary. He has been there for us. It moves our inwards; does it yours? How would that hand affect you if you saw it? It is the test as to whether you are a lover or a hater of Jesus.
{41}
Belshazzar was a hater. He was an idolater, turning aside from the light of his father. Daniel says, in effect, 'You knew it; you knew all about it; you were not ignorant'. Neither have you been ignorant.
The light is round about you. You may not respond to it. "The light shone", said Paul, "round about me and them which journeyed with me". And so with you. Heavenly light shines all *round about us*.
Has it shone in? If not, why has it not shone in?
Are you resisting it? Are you turning away as Belshazzar did? Daniel said he knew it; "thou knewest all this".
It is a dreadful thing to resist the light; it will lead to a deliberate turning away, and that turning away is apostasy, and apostasy brings a writing. Divine writing is a most interesting thing in Scripture. When you write you are more deliberate than when you speak. Before you write, you deliberate. Think of God; think of those fingers of a man's hand! What actuated those fingers? What mind controlled them? The mind of God. It was the holy deliberate expression of God's judgment of that man, and of the kingdom; and that kingdom and that man came to an end the same night. How would it be with you supposing those fingers came down? Could you discern the Lord's hand if you saw it? As I was pointing out, the speaker in Canticles had already had an acquaintance with the Lord, and she recognised His features. Do you not think that in heaven we shall recognise the features of the Lord? Do you suppose we shall require an introduction? I do not.
The speaker in @Song of Songs 5, though slothful, had the advantage of an acquaintance. She was so accustomed to see that hand that she knew it, and the sight of it moved her to give a complete delineation of the Lord's Person. She gives a delineation of His Person from head to foot; and what a Person!
{42}
There is no deterioration; the legs are equal to the head. Such, beloved friends, is the Person of our Lord. Not like Nebuchadnezzar's image, showing deterioration from head to foot, but the description given of the Bridegroom in Canticles shows that He is perfect throughout. His head is as fine gold, and His legs are set upon sockets of fine gold. With Jesus all is perfect. Such was the speaker's acquaintance with the Lord that she could give a complete outline of His glorious features. That is the advantage Christians have. I would not excuse slothfulness or carelessness in Christians; but it is a great encouragement, that when the Lord presents Himself, He is recognised. That is the encouragement I have with erring Christians. Sorrowful it is to admit that there are such; but when the Lord presents Himself to you, you know Him. "I go a-fishing", Peter said; that is an erring Christian, one walking after his own will. The others said, "We also go with thee"; but the Lord appears, and is recognised. "It is the Lord"; that is the beginning of recovery. If you do not recognise His features, there is no hope of you. A Christian goes to see you, and you shut the door in his face, there is no hope of you. You deny the Lord and His gracious consideration for you. If you recognise His features, it is the beginning of recovery; you knew Him before, and you are again in intimacy with Him. A period of darkness has intervened, but you remember the bright period. The Lord does and you will. You will remember what He is like; and now that He has drawn near in grace, you recognise Him, and that is, as I said, the beginning of recovery.
Now, look at Belshazzar. He was surrounded with light; and more than that, he knew it. "Thou knewest all this". What a dark prospect lay before him, a fearful prospect! There is a sphere here on earth in which the light of heaven has been. The
{43}
Gentile world was illuminated by Paul, and what kind of light did Paul have? Heavenly light; that was the light that visited the Gentile world. How are you regarding the light? As I was saying, if you resist it, it will end in your turning away from it, and that means that you espouse darkness, and will finally find yourself supporting apostasy. Awful prospect! If you turn away from light, you support darkness, and "God shall send strong delusion, so that they shall believe a lie". There are those who *make* lies and those who *love* lies. Now those who make lies and those who love lies find themselves together. Where? Outside the gates of the heavenly city. It is bad enough to believe lies, but worse, I think, to make them, but maker and believer are found together. The literature of the present day is pregnant with made lies, deliberately planned, carefully thought out lies. I warn you that if you have anything to do with it, you may be found in the company of those who make the lies.
The Son of man takes up judgment. He is Head of the race, Heir of all that belongs to man. He has taken up every obligation, and discharged all to God's glory; and He now proposes forgiveness and the gift of the. Spirit to everyone on earth. That is what He has secured for us. He is Head of every man. We should glory in the wonderful thought that we have such a Head. Suppose He takes up another position, that of judgment, and suppose He writes on the wall, across the plaster of the earth's palace, what would be the writing? The entire system is weighed in the balance and found wanting, and the whole rule is to pass into the hands of Another. Glorious prospect for Christians! We delight in the termination of the present order of things, but we linger, every true Christian lingers, with Christ, who waits on man, that he might receive forgiveness of sins and the Spirit. That same hand
{44}
is about to write. Christ has written in His death the love of God to man; but He is about to write on this world His estimate of it all. And O! what an estimate! He is the Judge of the earth! and everything is taken account of accordingly, and written down to be seen by all. The world shall tremble, as well it may; but the believer knows the hand, it brings no tremor to him. John trembled, but the Lord said, "Fear not". All those emblems of judgment in Revelation had no reference to John; they had reference to those who had joined the world. So, true Christians, have no fear. We love that hand. It is a suffering hand; but the unbeliever trembles. Belshazzar's knees smote each other; he trembled.
May God grant that you may tremble now in the day of salvation, while the door of repentance is still open-wide open. It is about to be closed. May God grant that if there is anyone here who does not know Christ, he may repent and receive from His hand, that suffering hand, forgiveness of sins and the Spirit.
{45}
PAUL'S MINISTRY -- THE CHRISTIAN'S DISTINCTIVE LIGHT
@Acts 20:17 - 28
My thought is to say a word about Paul and his ministry. It is of all importance that we should pay attention to Paul, for he presents to us in his ministry what may be regarded as our specific light. There is a certain light in which we, as partakers of the heavenly calling, are to shine, and that light is Paul's ministry. I have no doubt that in the ministry of the twelve, especially in Peter's address on the day of Pentecost, we have Israel's light. I do not deny that the chapter presents what is distinctively Christian, for it does, but Peter says, "the promise is unto you"; that is to say, to Israel, it was Israel's moment. The rejected Messiah was in heaven, and He was in heaven on their account. He gave the Spirit, and it was therefore a moment of marvellous light for them, a moment in which we may introduce chapter 60 of the prophet Isaiah; "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee". It was a moment of marvellous light for Israel: Peter testified, that as in heaven, the Lord Jesus had "shed forth this which you now see and hear". It was the moment in which Israel might have shaken themselves from the dust and shone in their light.
Now, I wish to point out that whilst this marvellous light is light for us, it is not our distinctive light. The light in which we are to shine is Paul's light, and if we do not shine in Paul's light, we shall not shine at all. I wish therefore to speak of Paul. As another has said, *Heavenly light makes all things bright*, and in the gaze of that light everything is seen in its true relation. Paul's light is to endure. In chapter 3 of the second letter to Timothy he calls attention to his doctrine and his manner of life, and
{46}
I read this passage because it embodies the two thoughts; it speaks of the manner of man he was, and the teaching he presented to the saints. The man who is to stand in the latter and difficult days is supposed to know these things, he is supposed to be acquainted with Paul's doctrine and with Paul's manner of life. It is possible to divorce the doctrine from the manner of life, but if the manner of life is not in accord with the doctrine, the doctrine must become a dead letter; they go together. If you have the doctrine and the manner of life in agreement, you have the luminous body upon earth. The person whose soul is in the light of Paul's doctrine, and whose life is in accord with it, is a luminous body, a heavenly body; he shines in his own light.
Now I wish to show you, if I can, how the Spirit of God in the Acts leads up to this point; that is to say, He leads up to a point where we find a company of men and women to whom Paul could disclose freely all the counsel of God. What a pleasure to Paul to be able to free to bring forward that which his heart cherished, and to speak freely and fully of every part of the divine counsels! My conception of those who shall throng the courts on high is, that they are intelligent; they answer to Abigail, the last type, as I understand it, of the assembly in the Old Testament; they are of a good understanding and of a beautiful countenance. Those courts shall be thronged with such people. On earth there shall be a people, but not their equal; they shall have God's laws in their hearts, they shall answer in that way to righteousness here, their hearts and minds shall be controlled by God's laws and their sins forgiven, but in the courts on high we shall see the assembly in its glory as formed by Paul's ministry. She will be marked by a good understanding, a full, intelligent apprehension of all the divine secrets, and a beautiful countenance.
{47}
I wish to show also, if I can, the order in which the Spirit of God leads us to that point. I take the liberty of going back to chapter 6 of the Acts, and here I would remind you that the Spirit of God inserts nothing in Scripture without a purpose, and He omits nothing without a purpose, and what He records in the end of chapter 6 is that a man appears whose countenance is as that of an angel's; he is a remarkable man. You will all remember that Stephen was one of those deputed by the apostles to serve tables. Beloved friends, if we ever regard the work that refers to the support of the saints as beneath us, those whom we depute to accomplish it shall shine in our stead. Stephen and Philip shone not only as table-servers, but as ministers of divine and spiritual things. See the face of Stephen! He shines with a heavenly countenance, in the presence of the council; that is the significance of an angel's face. That face did not reflect what was at Jerusalem, it reflected what was in heaven; he shines with a heavenly countenance and he died as a priest. He died praying for his murderers. What a marvellous testimony! It appears at the juncture of the severance of God's relations with His earthly people, like the death of Samuel. You will all remember that Samuel died as Abigail appeared. The link between God and the people was severed, and at that juncture a heavenly countenance appeared; that is to say, what was earthly is superseded by what is heavenly, and the man who shone in the end of chapter 6 with a heavenly countenance, at the end of chapter 7 dies as a priest. Such is God's testimony at the juncture when He severed His relation with His earthly people.
Well now, I want to show you the order in which the truth is developed. You will all remember that Saul was present at the death of Stephen; he saw that countenance, he heard Stephen's testimony;
{48}
and what was it? There was a *Man in heaven*. Peter testified that the One whom they rejected, the same Jesus, the same Man, was anointed in heaven. Of Stephen it is said that "he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God". The Man who was accepted there had secured the glory. What a triumph! Well, Saul heard that, and he saw the priest; he saw a man kneeling and praying for his adversaries, a perfect reflection of the great High Priest who prayed for them at the cross.
What a testimony to Saul! Well now, in the next chapter the spirit of evangelisation appears. The Lord had bought the field, and He had title to it, the treasure was in it, and *that* He would have, and hence the activity of Philip the evangelist.
Now in the passage from Isaiah read by the eunuch you have the Man whose "life is taken from the earth"; that is an important element in the development of the testimony. "His life is taken from the earth", but Stephen saw Him in heaven, and the Ethiopian read about Him. Who shall declare His generation? For He was "cut off out of the land of the living". He is a heavenly Man. He belongs to heaven, His life is taken from the earth. It reminds one of Isaac walking in the fields. You all remember that Isaac is typically the heavenly man. Directly we have the testimony of his resurrection; that is to say, in type the resurrection of Christ, you have the genealogy of Rebecca. Isaac is claimed from heaven, remember that. The angel called to Abraham out of heaven; @Genesis 22: 11. Isaac as typifying Christ belonged to heaven, and he must have a companion, and his companion is to be equal to him, she is of the same genealogy. "Who shall declare his generation? for his life is taken from the earth". Such is the testimony brought to the heart of the Ethiopian eunuch. How Philip would enlarge upon that! We are told that he began there. There is
{49}
no life on earth now, no earthly associations now in which you can find life. Jesus¬ life is taken from the earth. What a start for an Ethiopian eunuch, and how admirably he started! He started rejoicing, he accepted the rejection of that Man, he went down into the waters and was baptised. In the next chapter the Man whose life was taken from the earth is speaking from heaven. In chapter 7 He is *standing* in heaven, and in chapter 9 is *speaking from* heaven. Let us pay attention to that.
First of all the light shines out of heaven, and then the voice is out of heaven, all a direct intimation of the change of base of God's operations. Jerusalem is displaced by heaven, and then the voice is out of heaven. That voice secures the vessel, for round about Paul there shone a light from heaven, his environment was illuminated from heaven and his heart was touched by a voice from heaven. Saul became a vessel of heavenly light. You will all remember how Paul gives an account of the incident; indeed he gives two accounts of it. Luke gives one, and his is simply that it was "a light from heaven". Paul's first account is that it was a "great light" out of heaven, and his second is that it was "a light from heaven above the brightness of the sun". These things are recorded thus doubtless as reminding us of the character of his ministry; it was heavenly.
Well now, the Lord has His vessel. He is the vessel through whom the great treasure is to be brought to light and formed. The field was wide, the treasure was in it, but it was bought in all its extent. I am referring to @Matthew 13. The Lord, on the ground of redemption, has secured right-of-way among mankind in order that He should have the treasure. He can seek for it where He pleases and who dares to dispute His right? And hence in chapter 10 the door is opened out into the wide field; Peter opens the door and Paul goes out by the door
{50}
Peter did not. You will all remember the introduction of the assembly in the gospel of Matthew; Peter got the light of it, but not the ministry of it. He was simply commissioned with the keys of the kingdom of heaven; he got the keys, we may say, to let Paul out. I am speaking now from one point of view, there are others. The Lord had the vessel, Paul, and he was to search the field; he had a message that extended to the whole field, and Peter opened the door. It will be found to be a principle in the Acts, that in every locality where the work of God progresses, some special feature of the testimony comes to light. At Caesarea the door was opened; the Gentiles came in and Paul went out. I am speaking now as you understand in the most general way. "Unto thee", says the Lord to Peter, "I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven". Directly the assembly is introduced, the keys of the kingdom are introduced in order to make room for it, and to make room for the vessel by whom it shall be brought in.
When you come to @Acts 11, you find Barnabas, he appears earlier as a consolation to the apostles, "son of consolation", but here he is sympathetic with what God is doing, a great element in the development of the testimony,; and following upon that he was at Antioch. At the end of chapter 11 you will find what is priestly. There was need among +he saints and those at Antioch were equal to it. They lent the shoulder, they gave as each man had ability for the support of the saints; that was manward, that was royal. In the beginning of chapter 13 you have the same people in principle ministering Godward. The priesthood was now amongst the Gentiles; they ministered to the Lord and to the saints. That is the testimony that appears at Antioch. The priesthood is there, and depend upon it, without the priesthood you have nothing; with it you have everything. In the beginning of
{51}
chapter 13 Paul is not only sent out by the Spirit, but he goes out with the full fellowship of the saints. Antioch is in connection with heaven, it is in full sympathy with Barnabas and with Paul.
I pass on now to @Acts 18 in order to show how Paul's ministry progressed, and I would say in brief that while Corinth presents to us the wilderness side of it, Ephesus, in chapter 19, presents to us the results of his ministry in the heavenly side of it. I wonder if you follow what I mean by that. We have to take account of our position in this world as a company of people that have had their part in the world; we ran riot with the Gentiles, we followed the bent of our own wills, and in doing so we have dishonoured God; but we have been converted; that is the position at Corinth. The Lord says to Paul at Corinth: "Be not afraid ... I have much people in this city". The Lord shall have a people in heaven, but He has *people in a city*. You can well understand that it is one thing to see a company of God's people divinely taken account of in a city on earth, and another to see the same people taken account of in heaven. Now Corinth is the one and Ephesus is the other. There is a company of people in a city belonging to the Lord, and His name is bound up with them. God has been pleased to convert them, to own them, to call them out of the world and to give them a name, the assembly of God *at Corinth*. They are God's assembly there.
Now you can readily perceive how many thoughts enter into that, they have come out of Egypt and they are in the wilderness. I need not remind you that Corinth is the wilderness; it was adverse for the saints of God in every possible way, and yet they were in it, taken account of, and called God's assembly in it. God's honour is bound up with that people, His order is to be seen there, His government is to be seen there, and every member of that company is
{52}
to recognise that it is God's assembly, not man's and in that assembly there is everything requisite for its support, maintenance and order. It was God's building, God's temple, and it was Christ's body in that city. Now all that was brought to pass through Paul's ministry. The Lord stood by him until the saints at Corinth were delivered, and then he writes his letter to them, which is left on record, and shows how the assembly is to be governed during all the period of the absence of the Lord. When you come to Ephesus, you have the saints not viewed in the wilderness or according to what is manward, which is Corinth, but according to what it is Christward and Godward; in other words, in Ephesus we reach the treasure, and I might add we reach the pearl.
Now I have come to the point that I desire to leave with us and to enlarge on for a moment. One has great exercise that the saints, as I have been saying, might shine in their own light. See how earnestly and ceaselessly Paul laboured, in order that the Ephesian saints might shine in their own light. Now he was departing and he sends for the elders. The elders were those who were specially entrusted with the responsibility of the flock. He says, Feed the flock of God "which he has purchased with the blood of his own". It is the strongest kind of expression, showing what Christ is to God. It is not simply the beloved, or the beloved Son, it is a stronger term as expressing affection; it is God's Own, as though there were not another. In that light the flock is regarded; they are those who are purchased with the blood of One so loved.
Now look at verse 18: the apostle says, "Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons". Paul, first of all, calls attention to his "manner". I am exceedingly convinced of this that the Lord would
{53}
remind us of Paul. He is the only man in the Scriptures who calls upon us to follow him. He says, "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ". Then it says, among other things, he was accustomed to go from house to house. You will all remember that as minister of Satan (@Acts 8) he went into houses; he was accustomed then to go from house to house, but in those instances it was to destroy the members of the assembly, and to obliterate every lover of Christ. He went into houses in order to secure the members. What a complete change now! And then it says, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God"; that is the point I would like to lead you up to. Before the apostle Paul was removed, there was not one whit of God's counsels that had not been brought to light; and mark you, the light was not presented to an unsympathetic audience; the Ephesians were sympathetic with the ministry. They loved Christ, and not only did they love Christ, they were set in Christ's love. In other words, Paul had placed them in the affections of Christ -- what a position! His ministry was completed when he presented the assembly to Christ, he placed her in Christ's affections. He says, "I have espoused you unto one man to present you a chaste virgin to Christ". That was his aim and he laboured to this end at Ephesus. Paul had no compeer. Alas! the assembly moved away afterwards; the Lord says, "I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love"; they had left the position in which Paul placed them, but the triumph of his work was in this, that he placed the assembly in the affections of Christ. No one could say that Paul is responsible if they move away from Christ. He says, "I am pure from the blood of all men".
What great pains the Lord has taken, if one may speak simply and freely, to bring forward the divine
{54}
thoughts and counsels! What are we going to do with them? The word is, "Arise, shine; for thy light is come!" Our light is come, and we are to shine in it. May the Lord give us to loose from our moorings. "Forget also thine own people, and thy father's house; so shall the king greatly desire thy beauty". Separation is the first principle of love for Christ, separation from all that is contrary to Him here, and as the Lord sees it in you, you are covered with beauty in His eyes. "So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty". May the Lord grant that we may answer to this!
{55}
CHRIST AS PRIEST ON HIS THRONE
@Zechariah 3 and 4
My thought is to seek to show the connection between Jerusalem and the priesthood. Of old you will remember it was indicated in the typical books that the system introduced by Moses was made to depend for its continuance upon the priest; that is to say, the order of God in the created universe is made to depend upon the priest. You will remember the principle enunciated in chapter 1 of the epistle to the Hebrews that God made everything by the Son; everything was called into being and set in its order by the Son. Then following upon that we have the principle that He upholds what He created. Wonderful thought! As we look abroad on the vast expanse of the heavens and take account of the earth and its surrounding planets, let us remember that all that is upheld by the Son, "upholding all things by the word of his power".
It is a principle you find in Scripture, that what the Lord establishes in the way of authority on the part of God He sustains and perpetuates. Moses on the mount with Jehovah received all instructions as to the tabernacle. Everything had to be made according to his direction. There was no communication to Aaron in regard of the tabernacle, but the upholding of the system was made to depend upon the priest. Therefore what we learn is, that the spiritual order of things which God has in His mind is established in the revelation of God; it is inaugurated by Christ coming out from God. The tabernacle has been pitched. We are told that Christ came by a greater and more perfect tabernacle.
Christ has pitched it, but what He has pitched He sustains, so that it is continuous. He sustains it as a priest.
Now when you come to Jerusalem you have another
{56}
line of thought. Jerusalem refers to government. There are many thoughts connected with Jerusalem that one could dwell upon, but the leading thought is that it is the centre of government upon earth. Satan understands that. You often hear predictions in regard of certain happenings in the East, but they must all of necessity be wide of the mark. You shall have no prophetic happenings until God returns to Jerusalem, and whilst the saints are here who will form the heavenly city, you shall have no return to Jerusalem. Satan is not occupied with Jerusalem now; he is occupied with Jerusalem above, the heavenly city, and he would accuse those who form it. The hour is coming when he shall be occupied with Jerusalem on earth; that is, when God returns to it. You will not find Satan making a move until God makes a move; in other words, he always seeks to thwart the divine movements and the divine activities. Well now, what God has in His mind is that Jerusalem is not only to be influenced by a king, it is to be influenced by a priest.
In turning to Zechariah one feels particularly encouraged because his ministry had to do with the returned remnant; not with Jerusalem in its pristine days under David and Solomon, but with Jerusalem as rebuilt by the returned captives of Babylon. You will all remember that in association with Haggai, Zechariah stirred up Joshua and Zerubbabel, and the others who laboured at the city and the temple. He was a prophet raised up to stir up the energies of the people, therefore you can rightly draw a parallel with our own times. There was no king raised up after the captivity; kings came in, I admit, but not divinely appointed; but there was a priest. My object in referring to it in this way, is to point out that what we require, beloved brethren, is the priest. I quite admit that we must submit to the authority of the Lord, that is of all moment. I
{57}
have not a doubt but that this has been raised amongst us and for a purpose. The Lord must rule, His will must prevail, but remember that the Ono whose will prevails and must prevail, is also priest. He sits upon His throne to rule, but if He does so He is a priest there. In other words, He supports us to do His will and to keep His commandments; such is the Lord, such is He with whom we have to do.
Now you will see in chapter 3, that the situation there is Jerusalem; there is Joshua, the high priest, he is the great object of attention; there is Satan, there is the Lord, and the angel of the Lord. How many far-reaching thoughts enter into all that. I do not propose to dwell upon the chapter save to point out the exact situation, and I am not speaking of it in the way of prophetic teaching as regards what is future, but as regards what is present. If anything has happened to us spiritually, we have been recovered from Babylon. What are we recovered to? We are recovered to first principles, and the first principle connected with Jerusalem is that it was God's sovereign choice. He chose mount Zion, which He loved. He desired to dwell there, hence He selected it as a matter of sovereign choice. There is no principle more important to submit to than that. Our blessing is bound up with the recognition of it. Why have I been recovered, enlightened and blessed? It is a question of the sovereign rights of God; He delighted in it, and I submit, and my happiness is bound up in the submission. The next thing is, that that which God has desired and selected is to be the sphere and centre of rule and light on the earth, and Jerusalem was that; indeed it is intimately bound up with David. You will all remember that David took the head of Goliath to Jerusalem. It was the token of his triumph, when he led captivity captive. God has taken us up sovereignly, He has
{58}
placed His light amongst us, and He has placed in the assembly a testimony to the exceeding greatness of His power, that is in the resurrection of Christ. That is what Jerusalem stands for; and Joshua is there. One might dwell with the greatest delight on the subject of Joshua; passing over certain features which have reference to him as a sinner, and speak of him as a type of Christ.
Now Satan is against Jerusalem and the priesthood.
That is the situation, and what we find is this, that the Lord is against Satan, and, Satan is outmatched: I want you to take that in. You remember Joshua at Jericho; he assumed that he had to overthrow and dislodge the Canaanitish nations, but there was a Man with a drawn sword in his hand standing before him, and Joshua said to him, "Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?" The man with a drawn sword answered, "Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come". He was against the Canaanitish nations, and they were outmatched, and it was for Joshua to recognise that, and he did. It was, as it were, the Lord saying to him, 'It is a question of you being with me, for I am against them'. So here, the Lord is against Satan, and he is therefore outmatched. The battle is won at the outset; if the Lord is against the adversary it is victory, it cannot be otherwise. "The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee". What rest of heart that would impart to Joshua, and what rest of heart it should impart to us! The conflict is the Lord's; His testimony was bound up with Jerusalem, and He is bound to defend it. Satan is silenced. Then we get the clothing of the high priest. He is mitred and robed. Satan has no more to say, for the Lord has rebuked him, and that is what we should look for. Opposition there will be, but let us remember that the Lord rebukes the adversary, and if the adversary is
{59}
silent, we shall have the priest. Joshua is now set up in dignity in Jerusalem. Now what an influence you have! God intends it to extend from Jerusalem. He intends that there should be light and rule amongst His people, and so the centre whence it issues is under the direct influence of the Priest.
Now I turn to @Zechariah 6. You will see there that there are two distinct classes of agencies used in the government of God; there are four chariots issuing from between two mountains of brass and drawn by certain coloured horses. It is well to remember how extensive God's rule is and how varied the instruments of it are. There are two mountains of brass. I do not suppose that there is a right minded Christian here, or anywhere, who is not affected by the conditions which prevail in the world. We cannot be with God without feeling them. We, forget too much the divine sensibilities as to what prevails in the world; the world is lawless in every possible way. Well now, in this chapter, we have what may be called the *indirect* instruments of His government and the *direct* instruments of His government. We should pray for both. One knows it in one's self and one notices it in others, how little we enter into the divine mind as to the conditions in the world, and yet we are enjoined to pray for the powers that be. They are the indirect instruments of the divine government upon earth, and we should be thankful for them.
We read that the chariots issue forth from between two mountains of brass, and I have not a doubt that they allude to the four great empires that God was pleased to use for maintaining the order of the world; but what I would point out is this, that whilst they mitigate to a certain degree the lawlessness in the world, yet their energy is that of *horses*. If they were simply beasts, they would not be under divine control. In themselves that is what the
{60}
empires were, wild beasts, utterly conscienceless but a horse is within control. In His indirect govern went God saw to it that these powers were under control and useful, but they are not God's people God's people are not horses, they are all priests, and priests are not held in by bit and bridle, they are governed through the mind and heart. The Lord set forth the idea here upon earth and taught it to His disciples. Priests are controlled through their affections, and their influence is through the affections. Horses are not regarded as having affection or sensibilities at all that are in accord with God; they are controlled by external influence. In the Psalms we are exhorted not to be like them; alas we are often like them. If our wills are at work, we become as horses, having to be held in by the bit and bridle. The Psalmist, having been in the sanctuary, says, "I was as a beast before thee".
In these four chariots and horses we have what we may call the providential instruments of God's government, and alongside these we have the priest, and that is what I desire, dear brethren, might be clearly before our minds. There are crowns made of gold and of silver, and the crowns were placed upon Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high priest; that was for a testimony. God was calling attention to the great contrast between the empires that He used in His government upon the earth, and His precious Son as King and Priest, for Joshua was a type of Christ. That is the testimony of the book of Zechariah. Luke specially presents to us that blessed Man; he traces His history back to Adam, but the truth that He is a divine Person is ever asserted. As born unto this world it is said "that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God". His uniqueness is carefully guarded at the outset, but He is a Man, hence He is taken from among men to be a Priest.
{61}
Now what is said of Him here in @Zechariah 6 is, "he shall grow up out of his place". That could not be said of any of the great emperors of the world, for they sought their own glory and their own fame; they disregarded God. But look at Christ! He grew up out of His place; there was no effort to alter His circumstances, He was perfect as a Boy, and perfect as a Man in every respect; He was subject to the divine will. Not only did He abide in righteousness, He *loved* it, and He is the One who is to rule. In fact, one might say He is the divine Emperor. I think you will understand me. You will remember in @Revelation 12 it is said, that the Man-child was caught up to God and to God's throne, and that He was to rule the nations; that is imperialism. The nations are to be ruled by a Man who loved righteousness and hated lawlessness, and in @Revelation 19 He comes out of heaven as the Emperor, "King of kings and Lord of lords". That indicates the mind of God as to the government of the earth, that the nations are to come under His righteous, holy sway.
The scripture goes on to say, "he shall grow up out of his place, and shall build the temple of the Lord: even he shall build the temple of the Lord; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne; and the counsel of peace shall be between them both". That is Christ. What a contrast you have there to the great rulers of the world! There was the entire absence of the divine glory in their rule, but in Christ you have it; He bears the glory. I want to point out that He shall be a Priest upon His throne; and that the counsel of peace shall be between them both. That is to say, rule and priesthood are united in the counsel of peace, and that is what we need, dear brethren, the counsel of peace. There is no surrender of principle; we never should admit the principle of agreement to differ, which is
{62}
contrary to the divine mind. "The counsel of peace shall be between them both". There is a righteous ruler, One who grew up out of His place without any will of His own, He was a Branch, He was dependent. He reached the throne, and He rules there, and He bears the glory, and He is there a Priest. There is a righteous rule combined with the sympathy of a Priest, and hence you have the counsel of peace. That is what the Lord's people require.
Now that is what the Lord Jesus brings in; we recognise His rule and His priesthood, and, as a consequence, we have a counsel of peace. He is there on His throne, and all the weight of the divine glory is supported by Him. He thinks of us, and hence the counsel of peace is there. It is not agreement to differ, it is a counsel of peace based upon a righteous, discriminating rule. The sympathies of the Priest are allied to a righteous rule, and that counsel shall stand. There are counsels that do not stand, but that counsel shall stand; that is the counsel of peace. May the Lord grant it to us!
{63}
A TWOFOLD TRANSACTION
@Acts 9:1 - 19
I have in mind to dwell on two transactions in this chapter; one with the Lord Jesus directly, and the other with the brethren, the saints of God. This chapter is much used in the proclamation of the glad tidings, and I am using it now because it presents these two themes; a transaction between the Lord Jesus and a great sinner; and then a transaction between the saints, or one of them, and that same man. The second transaction is of as much importance as the first if the work of God is to be *completed* in us.
The first transaction is with the Lord, announcing Himself as Jesus: "I am Jesus". Luke particularly emphasises that name as appearing in the earlier part of this book, for he would dissipate in the minds of men and woman all prejudice that is apt to be there against God, for generally He is not known. He is apprehended in people's minds in a distorted way as if He were hard and exacting, whereas Luke would disabuse our minds of all such thoughts. He would emphasise Jesus as representing God here, and that name should not strike terror into anybody's heart; it is calculated to appeal even to a child -- "the name of Jesus". Hence we find in this book that the writer commences by referring to "all things that Jesus began both to do and to teach". In approaching man, the *doing* comes first; it is not exacting but helping and blessing man. Elsewhere we are told that He "went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with Him",
@Acts 10: 38. The *doing* is placed first, and then the teaching, for teaching in itself will not represent God, we need the teaching exemplified.
{64}
Luke is referring to what he had written already to this believer called Theophilus, so we are directed back to his gospel for examples of the doings of Jesus, and of the teachings of Jesus. The aim is to clear the mind of any hard thoughts and misconceptions of God, for He was in Christ reconciling the world to Himself, not imputing their trespasses. In the well-known incident recorded in Luke of two persons, one of whom owed much to a certain creditor and one little, we are told that when they had nothing to pay, "he frankly forgave them both". It was to convey the gracious attitude of God to sinners, and that is what the gospel by Luke emphasises.
Then in @Acts 1 Luke speaks of Jesus going up into heaven, those who loved Him having beheld Him going up. Most of us here tonight love Jesus, and love, too, the thought of His going up. Luke ends his gospel by telling us that Jesus was "carried up into heaven"; heaven honoured Him by carrying Him up. Those who loved Him beheld Him, and then the angels tell them that the same Jesus whom they saw going into heaven should in like manner come back again. That is what we think about; but if you are not a believer in Christ you do not think of that. We who love Jesus think of Him as having gone up, and as coming back; and in the meantime we are seeking to make Him known here, to announce Him as glad tidings. How sweet and full the name Jesus is! It signifies "Jehovah the Saviour", @Matthew 1:21.
Then Peter takes up the same note, as recorded in the next chapter; he says, "God hath made that same Jesus ... both Lord and Christ", @Acts 2: 36, and, "being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear". That is the Holy Spirit. Did
{65}
you ever hear of the Holy Spirit? He is a divine Person sent down here by the Lord Jesus, and available to the believer. If you repent now and believe the gospel you will get the Spirit; He is given to all those who obey Christ, @Acts 5:32. This is what came to light as Peter preached his first gospel address; what he said was about Jesus, and three thousand were converted on that day. The bearing of it is that anyone may be converted while listening to the gospel; you may be converted now.
Up to the chapter we have read there is no record of any *direct* transaction between a soul and Christ; the gospel was carried on mediately through others, as it is by me this evening. Jesus has gone to heaven, but has witnesses to speak of Him here. The preaching is through Jesus, whether He employs vessels or not, the work is His. He preached the glad tidings of peace to those afar off and to those that are nigh, @Ephesians 2: 17.
Now the time has come to bring out this feature, that whilst you may hear the preaching and be convicted, there must, at some time or another in the history of your soul be a *direct transaction with the Lord*. I put that to every one of you here. Have you arrived at this point? Have you turned to the Lord? Has there been a direct personal transaction between the Lord and your soul? Let this search our hearts. He calls us by name. Has it never occurred to you that the Creator, the Upholder of the universe should have knowledge of you, and should know you by name? Here is a young man whose name the Lord knew, and he was no more commendable than you. Indeed, if there was one man on earth at that time who deserved to be utterly obnoxious to heaven it was this young man. Yet his name was known by the Lord Jesus; and so is yours, specially if there is any movement towards
{66}
God. Evidently there was movement in Saul. The Lord refers in @Acts 26: 14, to him as kicking against the pricks. The Lord was watching that young man, and knew what was going on in him from the time he held the clothes of those who were stoning the martyr Stephen.
We have great ability to conceal our inward motives and feelings, but we cannot conceal them from the Lord. He knows what is going on in your soul and in mine. The something going on may be extremely faint; as I was, saying the other day, quoting from @Amos 3: 12: "The shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear". The Good Shepherd sees there has been a little lending of the ear to the word at some time or other. It arrested you, though you did not give much attention to it; still there was something, and the Lord noticed it. Such is His keen interest in us that He notices the least bit of inclination for the word. In His vigilance the Saviour notices these things, "a bit of an ear", not a whole one; the Shepherd rescues that from the mouth of the lion. You may have been uneasy sometimes; not always, for Satan watches to obliterate the impression made by the word. Maybe you are unhappy, your will is active. It says of the elder brother of the prodigal, that "he *would not* go in", and the Lord says, "How often would I have gathered .. and ye *would not*". This may be *your* attitude while the word of God says, You *should* submit now, your eternal welfare depends on your submission to Christ. Do not therefore continue saying, I will *not*. There is a struggle going on; your conscience has been touched, but you have not yet submitted. The Lord would save you, He has compassion on you, and says, 'It is hard for you'. You cannot get rid of the effect produced by the light of God, although you may seek to drown it by the pleasures
{67}
of this world. One inquired, "Whither shall I flee from thy presence?" @Psalm 139: 7. And we read, "All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do", @Hebrews 4:13.
Now, are you going to trifle with God, and to carry on this conflict with Him? Are you stronger than He? The Lord calls Saul by name, and says, "It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks". The first movement towards repentance gives you a place in heaven. The Lord knows everyone's name, of course, but it is one thing to be known in the sense that He knows all things, and another to be known on moral grounds. As soon as there is the least movement of repentance, the thing is recorded in heaven, you have begun to add to the history of heaven. If the history of heaven could be written as the history of the earth has been, you would have records of repentance and conversions; that is what heaven takes notice of. As soon as you begin to repent towards God, and to have faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ, you begin to make history in heaven. Maybe you have never made any history on earth; many aspire to it, but I prefer to make history in heaven. Every true Christian has a name and fame in heaven. The Lord said to His disciples, "Your names are written in heaven", @Luke 10: 20. He also says, "There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth", @Luke 15: 10. It is not only that there is joy over a great many, such as the three thousand who repented at Pentecost, but over *one* sinner. That is how it was with Saul, the Lord called his name *twice*, and it was in the *Hebrew tongue*. If I were a German, He would speak to me in German, and if I were English, in English. He would avoid everything that might prejudice me against what He seeks; that is, my salvation. He would speak to my heart and secure my heart. No doubt Saul would
{68}
have understood Greek or Latin, but the Lord speaks in Hebrew, his mother tongue.
The Lord had said, "I am Jesus". You may say, You speak to me of Jesus, His grace, His gentleness, His attractiveness, but I have never seen Him or heard Him. Have you not? Had Saul not seen Him or met Him before? He had. He had persecuted Him. He had taken those who believed on Jesus, and *were like Him*, to prison; he had come across Jesus in *that* way; and in this sense there is not one here tonight who has not come in contact with Jesus. His people are sitting around you here, they are like Jesus; they think of you with compassion, they pray for your salvation. The whole atmosphere in this room is in your favour, and I appeal to you now about these transactions, first with Jesus, and then with the disciples of Jesus. Turn to Jesus now, and then you will be ready for the brethren. Saul says, "What shall I do, Lord?" This is a very good question. Jesus had spoken to him, and the light shone round him, and now *the next move was his*. What was he to do? Nothing like what the Roman Catholic Church would tell you; they would give you a long list of penances and things to do. The Lord Jesus gives you nothing like that to do. He says to Saul, "Go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do".
The Lord sends Saul into the city, and that brings me to the second transaction; that is, with the brethren. Some of you here have never had that, though maybe you are saved. I know of young persons who have confessed the Lord and know their sins forgiven, and yet have never come to this transaction with the brethren. The Lord would say to them exactly as He said to Saul, "Go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do". Perhaps there is a young person here who has been converted for a year or so, and has had a transaction
{69}
with the Lord, but has had no transaction with the brethren. If so, I would like to speak to you of it tonight. Now Saul had fallen to the earth, he was blind, seeing no man. Is that the state of your soul? Perhaps you can see men, though they be "as trees walking", @Mark 8: 24; but Saul saw no man. Moreover in that state he did not eat. Some people are fed in a state of blindness in wrong associations, before they know forgiveness or adjustment with God. Saul did not eat, he was left blind and hungry for three days and three nights. Now the next move must be from the saints. Can *they*  help him?
Ananias goes to Saul and says, "Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou tamest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight and be filled with the Holy Ghost". Saul had been breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, but he will never do that again; he is a blind and penitent sinner. He is about to be completely saved, the work is about to be finished. Ananias says, "Brother Saul". Is it not sweet to be addressed as a brother? It belongs to the *family*; as believers on Christ we are brought into the family of God, @John 1: 12, 13; we are also brought into the fellowship of God's Son, @1 Corinthians 1: 9. Let me appeal to you now. How many of you here have confessed the Lord, but have never had this transaction with the brethren? The brethren putting their hands on you is fellowship; they commit themselves to you, linking you thus with all that are calling on the Lord out of a pure heart. There is an Ananias here who would be very glad to put his hands on you now and call you "brother". That implies that you are identified with the saints; they put their hands on you as *confirming the work of God in you*; they identify themselves with you.
{70}
Peter says, as to the case of Cornelius, that it was God who did it, and "What was I that I could withstand God", @Acts 11: 17. He accepted it, and those in Cornelius¬ house were baptised as having received the Holy Spirit. Would you not like Ananias, so to speak, to put his hands on you and call you brother? You will understand that I refer to one or more of the dear brethren in this town. The scales fell from Saul's eyes, "he received sight forthwith and arose and was baptised". He would see Ananias, the brother sent to him directly from Jesus. "And when he received meat he was strengthened". Then he abides certain days with the disciples; he is thoroughly in fellowship. And then he preaches Jesus, in the synagogues, that He is the Son of God.
Thus in this remarkable account of the conversion and introduction into the assembly of Saul of Tarsus there is light and guidance for all who would obey Christ. May the Lord grant help to us all by what has come before us!
{71}
*Pages 71 - 157 -- "The Defence of the Testimony", Belfast, 1914 (Volume 21)*.
THE BELIEVER SET FOR THE DEFENCE OF THE TESTIMONY -- PART 1
@Numbers 1: 1 - 4,17,18,44 - 54.
J.T. The book of Numbers clearly contains the instructions intended by the Spirit to govern us as viewed externally in relation to the testimony here; whereas the book of Leviticus refers to our access to God, to our approach: Thus it is rightly set before the book of Numbers; for before we can be right outside, we must be right inside; before we can be for God publicly, we must know what it is to be *with* God. Hence Leviticus is taken up with man's approach to God, and so we find that God spake to Moses "out of the tabernacle", without saying it was in the wilderness; whereas in Numbers He spake to Moses from the tabernacle "in the wilderness;" that is the position, in the wilderness.
Ques. That is a most important principle to be recognised?
J.T. Yes; it is a very affecting thing to be taken account of, formally, by God, as this book of Numbers teaches us. Numbering signifies that God is taking account of His people.
Ques. Is that individually?
J T. Yes; God formally takes account of us, and gives us our place; each one has his own place in relation to the tabernacle. First of all we are taken account of; it is very touching. Think of being taken account of by God! Many young believers have no idea that God knows them by name; and that they have a certain niche to fill for Him. No one is excluded from the numbering; every male from a certain age upwards, is numbered.
Ques. What is the idea of the tabernacle?
{72}
J.T. It was a receptacle for the testimony; it was that in which the light of God found its home. The necessity for it appears when the testimony was given.
Rem. We have not got it in a material form now.
J.T. No; "Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building". It is not a tabernacle of material things; it is not of this creation; it is moral; and that is what we have to deal with.
As you proceed with the instruction in this book, you find the tabernacle is the great central thought; and a great deal is made of how it was to be taken down and carried. There is nothing of that in Leviticus. When it was set up, "a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle", @Exodus 40: 34. God was there, and would be approached; and He has provided all this in order that we may draw near. There is nothing to keep us away except our own will; everything is provided that we may draw near. Now Numbers opens, not with the idea of drawing near, but that we are taken account of by God, so as to be set up in relation to His testimony, we are to be men of war.
Rem. It is more than merely the thought of our blessing; it is taking account of what is of God on earth.
J.T. Yes; the testimony could not be here without conflict; and therefore it requires to be defended; and every man able to defend it is assigned a position.
Ques. How would you say we get a knowledge of the tabernacle in order to defend it?
J.T. Well, Paul went to Corinth, for instance, and announced the testimony of God. There is the testimony, and then there is place for it. It is
{73}
called firstly, the tabernacle of testimony, and secondly, the tabernacle of the congregation. The tabernacle of the testimony is that in which God is set forth. Paul announced the testimony of God, and the consequence was there was a gathering; the testimony was to find a place there.
Rem. It was where the light was.
J.T. And that has to be defended; every true believer is called upon to defend it. The military men were required to be 20 years of age; and the Levites were required to be 30. The believer, in his daily avocation, is to be ever ready to defend the truth. You must not lower your standard at any time. It may be said, 'This is not the place for that; this is not the meeting;' but at all times we are to be ready to defend the truth.
Ques. In what way do you defend it?
J.T. You *confess* it; and then you have all that is necessary to support you, because, "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved". There is support in *the Name*, and you have the consciousness that the Holy Spirit is with you.
Rem. It is a most important thing for a young believer to confess the name of the Lord. It may be said that your life should confess Him.
J.T. Scripture does not say that your life shall confess Him; it is "confess with thy *mouth*;" but your life is to be in accord with your mouth.
Rem. There would be a distinct advance in the soul that confesses Jesus as Lord.
J.T. I think that in conflict you get confirmed as to how real things are. In coming into contact with the world you come under reproach for your confession, but you get confirmed of the Lord in it. In that way you acquire strength as a soldier. After you become 30, you become a Levite. This chapter,
{74}
and the next chapter, are military chapters; then you get the levitical chapters.
Rem. There has to be the secret relationship with the Lord, in order to take this stand outside.
J.T. I think a person who is 20 years old in Christianity, speaking figuratively, has the Spirit; he has come to the age of manhood.
Ques. I was wondering if something of the priestly side would not need to be known before this?
J.T. Well, Leviticus has to be known; approach should first be known, because if you do not go *in*, you do not know what you have to defend. It is a great thing to know what you are going to defend.
Rem. A person might have the Holy Spirit, and believe in Christ risen, and yet not have gone within much.
J.T. Still, he has light; light comes in by the Spirit. No one can be in relationship with God unless he passes the brazen altar. The brazen altar stood between the entrance of the court and the door of the tabernacle; that part was figuratively like the space between heaven and earth. The gift of the Spirit connects us with what is within.
Rem. There could not be intelligent warfare unless there was an apprehension of approach.
J.T. The tabernacle position typifies the heavens and the earth, and the space between is typical of the place where the Lord was "lifted up;" that is where sin was judged. The Lord says "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all unto me". He was there in view of all, as it were, but then, the gift of the Spirit is beyond that, and gives you a place within.
Ques. Is there any special thought in calculating the age for defence to be at 20?
J.T. Because at 20 you attain manhood; we call it 21; but according to God's reckoning it is 20.
{75}
At the age of 30 a man is at his prime, physically; hence the Levites served from 30 to 50; but nevertheless, manhood is attained at 20. There may be certain development still required, but he is viewed as a man, and he is accepted to defend the truth so far as he has it. He is not expected to give an address to Christians, or to teach; that is to say, he is not expected to do levitical work; but he is expected to defend the truth if it is attacked.
Rem. You might do that under 20.
J.T. You could not do it spiritually under 20. The antitype is, that a man who is justified has the Spirit. We read in Romans, that "if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved". I read in that confession that you are in your military position. *You confess* Him; and as confessing Him you are saved, because He supports you.
Rem. And you stand by that.
J.T. Yes, you never lower your standard.
Rem. That is the work of the Spirit, to defend.
J.T. It is in the power of the Spirit.
Rem. He defends the light he has.
Rem. It was on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, that this numbering took place.
J.T. Yes; it shows that they were one year and one month in the wilderness before these instructions were given. They were prepared for it.
Rem. So that it is beyond the thought of relief.
J.T. The truth of Exodus is supposed; and the truth of Leviticus is supposed; because if you look at the dates, this comes in after Leviticus. God does not put upon us burdens we are not able to bear. He puts burdens upon us according as we are able to bear them.
{76}
The people in the camp had the opportunity of seeing the furniture of the tabernacle constructed; they had the opportunity of receiving all the instruction in Leviticus; and they would get help from it. Now, if you have understood it, are you prepared to defend it? Numbers calls upon us to defend what is before us.
Rem. It seems to raise the question, Are you prepared to defend the testimony?
J.T. Yes; and God honours us by taking account of, us in that connection; so that now, instead of being a disorganised crowd, you are ordered under military direction where God is dwelling.
Ques. What is the thought in the pedigree?
J.T. That is another important principle; but before going to that, note that Moses and Aaron are called to do the numbering; and associated with them are twelve princes, or heads of the families of Israel. That is, the book of Numbers teaches us what we call local responsibility. It is very remarkable that it should appear there, because the book of Numbers really corresponds with Corinthians, which teaches this in Christianity. Each tribe has its own representative at the numbering, so that each locality is in that way represented; whilst Moses and Aaron are over all, yet each prince represents his own locality, so to speak, his own tribe.
Rem. That is to say, while there is local responsibility, as represented in the prince from each tribe, there is unity in the whole.
J.T. That is a great principle, I think, in first Corinthians. Catholicity does not militate against local responsibility. There is a principle that applies universally, and yet it applies locally. The apostle opens the epistle by addressing "all that in every place (that is local responsibility) call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours" (that is universal).
{77}
Rem. And they could only carry that out according as the authority of Moses was recognised.
J.T. Yes; whereas the local thing is seen in the princes, each represented a tribe.
Rem. Moses and Aaron had to say to all, the princes are responsible to Moses and Aaron.
J.T. Yes; that is how the Lord governs. Now, the early parts of Acts supposes one central assembly in Jerusalem, whereas the epistle to the Corinthians supposes a number of assemblies. Each assembly is governed by the same principles, and yet it retains its individuality as an assembly locally.
Ques. Do we get the thought of local responsibility in the men abiding by their standards?
J.T. Yes, we do; each was to pitch by the standard of his father's house.
Ques. What would answer to the princes now? Local responsibility was set forth in them, but it was in connection with their tribe.
J.T. Yes; there were twelve tribes. Of course, we only have a shadow of it here, but it is remarkable, whilst it was one nation it was sub-divided into twelve tribes; and each tribe had what was peculiar to itself. So now the assembly economy has taken that form; it is assemblies; and the assembly at Corinth, for instance, had all that was necessary for the ordering of itself internally; it does not represent the complete thought, if it did the article would be affixed. It is said to them, "ye are Christ's body", "ye are temple of God". If you put the article, it would imply the complete thought.
Rem. So that in the broken up state of things we have to adhere to the principles.
J.T. And therefore the importance of coming out to principles. If you leave the religions of the day, you do not come out to *people*; you come out to
{78}
principles; and therefore you can stand to principles.
Principles are eternal; they will govern the world to come.
Rem. Principles seem to be almost given up now.
J.T. Yes, Christendom is marked by departure from principles; and they substitute expediencies for principles. They may say to you, 'These things may have done in the apostles¬ days, but not now'. The answer to that is, that they will appear in the millennium, and why not now?
Ques. Is the thought of power connected with the princes?
J.T. Well, a prince is a man who has ability; he is not simply an anointed official; he is a ruler, or a leader in the tribe; he is that because he is morally fit; in fact, it is his moral qualification that is in view.
Rem. It is said of Jacob that he prevailed with God.
J.T. Yes; a prince is *able*; he has power with God, and he has power with men. Well, that is the kind of thing that you look for in the assembly in the way of leadership.
Ques. He is spiritually formed for that position I suppose it is like the angel of each assembly in Revelation?
J.T. It is, in the sense of representation, but the angel is scarcely a prince. I mean his moral qualities are not in view; he is held to his responsibility. In fact, it is the contrary with most of the angels addressed. The Lord says, "I have against thee".
Rem. Will you say a little as to the pedigree?
J.T. That is a very interesting subject. How is a man to declare his pedigree? Verse 18 reads, "And they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
{79}
the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls".
Ques. Would that answer to the beginning of Acts?
J.T. Yes; this is a type to some extent of what you get there; but rather more so of Corinthians. The children of Israel did what they were commanded to do. It is a very difficult thing today to discriminate who is who; and the second epistle to Timothy formally admits it, saying, "The Lord knoweth them that are his". What we have to do it to "depart from iniquity". You say, 'What about those Christians whom you leave behind?' Well, you have to leave them with the Lord: you must prove your pedigree by separating from iniquity.
It is open for all to do likewise. "Let *everyone* that nameth the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity;" and therefore you prove your pedigree. In the early days of the assembly they all did that, and there was as yet no admixture with the world.
Rem. In the early days of Christianity we read, "of the rest durst no man join himself to them". There was power to deal with evil.
J.T. There is no way of making our pedigree clear now except by departure from iniquity; that is the test and proof that you love the Lord. Why are we separate? The true reason should be, not that these people have light and are right, but that you love the Lord. "Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity".
Ques. What is iniquity? Is it man's will working in the things of God?
J.T. Quite so; it is lawlessness. You leave it; you cannot have anything to say to it.
Rem. That is a principle we have to hold on to.
J.T. Well, it is; but Christ is the great test. The test is as to whether you name the name of the Lord. You feel the Lord has not His place with
{80}
those you leave. "Surely the fear of God is not in this place". Now, in Corinth you could not say that. The apostle says, "God is in you of a truth". Where God still is, you can stay with a good conscience.
Ques. What is the thought in the last part of the chapter?
J.T. One great thought is that each man was to pitch his tent by his own standard, throughout their hosts. So their pedigree is declared, and then each tribe is numbered separately, and every person in each tribe is taken account of; and then each man is to occupy his own place by "his own standard".
We do not interfere with each other; we are all necessary to each other; we occupy assigned positions; we are close to each other, but we do not interfere with each other. Divine wisdom has put each of us where we are. It may take years to bring to light what He has in view in the position; but if you occupy it faithfully, He will honour you in it. One of the most touching things about the Lord is what we read in Zechariah, who speaks of Him as "the Branch", and he says, "he shall grow up from his own place". It is a great thing to grow up in your place.
Rem. You were speaking last night of indefiniteness; and there is that with many of us as to where our place is.
J.T. I think if you occupy a divinely given place, you will reach the throne. Zechariah says, "he shall build the temple of the Lord; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne". The throne will come in due time. We often try to get there ahead, but it will come.
Ques. What is the thought in the *place*?
J.T. It is your locality, where the light comes to you. The idea is that you are now to shine where you were a sinner; where you dishonoured God, there you are to honour Him.
{81}
Rem. Like the demoniac.
J.T. Yes; and like the woman of Samaria. Where she dishonoured God, there she honoured Him. The Lord said, as it were, 'You do not need to go to Jerusalem, you will be set up here'. And so it was. One great idea of the assembly is, it is taken out of Egypt, historically. We dishonoured God; we had our part in the world, as Peter says in his epistle; now, instead of that, you do the will of Gad. Your circumstances are the same as they were before; only, instead of running riot now, you do the will of God. Your business, your house, and your relations with men, are different. Why? Because of the light you have in your soul. You *have the Spirit of God*. The Lord, I believe, really sends us back to our house. A good test whether a man is converted is how he treats his wife and children; then how he acts in business. That is God's thought for you -- you are *changed*.
Rem. So, instead of running riot, you are under rule now.
J.T. Quite so; that is the testimony.
{82}
THE BELIEVER SET FOR THE DEFENCE OF THE TESTIMONY -- PART 2
@Numbers 1:47; @Numbers 2
J.T. It is important to bear in mind that the people were one year and a month in the wilderness before they were numbered. It is as if the Spirit would remind us that our position in regard to the tabernacle of witness were made to hinge on a certain experience with God. The book of Exodus shows that they are brought to God in the wilderness; and having been brought to God, He proposes the covenant to them; and following upon that, He counts on their affection in the way of giving, and lays tribute upon them for the material of the tabernacle. Then the tabernacle is reared up; and He enters into it, and His glory fills it. Then the instruction that follows in Leviticus is that He is to be approached there: He is to be drawn near to. All that precedes this book occupied a year and a month, and unfolds the experience of what it is to be set here in the world in relation to the testimony. So, in the opening of this book we have the numbering; which reminds us that God is taking account of us. In chapter 26 we are numbered for the land, for heaven, but in this chapter we are taken account of by God for the defence of the testimony.
Rem. They were exercised before being numbered.
J.T. Yes; God does not lay upon us burdens we are not able to bear; He graciously deals with our souls until there is a measure of strength there; then He reminds us that He is taking account of us here, and is going to give us a place in defence of the testimony. We have to take account of the tribe of Levi apart; that is another subject, really; but here all the tribes are numbered with regard to the military position in the wilderness.
Rem. They had experience of God, did you say?
{83}
J.T. Yes; they had been brought to Him; that is the point in the earlier chapters. God had brought them to Himself. He had borne them on eagle's wings. They were not yet in the land, but as brought to Himself they were to know Him in grace. In all these chapters, following @Exodus 15, God has given them no reproofs. They murmured, they complained, but there is no reproach; that is to say, it is the reign of grace. Then following on this are all these wonderful things; the ark, the tabernacle, and all that related to God's dwelling; they were instructed as to all that. You can understand if a soul were exercised how much he would find in the testimony, and therefore he would stand for the defence of it.
Ques. The purpose of God was assured to them.
J.T. His purpose is unfolded in this chapter. He would bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of His inheritance; but, in their *experience*, they were brought to God. It is a wonderful thing to be brought to God; but to be brought *in*, and planted in the mount of God's inheritance, where His sanctuary is, is another thing. Your heart is brought to the presence of God, where things are contrary; this is in the wilderness.
Ques. Would you say God gets the response of our affections before we are set here in the defence of the testimony?
J.T. He does; that is the testimony of Exodus, though the breakdown is in Exodus too, that of the golden calf. Nevertheless, we get in Exodus that the people came and offered willingly.
Ques. Did you say that in chapter 26 they were taken account of for heaven; and here it is for the testimony? Now, why are they taken account of for the testimony first? I was thinking of Ephesians, where the conflict is after they have gone in.
J.T. This book does not typify Ephesians. Ephesians is conflict in the land.
{84}
Ques. What is the difference between conflict in the land, and here?
J.T. Well, conflict in the land is wholly spiritual.
It arises from the fact that God has given us a place in heaven; and Satan disputes that. @Revelation 12 gives an account of the warfare in heaven. It arises from the fact that the Man Child is caught up, He is the Emperor! He rules, not *a* nation, but the nations. That is imperialism. He rules the nations.
He is the real Emperor. God meets imperialism in Christ. Satan saw what was in the mind of God in dividing the nations, and so *he* brought in imperialism. It is an idea that is prevalent now in one way and another, but God has met it in Christ. @Revelation 12 shows that the woman who brings forth the Man Child is seen as endowed with universal dominion; that is God's mind in regard to her; and the Man Child becomes the Ruler of the nations. In other words, He is to be the Emperor. Satan's device is met, and overthrown in Christ. Now, the assembly is included in the ascent of the Man Child. The divine thought of universal rule is seen in Christ, and Satan disputes that. Meanwhile the Lord is on high; and He goes into heaven with the breastplate on Him; that is, He carries all the saints in there on His heart, so we are there in His affections. He is there as the Priest; and Satan is the anti-priest who accuses the brethren, as we are told in that chapter, day and night before God. Now, the Lord is intolerant of that; nothing is more intolerable to Him than the accusing of the saints; so there is war in heaven, and that is really the light of Ephesians. We are in the light of that here, and we testify to it. But then you are also here as a man who has once been in Egypt. The Ephesian warriors are regarded as having their origin in heaven. In Numbers you are viewed as a man who has had a history in Egypt, in the world; you have had your part in it. God
{85}
has converted you there, and you take your stand there where you have been converted. That is the idea in the first chapter of Numbers. You are where you have been converted; where all your responsibility was. Now, in conformity with that the numbering begins in the first chapter with Reuben, and it is specified that he is the eldest son of Jacob. That is the *responsibility* side. We know how corrupt Reuben was. Reuben is taken account of by God now. He has had a bad history, but now he is converted, speaking in Christian language; and where he had dishonoured God he is now *for* God in testimony. We are converted to God, and where we had dishonoured God, we glorify Him. That is what is in this first chapter.
Rem. This is for the wilderness.
J.T. Precisely. The idea in Corinthians is that Paul had gone to Corinth, and he presented to them the testimony of God. Now, many of the Corinthians were converted. The Lord had told him beforehand that He had much people in that city; not a people in heaven, but in *that city*; and He would allow no one to hurt Paul, who preached, and a goodly number were converted. As gathered together they were definitely called the assembly of God in Corinth; and every member that composed that assembly was previously known as having been in the world.
Ques. Does the ordering of the people here in connection with the testimony necessarily contemplate conflict?
J.T. It is rather, that they are there in case there should be an attack. It is not aggressive conflict. When you come to Canaan it is aggressive; but not so here, because it is a question of passing through. If the Amalekites let them alone, they would let the Amalekites alone. You may be employed in a workshop; you have spent your time as an unconverted man there; but you are converted,
{86}
and in the place where you had been in your unconverted days, you testify for the Lord; and if the Lord is attacked there, you defend Him there.
Rem. It magnifies the grace of God; I was thinking of Reuben.
J.T. Yes; it is remarkable that He begins with Reuben; but then He takes up Judah in chapter 2. Rem. Judah seems to have a very remarkable position in this chapter.
J.T. Judah represents in Scripture the counsel of God; and therefore what we gather from chapter 2 is that whilst you are taken account of in your responsibility to God, and in connection with the standard of your father's house, yet God orders things according to His counsels. He decides who is to lead. If it were according to nature Reuben would lead; but if it is according to God's sovereignty, it is whom He will. We are all taken account of by God, and set together, but you must not assume that because you are the eldest you must lead; you must leave room for the sovereignty of God. What ultimately brought in the enmity of Ephraim was that God took up Judah. It is a most important thing for us to bow to the sovereignty of God. "He doeth according to his will in the army of heaven". Rem. And it is according to His grace.
J.T. Yes; you may depend upon it, if God takes anyone up, it is according to divine wisdom; God does not do anything simply in an arbitrary way.
Ques. Why was Levi not to be numbered with the others?
J.T. In the case of Levi the Spirit shows us, in type, what the assembly's own place is in the mind of God. Whenever Levi is not numbered, it shows that the tribe is distinguished; and in the book of Joshua you find it is distinguished in this sense, that it had no inheritance on earth; it had an inheritance in heaven. It is said of Levi; "The
{87}
Lord God of Israel was their inheritance;" and the point in the book of Joshua is that the Levites represent the assembly as a heavenly company. In Numbers the Levites represent the saints as specially charged with the service of God in the assembly.
Ques. What would you say is their character in Deuteronomy?
J.T. Well, in the book of Deuteronomy the priesthood is scarcely distinguished from the Levites. I think that the way the Levite is alluded to in Deuteronomy is to show that the people are in direct touch with God without an intermediary; in fact, they are called the sons of God. Viewed in that light, we do not need an intermediary.
Rem. I was thinking of that verse, "At that time the Lord, separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord to minister unto him, and to bless in his name unto this day", @Deuteronomy 10: 9.
J.T. To Levi, being the priestly tribe, that was given, but I think it is very important to bear in mind that whilst God takes account of us each one, *age* has nothing to do with God's counsels; we must bow to the sovereign will of God in whatever He does; and so He brings Judah forward here.
Ques. Do you regard the thought of the Levites as setting forth the assembly?
J.T. Yes, here. We shall see in chapter 3, that we have the service of the Levites detailed; so that in that sense the Levite refers to the Christian now, in contrast to what he may be in other connections; but where it is distinctly said that they are not to be numbered amongst others, there they are signalised.
Rem. They have this unique position because of their faithfulness in a day of ruin.
J.T. @Deuteronomy 33 enlarges on that. "And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah,
{88}
and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah; who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children; for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar. Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands". That is based on what they were in faithfulness when the tribe of Levi gathered around Moses at the time of the sin of the golden calf. However, Aaron and his house were chosen sovereignly for the priesthood. Rem. The Levites were taken up especially for the service of the tabernacle.
J.T. Yes; a Levite in chapter 4 is simply a Christian viewed as occupied with the things of God, not engaged with secular things. In our employment in the world outside, and having to do with the contrary elements, we are warriors. If you are not a warrior you will be overcome, and that is where many suffer: they do not take that position. You must be on your guard; you are a military man; you are on the defence; and if you are not on your guard, you will be overcome. When you turn aside from that, and take up the things of God, you are in a levitical position; your exercises in regard to the people of God are levitical. The key word as to the Levite is, he *beam*; he carries.
Ques. Would prayer for the Lord's people be levitical?
J.T. That is more priestly; but it is the levitical side that leads to that. When you come to the next chapter, you can do nothing without the priests. And that leads to another side, that in Christianity each Levite, or minister, is a priest. You will notice that Eleazar the priest, and not Aaron, was "chief over the chief of the Levites". It refers more to
{89}
priesthood in the saints than to Christ specially. Of course, the Levites were given to Aaron, and that is to Christ; but Eleazar supervises the Levites. It is more the spiritual side in the saints that Eleazar represents. There are a great many things to be carried amongst us; and that is the Levites¬ work. Ques. Would you enumerate some?
J.T. Well, it takes largely the form of helping the saints; because the testimony is in the saints in a practical way. Here the tabernacle of witness answers to our present condition. The tabernacle suggests an order of things which could be terminated at any time; hence in that sense it refers to us as in flesh and blood, liable to death. The saints, in that respect, are liable to be put to sleep; and they are liable to be ill. All these things lead to levitical exercises. You want to help a brother; you cannot ignore him.
Rem. We read in Galatians, "Bear ye one another's burdens".
J.T. That is levitical. The best example you will find is in @2 Corinthians 11; there Paul gives an account of his levitical exercises.
Rem. The testimony is bound up with the saints; and they have to be carried.
J.T. Yes; and it is carrying that tests us.
Rem. Some of the things were very heavy to carry.
J.T. Yes; and you carry them in the desert, where the sun is beaming down upon you; that is testing.
Rem. Instead of the breaking of bread being the end of exercise, it should be the beginning.
J.T. I think so; it leads to love; and therefore the box is in order; because you want to support what is of Christ here.
Rem. What was in my mind in speaking of the breaking of bread was the desire of a young person wanting to break bread. Often the exercise ceases
{90}
there; instead of seeing that the tabernacle is in the wilderness, and that it has to be carried.
J.T. There is no need of armour in the assembly; it is a very abnormal state of things if we war with each other; it is outside you need the armour. The numbering here is to show that when you go out of the assembly into your ordinary sphere of life you are prepared to defend Christ. It is not aggressive warfare; we do not go out into the world and raise a quarrel with people; they are not in our inheritance yet; heaven is our place, and therefore the warfare is in heaven, aggressive warfare; but as here in the wilderness, we are simply negative; we are prepared to defend the truth under any circumstances.
Ques. Did not David err in numbering the people. He was depending more on the numbers of his people than on God?
J.T. When God numbers us there is no danger; but when we begin to number ourselves with the object of making a show, then there is danger; and God is sure to bring that down. When God numbers us, He knows our names, and He is going to give us some position to occupy.
Rem. I suppose the important point is, being with God to start with?
J.T. That is the important point. He says, "I brought you to myself;" that is the epistle to the Romans; you are brought to know God, and really the epistle to the Romans brings in the boards of the tabernacle. Not only do we know God, but we love His will. Paul says, "I delight in the law of God, after the inward man", @Romans 7: 22.
Ques. Is @Romans 12 the answer to that?
J.T. Yes. "That ye may prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God". It becomes a very searching thing when you take it to yourself. In God's mind I am set for the defence of the testimony in my position in the presence of men.
{91}
Ques. Would not that involve the confession of Jesus as Lord?
J.T. Yes; you do not hide your light under a bushel, or under a bed.
Rem. We have to ask ourselves the question. Are we honest in the circle in which we are placed, as those who are connected with the Lord?
J.T. Yes; as Peter says, you do not run riot with them, as you used to; the time past sufficed for that; now it is a question of the will of God, to live the rest of your time for the will of God; it may only be a very little while, but it is your aim to live it for God.
Ques. You would distinguish between that conflict, and what is entirely spiritual?
J.T. Well, yes; you want the inheritance, and the numbering in @Numbers 26 means that you should have a place in the land; and if your place there is occupied by enemies, you must have conflict to get possession. It is a path of conflict now; you do not want a little part of the wilderness for yourself; you want to pass through it, and defend the testimony in it. I think it is very beautiful to see the touches we get in the chapters which were read. First, as regards Reuben; God taking account of us in responsibility as regards the testimony; and then, in chapter 2, we bow to the sovereignty of God.
Ques. What would answer to it in the New Testament?
J.T. You find that God has set gifts in the assembly, for example, and He does it according to His sovereign wisdom.
Rem. I was thinking of that scripture, "differences of administrations, but the same Lord".
J.T. Yes. You see, for instance, in the case of Saul of Tarsus, how distinctly that was an act of the sovereignty of God. Saul had absolutely no claim at all, yet he is put in the front rank.
{92}
THE LORD DISCERNED BY HIS FEATURES
@John 21
J.T. The object the Spirit had in writing the gospel of John is stated at the end of chapter 20, so that chapter 21 is clearly an appendix. Among other things it serves to show us how the Lord is discerned here without a formal announcement. He is discerned by those who, although they were in a wrong course, yet had this advantage, that they had already been acquainted with Him, and so they discerned Him by His moral features.
J.McF. What were His features?
J.T. Well, no one but He could act in this way. The feminine speaker in the Canticles discerned the bridegroom by his hand: she only saw one feature -- his hand; he put his hand through the door; that was all she saw, and she discerned it was he. John here discerns the Lord without any announcement.
He says to Peter, "It is the Lord". I just mention that in a general way, as one great point in the chapter. It is a remarkable chapter, because it begins with the disciples as really in a wrong position, and it is a very noticeable fact that Peter and Thomas are the leaders in this position; men who, as we know, had not appeared in a very good aspect lately. It is important to take account of people who take the lead in any movement.
Rem. Referring to Peter and Thomas, the one denied Him, and the other was unbelieving.
Ques. Would you say it was dangerous to see such men leading?
J.T. Yea. It is important to take account of the leaders in any cause or course. What has their history been? Are they trustworthy? You notice in verse 2 that "there were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael", and so on.
{93}
W.H.M. It is interesting to see here that if Simon Peter was the one to lead them off, he was the first to come back.
J.T. Yes; he makes a good recovery. He really was aided into his false position in the palace of the high priest through influence. "The disciple who was known unto the high priest brought him in". It is very interesting to see the recovery of one who fails when the groundwork is genuine.
Rem. There was affection there.
J.T. Failure in any one who has reputation amongst the saints is serious, because it involves others. Peter says, "I go a fishing. They say unto him, we also go with thee". The position of leadership is a very serious one in the things of God.
Ques. Would you say that this really follows after the light of the assembly had been brought to them in chapter 20?
J.T. Yes. This chapter is really the filling out of the subject. The immediate object of the writing of the gospel was that the saints might be believers in the Son. "These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name". That is the object the Spirit had in writing; but there was a want of completeness in the scope of the record, inasmuch as it did not go on to the end; and the appendix shows us the end in the millennium with regard to the Gentiles. John's "I suppose" makes room for the infinite bearing of the ministry of Christ. The negative proposition makes room for the infinite bearing of the Lord's ministry. It goes beyond what is material, and what is in time. It is an immense gain for us to be acquainted with the Lord, because even from the point of view of failure occurring, you have the advantage of knowing the Lord when He touches you in your circumstances. Often our circumstances
{94}
become the means of the Lord speaking to us; something happens, and you say, "It is the Lord". You do not attribute it to second causes.
T.M.G. It shows that you know Him.
Ques. Recovery brings us back to the point of departure, but does it not also include a further step in our acquaintance with Him?
J.T. Yes. Abraham has to go back to the place of the tent and altar where he had been in the beginning. There could be no further progress until he got back to that point, but the Lord does not leave him there. Once He gets us on the move, He leads us on.
Ques. Was the Lord bringing Peter back to the point of departure when He said, "Lovest thou me?"
J.T. Yes, that was the point of departure; but then He leads him on when He sets him to work He says "Feed my lambs;" "Feed my sheep". The Lord's dealing with Peter ends with, "This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God".
T.M.G. Peter had said he would follow Him to death.
J.T. I believe in resolutions in your soul. The Lord holds you to them. I think if there is anything the Lord dislikes in us it is indefiniteness; most believers are quite indefinite.
Rem. If you depart from your resolution the Lord will bring you back to it.
J.T., He recalls you to your vow. You make a vow, and that vow is valued according to Moses¬ valuation, according to the currency of the sanctuary. We find in the book of Leviticus, chapter 27, that God puts a distinct value on your resolution; and if you depart from that, He brings you back to it.
Rem. What marked Laodicea was that they were neither hot nor cold.
J.T. Yes, there was nothing definite there.
{95}
Rem. While He may have to discipline one in that connection, still He would support and encourage in what is of Himself.
J.T. Yes, He will discipline you if you depart from the resolution. The Lord called Abraham out of his country, and from his kindred, and from his father's house unto a land that He would show him. Well, Abraham answered to that, in time; that was the call, and he answered to the call; but he departed from it when he went into Egypt, where he had never been sent, and the Lord disciplined him until He brought him back. The Lord loves you to go forward, and make your resolution; you owe it to Him to do that. *He* did that on our behalf.
Rem. He said, "I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free".
J.T. Yes. And Peter unquestionably meant what he said: he would lay down his life for Him; he meant that, and the Lord graciously brought him to it. Peter was really called to be a leader; but leadership is moral. The Lord is a great Leader; and the way to lead is indicated here. The Lord brings Peter back to true leadership.
Ques. When Peter says here, "I go a fishing", you would look at that as being an independent line of his own?
J.T. Yes; he is the leader, but in this instance he is leading in lawlessness; to go back to that out of which he has been called is lawlessness.
J.McF. Is there not something significant in the question the Lord asked them? "Children, have ye any meat?"
J.T. I think it is very touching to see that He should address them in such an endearing way, and that He should have such consideration for their need. I believe that if we are to help one another, there must be a ministry of Christ. If there is failure in a brother you minister Christ to him; you give
{96}
him a certain moral power to judge himself. The probing of Peter did not take place until they had dined.
Ques. Would that suggest the ministry of Christ to the soul now?
J.T. Yes; I think it requires a certain moral power to judge yourself: it requires power in your soul.
Ques. Would you say Peter came out a better man afterwards?
J.T. Yes, he did; he had to go through all this to be a true leader.
Ques. You spoke about acquaintance with the Lord. How is that brought about?
J.T. I think it is brought about through a true ministry of Christ to the soul. Repentance is really that: you hate yourself in the presence of Christ.
Ques. Would @Romans 12 suggest your thought? "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice".
J.T. Yes; you see that your body can be used in the testimony, and you present it to God. It is a living one now, it is not dead; that is to say, the body is possessed by the Spirit of God, and it is worth something. Presenting it to God is said to be intelligent service; in the light of all that preceded it is intelligent to do that.
Ques. "As for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord". Would you say that is a vow?
J.T. That is a very definite statement. As head, you are responsible to the Lord for your house. It is a remarkable thing how the introduction of the testimony into Europe is connected with the household in @Acts 16. What is made prominent in that chapter is the household; the "brethren" are merely alluded to. The testimony was received into the house by a woman; she had respect to the testimony of the apostle, and she invited him to come
{97}
into her house, if he judged her to be faithful to the Lord. Therefore she held her house for the Lord.
W.K. "It is the Lord" seems to be prominent here. Is there any point in that? They do not say "Christ", or "Jesus".
J.T. No doubt they always referred to Him in that reverential way. It was befitting that in their circumstances they should recognise the Lord. His authority was really set aside by them in having gone to fish without His word, and in returning to what He had called them out from.
W.K. It was in that character they were to be recovered. They were to be in subjection to Him.
J.T. Yes; the Spirit records three times "it is [or 'was'] the Lord".
W.K. They had the inward sense of who it was. Was it by His actions they knew?
J.T. Yes; He says, "Children, have ye any meat?" And He also says, "Cast the net on the right side of the ship".
Rem. If you depart from the Lord you get nothing spiritually.
J.T. One of the most interesting things in Scripture is to find out what a leader is. There were princes in Israel; but their moral qualifications preceded the official. In other words, a leader is a leader; he is what he is. In the opening of the book of Numbers, Moses and Aaron are to take the heads of the tribes; they were leaders; they had distinguished themselves; they were not simply officially appointed; they were princes. When you come to @Numbers 7 you will find that the leaders were united; and their unity is seen in their appreciation of the testimony; each one gave the same thing. There was unity of appreciation of the testimony, a remarkable expression of unity. I have no doubt that true Christian leadership is seen in this chapter; that is
{98}
to say, the true leader feeds the saints, and he dies for Christ's sake; he dies for God's glory; he is prepared to lay down his life for God's glory.
Rem. That is contrasted in David and Saul; and that is what Peter was brought back to. He had undoubtedly made the resolution to do this, and the Lord brought him back to it: to be a feeder, and a leader.
J.T. Yes; "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, when thou wart young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not".
Rem. When Peter said, "Though all should forsake thee yet will not I", he meant it, and the Lord brought him back to it.
J.T. So he says at the end, "Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me". He came to it beautifully; and he thought of the saints and says, "I will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to have those things always in remembrance". He was true to his mission.
Ques. Would you connect God's discipline with that?
J.T. I think the discipline of God is the means of our preservation and growth. It is a very great thing to be able to see the Lord's hand in things that happen to us. Something happens, and we are apt to attribute it to second causes; whereas faith sees the Lord's hand; and directly you see His hand, you begin to think about His head. The bride in the Canticles discerned the hand and she begins to speak of his head, and about his locks, his eyes, his cheeks; every feature is described.
Rem. And then she gets to him.
J.T. Yes; but it is his hand that first stirs her
{99}
up; she was drowsy, and the beloved withdrew his hand; and then she sets out to find him.
Rem. There was fragrance left where his hand had been; sweet smelling myrrh.
J.T. Yes; it has been likened to the suffering of love. The Lord stands outside Laodicea, knocking. I think the recovery here in @John 21 is beautiful; it is complete. The Lord meets them in grace, and without any reproach. Then He turns directly to Peter, who was really the leader of the apostles; and having probed him to the bottom, He goes on to show that the Levites must not interfere with each other's work. No Levite has any authority over another Levite; the only one who has authority over the Levite is the. Priest. Peter asks the Lord as to John, What shall this man do? That is one Levite questioning about another Levite's path and services. The Lord says, What have you to do with that? This leads back to the book of Numbers. We find there were three families of the Levites, and they were all under the supervision of the priests. The Levites were primarily given to Aaron and to his sons, so that they were directly under the supervision of the priests, and they had not to interfere with each other's service; each Levite gets his work to do, and it is his business to do it.
J.McF. I suppose @Romans 12 would answer to that?
J.T. Yes; "As we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office"; and "having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of, faith; or ministry, let us wait on our ministering". Each one has his work, and let him do it.
Ques. What is your thought about the world not being able to "contain the books that should be
{100}
written?" Is it God's estimate of the ministry of the Lord?
J.T. It is the Spirit of God through John giving the ministry of Christ its full infinite bearing. It has been said that approach is equal to revelation in Christianity, but it must be borne in mind that that refers to Christ. He only could compass the revelation; we could not compass it.
T.M.G. There is no limit to it.
J.T. And I think the Lord's ministry is guarded in that way here. It is, in a sense, concluded in chapter 20, because there it is shown that the object of it was that we might believe; but chapter 21 gives it its full and infinite bearing. It is important to have an estimate of things; you do not pretend to compass them, but you do have your thoughts and estimate about things. John gives us here, by the Spirit of God, his estimate of the Lord's ministry.
Rem. I suppose you would say that nothing that Jesus said or did could be lost, or fall to the ground; it must come out in some way or other?
J.T. Yes; and His sayings are not local. Epistles were written by the apostles applying to local needs of the saints; but in the gospels the bearing of all the Lord's saying is infinite.
Rem. I suppose it is in the saints that all is written?
J.T. No doubt every divine thought will find some expression in the assembly. Still the assembly is a finite thing; it is not infinite.
J.McF. I suppose our brother refers to the heavenly city.
J.T. Yes; but then even that is finite. Rem. Your thought is that nothing finite can compass the greatness of the revelation.
J.T. Yes, of the revelation of God. "No man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son
{101}
which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him".
Rem. The glory of God fills the city.
J.T. In @Hebrews 1 it says, referring to the Son, "Who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power". That is all said of the One who revealed God. Well, we cannot assume to compass that with anything else; that is according to what God is. The revelation is infinite, and the One who has declared Him is infinite.
Rem. And in the light of that your soul will worship.
J.T. Yes; we have a Great High Priest over the house of God, and we approach in connection with the Priest. The High Priest compasses the revelation, and He approaches in the full light of it; we approach with Him. "Let us draw near".
Rem. Our blessing lies in the study of that Person who is equal to the revelation.
J.T. "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; and having an High Priest over the house of God; let us draw near". You have part in the approach, but you do not compass it.
Rem. You never could come to the measure of what He was.
J.McF. Does the tabernacle foreshadow the revelation?
J.T. Yes, I think so. The tabernacle was a necessity in view of the testimony.
Rem. The Lord is "the minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man".
J.T. I have no doubt that Peter, at the end of his course shows what a true board of the tabernacle
{102}
is; he laid down his life to glorify God. That was what Jesus did. You and I glorify God, each one of us, in submitting ourselves to His will. This was seen in Peter in accord with what the Lord said to him, and the Spirit adds, "this spake he, signifying by what death he [Peter] should glorify God". The Lord's word was, "when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee". That shows resignation. The boards of the tabernacle were of the same wood as the Ark, and they were covered over with gold, only there was nothing inside. Romans sets us up in the wilderness as boards; we are fit material for the tabernacle. Ephesians shows you the tabernacle set up; we "are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit".
T.M.G. You mean Romans takes us up individually.
J.T. Yes; you see the thought in chapter 7; Paul says, "I delight in the law of God after the inward man;" and then in chapter 8 he has power to answer to that through the Spirit. I think Romans prepares you for the tabernacle.
{103}
DESCENDING AND ASCENDING
@Ephesians 4; @Ephesians 5:1 - 16
J.T. I was thinking that the effect of the most exalted truth being rightly apprehended in our souls, is to enable us to go *down*.
Rem. In lowliness and meekness.
J.T. Yes; and I think that this epistle shows us what descends, and the effect of it. The Lord descended, and the assembly will descend from heaven. But then there is also the idea of what *is fallen*. Satan fell; Adam fell; Noah fell; Israel fell; and the assembly has fallen. Therefore, the present world has taken character from what *falls*.
Rem. What you say as to what descends supposes also what ascends.
J.T. Yes. First of all, it supposes the One who was great enough to descend. The Lord Jesus has brought in the blessedness of *descending*. "He that ascended is the same also which descended first into the lower parts of the earth". The epistle to the Ephesians shows us how the Lord has ascended that He might fill all things, and it shows us the assembly's place with Him. The book of Revelation shows that the assembly also descends in her time; and now the same principle is to be seen in us in a moral way we are to *go down*.
Ques. Do you connect that with the thought in Philippians, the mind that was in Christ Jesus?
J.T. Yes: "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus". It is the mind that was in Him that you have. It is a very interesting subject, because if it is traced out properly it enables us to see how this present world has been constituted, and what characterises it; and then it enables us to see what the future world is to be. The present world has taken its character from a fallen being; and a fallen being is an envious being, and "where envy
{104}
and strife are there is confusion and every evil work". Satan is envious.
Rem. "Who hath ascended into heaven, or descended?" @Proverbs 30: 4. You get that principle in the Old Testament, pointing on, I suppose, to this.
J.T. Yes, perhaps you can enlarge upon that for us.
Rem. I was thinking how there must be the descent before the ascent. In @Philippians 2 we get the descent of that perfect One.
J.T. And then the exaltation.
Rem. You spoke of the assembly as descending by and by. She ascends first.
J.T. Yes. The prophet sees her coming down out of heaven having the glory of God; her light is most precious. That shows how she corresponds with Christ. The lesson as to how to descend is learnt from Christ. @John 13 is the great lesson book as to how to descend; whereas, we have all round us the principle of self-exaltation from the very outset. What was suggested to Eve was that they should be exalted; that there was a way by which they should be higher than they were. That was the principle; and so all along the line; it is a climbing principle, and climbing is very dangerous work, it is sure to come to a fall.
Rem. I suppose it is the man who goes down that the Lord will exalt.
J.T. It is a great thing to get hold of the power by which we may descend; it is a most ignominious thing to be cast down. We have the two thoughts in the Revelation; in chapter 9 there is a star fallen from heaven, and in chapter 12 Satan is cast out, and his angels were cast out with him. This is a most ignominious thing.
W.H.M. It is altogether foreign to the natural man to go down; he must get power from Another.
J.T. That which descends is illuminating; that
{105}
which falls is darkening. That can be easily shown. The Lord in descending from heaven brought in all the light of God. He descended first into the lower parts of the earth. That was light. Light is really love in activity, and the first part is to go down. So that the Person who descends is light. But then a person who falls shows his moral inability for the position which he occupied. To be cast out is direct judgment. Satan falls; a star falls. A star is a most valuable thing. I mean if you are out in the night. No doubt @Revelation 9 contemplates one who had the place of a guide. A star falls from heaven and it opens the pit; and what issues from the pit is darkness; what comes out of the pit is locusts. The minds of men are darkened, and they are tormented. The Lord descended and ascended, and what is the result? Apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers.
Rem. It is a beautiful contrast.
J.T. The office of an apostle is most important. It is light; it brings in and establishes in this world the authority of the Lord.
Ques. What would the locusts and the scorpions signify?
J.T. They refer to agents of evil; they are directly from the bottomless pit. Their description is remarkable; they are under the direct control of the destroyer Apollyon. Now, the apostles were under the direct control of the Lord.
Rem. The one is the fallen one, and the other is the descending One.
J.T. One is love, and the other is hate. It is a great thing to see that it is our privilege to descend; and this epistle gives us the power for it, and the power is the Spirit in us. This world is not the sphere of our glory; we do not want to ascend here.
Rem. Instead of the things spoken of in this epistle puffing us up, they have the opposite effect.
{106}
J.T. Yes, exactly; they give you a sort of leverage in your soul; you are great enough to go down. It is one thing to *climb up*, but it is another thing to *grow up*: here it is *growing up* unto Him. If you climb up, as sure as possible you will fall. Zacchaeus was a man of little stature, and he had to climb, that is, the kind of people who climb. The Lord will not spurn you if you have a right motive; still, the Lord says to Zacchaeus, "Come down", and then, "Today I must abide at thy house".
Ques. Do you mean one who climbs is of small stature spiritually?
J.T. Yes, figuratively speaking. The Lord does not rebuke Zacchaeus. He gives him encouragement to come down; very great encouragement, for his motive was excellent, he did not climb to be seen; he climbed to see the Lord.
Rem. I suppose we have a good example of descent in the apostle Paul; the effect that the light had on him?
J.T. I think if this epistle is studied, and is seen in the light of the power that is presented in it, it will enable us to go down; and in going down you are morally entitled to exaltation according to God.
Rem. God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the lowly. It is the lowly one who gets the grace.
J.T. The Lord's grace fills us; even if we do go out of the way He would encourage us to go down, and would help us down.
Rem. It is our tendency naturally to want to go up.
J.T. It is indeed; you see it all the way through from Satan onwards; he is the first being who fell, and from Satan onwards there is a constant effort to get up: "thou Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be brought down to hell".
Rem. We sometimes make an *effort* to go down.
J.T. There is a certain grace in going down.
{107}
"I saw the bride, the Lamb's wife, descending from heaven". There is dignity and glory in it. There is a certain dignity and moral glory to be seen in a man deliberately laying aside what dignifies him in this world for the sake of others.
Rem. I suppose the secret of it is having the mind of Christ?
J.T. I am sure it is. For instance, the Lord Himself at the supper laid aside His garments: garments are dignity, that which marks off a man; the Lord laid aside His garments and took a servant's form, and then He commenced a servant's work. That was the lesson book; He did that for an object lesson.
Ques. Is this growth needed in view of giving moral fitness?
J.T. Yes, I think so. The effect of the Lord's going up on high, after having descended, is seen in contrast to the star that fell. The effect of the star's fall was darkness and destruction here. The Lord gives that which enlightens, and builds up; so He gives these gifts. There are four kinds of gifts you will notice, pointing to the universal effect of the position of Christ on high, and the end in view is the building up of the saints; until we all arrive at the perfect Man. Now, the perfect Man's stature is seen in the ability to descend. I am persuaded that if we do not know how to descend now, we shall not be fit for the city, because the city descends.
Rem. In the epistle to the Corinthians we find one was boasting himself against another.
J.T. You will always find strife where there is rivalry. "There was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest". It is not simply that they had a discussion, they *strove*.
Rem. I suppose the gifts here take character from the One who descended.
{108}
J.T. Yes, no doubt. Contrast the opening up of the pit, the fearful influence that came up out of it, with that which came out of heaven, enlightenment, and refreshment, and so on. Now, if you will examine these gifts what you will see is that they are in the order of wisdom. The Lord gave first apostles, so that men might be brought under the authority of the Lord. That is a very important element of the truth.
Rem. None could gainsay their power.
J.T. Quite so. They had evidences with them that they were the apostles of the Lord; and those who were converted through them, continued in the apostles¬ teaching and fellowship.
Ques. What was unfolded in His having led captivity captive? That was a necessity, would you say?
J.T. Yes; all the power of evil is set aside. He has not only overthrown it; He has led captivity captive. The whole power that held men in bondage has been carried away in triumph. The apostles wrought in this same power. All the strongholds of the enemy were brought down.
It is very important to see that gift in *the Spirit* is superior to all satanic power. It is given by One who has led captivity captive. It is as if a general has conquered a country, and then he empowers others to hold it for him. In our case it is only in testimony. It is a great thing to see that you are holding the territory in testimony, and there is power for it. Of course, you may have to die for your testimony, but still the testimony is there. I believe that if the apostles¬ ministry is rightly apprehended it will be seen that they overthrew the world in all its phases; and then besides that the prophets bring God in in testimony.
W.M. That is the thought in prophets?
J.T. Yes, I think so. The apostle establishes the
{109}
authority of the Lord in the territory of the conqueror; the prophet brings God in to the souls of men.
W.H.M. Well, then, the prophet's gift would really bring the word of God home in power.
Rem. It is very beautiful; I never noticed it before in this way -- the apostles being brought in first, and then the prophets.
J.T. Then the evangelist is to bring all that light into the whole earth. The evangelist is not limited to Israel. Philip's ministry sets forth evangelisation. Then you have pastors and teachers: they go together, the final gifts; they take care of the saints; they shepherd and feed them.
W.H.M. There are very precious expressions, "the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace;" and then, "the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God". The descending you were speaking of leads to that?
J.T. It leads to unity. I had thought of the way the Lord provides for the continuation of the feasts of love. Jude speaks about love feasts. Now, the Lord not only introduced the idea of love in His own person and ministry, but He formed a circle here in which the love feasts were to be found. The Lord's supper, that we so often refer to, was to be continued. In it the Lord provided a means for its perpetuation during His absence. Whilst He was here there were love feasts. He met with the disciples in that way; and there was interchange of affection. Now, @John 13 contemplates that He was not to continue with them, and what was to become of the feasts? I believe the Lord set before them the means by which the feast should be perpetuated; there was to be active love among themselves. You cannot have a love feast without love. If you do not bring it you cannot have a feast. The Lord always had it.
{110}
O.J.M. That is the effectual working in the measure of every part.
J.T. And the means is by going down in *service*, serving one another.
Rem. The Lord said, "If I ... have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another's feet". Rem. Holding the truth in love.
J.T. Love is the leading thought in the passage, because you cannot have building up without it. Love builds up; knowledge puffs up.
Rem. It is very important that each one of us should bring our portion of love to the feast.
J.T. It is really not fair to come to a feast which is supposed to be mutual, without bringing your portion. You may ask a brother to your house, and set a material feast before him, but that is not the idea of a love feast, a love feast is mutual. So Jude says, "These are spots in your love feasts". He contemplated the feasts, but there were spots in them. Now, in @John 13 there was a feast, but there was a spot; Judas was a spot. If love is really in activity amongst brethren the spots will be driven out.
Rem. We would not forsake the assembling of ourselves if we realised what these love feasts are.
J.T. Yes; and how searching it is; what am I going to bring? what have I got to contribute? Rem. I suppose if we do not bring love we do not bring anything. I am thinking of @1 Corinthians 13. It is the only thing that never fails.
J.T. It is one thing for a brother to be an affectionate brother, but there is also love in a collective way; something that is known amongst the saints. Rem. It is a scene of holy liberty.
J.T. And then young Christians are to be brought into that; their roots are to, be set in right soil, they are to be "rooted and grounded in love". Sometimes the elders stunt the younger ones. It is
{111}
most important that there should be for the young saints the activity of love in the circle; and therefore there is the soil in which they take root, and grow up.
Ques. Does what we have in verse 14 infer the way the enemy would seek to hinder all this?
J.T. Stunted people, those who do not grow, are exposed to the enemy. "That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive".
Ques. Would you say a little as to verse 13? "Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". That expression, "unity of the faith" is the query.
J.T. Well, I think the unity of the faith is the unity contemplated as the result of the testimony; it tends to unity.
Ques. And the "knowledge of the Son of God"?
J.T. The faith that overcomes the world is that we believe that Jesus is the Son of God. It refers to Him as having the power to establish another system. A perfect man is a man who answers in every way to God. We *arrive* at a perfect man. It was a great thought with God that there should be a perfect man. When one transfers the thought to Christ in the wilderness, there was the perfect Man. Satan attacked Him in every point, and He perfectly answered to God.
Rem. And that is the great result to be brought about in each one of us.
J.T. It shows that God does not give up His thoughts. Satan overcame Adam, but now God brings in a perfect Man, and Satan does not overthrow Him.
{112}
Rem. The measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.
W.H.M. "The prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me". What a triumph!
J.T. And he that is born of God, keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. That shows that it comes out in us.
{113}
THE WILDERNESS
@Exodus 15
J.T. I thought that perhaps we might see how the believer enters into the wilderness; and I think this chapter enables us to see that.
T.M.G. What is the idea connected with the wilderness?
J.T. Well, in a general way there are three leading features of it. The wilderness is the place of testing, as we all know; but it may be divided into three sections; the first is that which appears in the book of Exodus, where they are under pure grace; that is, from chapter 15 to chapter 18 inclusive, they were under the rule of pure grace. The next section views the believer in relationship with the tabernacle, where God's rule and God's order are seen. Then there is the section which views the believer in relation with the Spirit, which comes in after @Numbers 21.
T.M.G. After the brazen serpent.
J.T. I thought it would be helpful if we were to consider a little what the wilderness involves in that way, especially for young people; that it might be understood that God takes us up as believing in Christ, and as committing ourselves to Him in baptism. God takes us up and deals with us at the outset on the principle of pure grace. Whatever we may do He has no answer for us but grace; so that the murmurings up to chapter 18 are answered by grace; there is no judgment as *yet*. This chapter in the light of the anti-type really suggests that the believer loves God; and the song is a celebration of what God has done for them. They speak specially of His "right hand". We read in the book of Proverbs "A man's heart is at his right hand". God acted for them in love. His right hand is at the
{114}
disposal of His heart, and they recognise that in their song. So that it is clear that at the outset of the believer's career, there is love. God takes account of it in their song, however little of it may be discernible. God speaks of it in that way. He tells us what we were in the wilderness. Israel was "holiness to the Lord, the first fruit of his increase". God takes account of that, and He would foster it; He would promote that in us. Hence what follows is the palm trees, the sweetening of the waters, and all that is to promote affection for God.
Ques. Would you say that we enter the wilderness with singing?
J.T. Yes. I think there is the recognition in the soul of what God has done for us in Christ. So that in @Romans 6 we read: "as many of you as were baptised unto Christ"; that is, you have regard for Him, hence you are baptised to Him; but the passage goes on to say, "as many of you as were baptised unto Christ were baptised unto his death". That marks you off here.
T.M.G. That would answer to across the sea.
J.T. I think so. @Romans 6 corresponds with that; but it is to be noted, that "as many of you as were baptised unto Christ"; it is to the Person, and that supposes that you have regard for the Person. You love Him, and you have committed yourself to Him; but the death side comes to light in the wilderness.
T.M.G. You must be in the good of the affection side before you accept the death side.
J.T. That is what I thought. So that they were baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea.
The sea is the mark of separation.
Ques. What do you say the cloud is?
J.T. Well, it was, for that moment, that in which God was.
Ques. What would answer to the cloud now?
{115}
J.T. I think, in a sense, the Spirit. It is thus that God is known.
T.M.G. God was with them in that way.
Ques. What is the thought in the acceptance of the wilderness? Is it that the soul confesses the Lord?
J.T. ¬Tis the treasure we've found in His love. That has made us now pilgrims below.
But then there must be the public identification with the Lord in His death. You may be identified with Him in your heart, but that is not for testimony.
T.M.G. You own Him as your Lord. They were baptised unto Moses as their leader.
J.T. Quite so. So here Moses led them. If you take up each book by itself you get in the opening portion the point of it. The book of Exodus is an account of the names of the children of Israel who went into Egypt, their numbers and their names. In the opening of Leviticus God is speaking to Moses out of the tabernacle. So it is a question of what God was in the tabernacle. In Numbers Jehovah spake to Moses out of the tabernacle *in the wilderness*; the point of view there is the tabernacle *in the wilderness*, and the relation of the people to it. In Deuteronomy, the land is in view. The people are regarded typically as having the Holy Spirit, and there is a second covenant in chapter 29: 1.
T.M.G. Deuteronomy would be, I suppose, @Romans 8.
Ques. As to Exodus and the names of the children of Israel who went down into Egypt; what is in mind?
J.T. It indicates how God takes account of the people in those circumstances. Moreover, Egypt was the scene of bondage. What lies behind it all is the love of God; and the Spirit opens with an account of the names of those who went down into Egypt. They are in the mind of God; His love is behind it
{116}
all; He is going to intervene for them: but He says at the outset that He *knows* them all.
T.M.G. You find the same thing in Numbers. It is very interesting to see that everyone is taken account of by God.
J.T. Yes; God spake to Moses out of the tabernacle in the wilderness; then first of all Moses and Aaron are to number them by their armies. Then with them there was to be a man out of every tribe in the nation, every one a head of the house of his father, indicating the principle of local responsibility, like first Corinthians. Then, as numbered, each man was to pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of his father's house. There again you see the same principle of local responsibility. Then the tribes were divided into four companies, so you have everything in perfect order;, and the tabernacle was to be carried between the companies, two before and two after, surrounded by the Levites. So that, in the book of Numbers you get the order of God in connection with His testimony; and every Christian has to be in relationship with that. But in the book of Leviticus you have the sanctuary; and there it is a question of how God has to be approached; it is not a question of the Levites, but of the priests. So that we are to learn what we are now as having to say to God in the sanctuary; whereas, in Numbers, it is more what we are publicly in relationship with the testimony.
T.M.G. Yes, the Levite character. Then Leviticus would answer more to the epistle to the Hebrews?
J.T. Yes, I think so.
Ques. Do you get the thought in Numbers of the gospel of Mark?
J.T. Yes, the gospel of Mark would go with it.
T.M.G. The testimony.
J.T. I think it is of all moment that we should see first of all how it is that we come into the wilderness.
{117}
It is one thing to come into it, and another thing to get out of it. The Spirit of God shows us how we get out of it, too. I believe many have the thought that the wilderness is only something we want to get through as fast as possible. That is true; but we have to see that it is the sphere in which God sets forth His testimony.
Ques. You made a remark at the beginning of the reading, that in Exodus it was pure grace first. There was no dealing with them on account of their murmurings. Would you unfold that a little?
J.T. Well, that is what you find in chapters 15 to 18. There you will notice the bitter waters are made sweet for them; then they have the shelter of the palm trees; and besides that they have the twelve wells of water which is the means of refreshment.
All that is divinely provided.
T.M.G. The twelve wells and the seventy palm trees mean shelter and refreshment.
J.T. Yes, but for us they point to the ministry of the Spirit. That is God's provision for us; we have to bear that in mind. If He sends a little gift among us it is that we might be nurtured, and if there is the energy of the Spirit, it is that we may be refreshed. Then the enemy comes forward, but if you have Amalek's attacks, you have Joshua; and finally in chapter 18 you have Moses the king in Jeshurun. So that any difficulty you may have in your soul you go to him with it; they came to Moses with their difficulties.
Rem. And it was later on that God dealt with them for their murmurings.
J.T. I think it is when you accept definitely a position under His rule, that He deals with you in discipline.
T.M.G. It was not until they had accepted the law that He took account of their murmurings.
J.T. Yes; they put themselves formally under it.
{118}
They had said that they would build a habitation for Him, and now He puts them to the test as to whether they would do that. At the outset of your Christian career God is before you, you are happy and enjoying the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, and you would do anything for Him. You would devote yourself entirely to the Lord; and then God, in wondrous grace, takes you up on that ground and nurtures that spirit in you. He does not bring you to the wilderness of Sinai all at once; it is the wilderness of testing. I do not know if you have noticed that there are different wildernesses here; the wilderness of Shur, the wilderness of Sin, and the wilderness of Sinai. They were fully two months in the wilderness before God said anything to them about law, I mean before He proposed the ten commandments to them; and they were a full year in the wilderness before they were set up in relationship with the tabernacle. It took nearly nine months to get the tabernacle in order; and nearly three months till the giving of the law. So that you have, figuratively, a full year; a year and a month, really, according to @Numbers 1, before you are set up in connection with the testimony.
T.M.G. That is very interesting as showing how the soul is led on.
J.T. There is nothing, I believe, that we are so defective in as the knowledge of God. How considerate He is of His people! If He sees there is love in your heart, He sets you in circumstances where that is nurtured. He does not call for the north wind all at once. That comes afterwards: "Awake, O north wind", but that is when you are able to bear it.
Rem. It takes different testings to teach us what we are ourselves, and what God is to us.
J.T. I think so. Up to @Numbers 21 that is seen. The flesh is fully exposed. But then, I think, what has not been noticed by us as it should have been, is
{119}
the place the tabernacle holds. If it was simply a question of taking the people out, and bringing them in, there would have been no need for that; it would only have been a few days¬ journey. The tabernacle contemplates what is adverse; and its maintenance here is a testimony to God's power. He can maintain what is really of Himself.
Ques. Referring to what you have said just now as to the nurture that the young Christian, the new born soul, gets, do you think there is any significance in the fact that the good Samaritan stayed a night at the inn before he took his departure?
J.T. Well, that is very suggestive; and then, moreover, he made provision for the man that had been found among the thieves. He undertook to be responsible for all his expenses.
T.M.G. The whole way through.
Rem. You connected the thought of power with that.
J.T. Think of what we are! Take the beginning of Acts, for instance. In Acts, we get the anti-type of the tabernacle. There in the company of poor people, in the midst of the most renowned religious city in the world, God introduced an order of things that He has in His mind for the whole universe; and it was also in His mind that it should be maintained in them, and yet they were men in flesh and blood here. That is a testimony to God's power; and the more you consider it the more wonderful it is.
Rem. Was it the answer to @Matthew 16? "Upon this rock I will build my assembly; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it".
J.T. But the first thing they propose to do here is to build a habitation for God. Now, He did not ask them to do it immediately. He gave them time, so that they might learn Him and His grace. Afterwards He proposed that they should build the habitation. So Moses is to take a heave-offering.
{120}
T.M.G. The heave-offering is an answer from the heart.
J.T. But the believer at the beginning has hardly any idea of what a dwelling place for God involves here; so it is of all moment that young believers should be nurtured in grace. God's desire is to bring them into a sphere where there is shelter and refreshment. The apostles were divinely prepared to be a shelter for those who would come in afterwards; and that there should be refreshment for souls. If our meetings are anything, there should be refreshment in them for souls, and they should have the sense that there is protection for them. The apostles were divinely prepared for it, so that the three thousand souls that were converted on the day of Pentecost came info that in which divine shelter and refreshment were. I believe souls are stunted because of the want of these things.
Rem. There is not sufficient consideration for the young.
J.T. There ought to be that in which they could take root; "rooted and grounded in love". You must have the love for that. You see the idea in Christianity is not that you should *climb up*, but that you should *grow up*. In christendom people get into a position of eminence by climbing; now, the Lord's idea is that they are to *grow up*. Take Balaam's prophecy. He sees the tents of Israel: and he says, "How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel! As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the trees of lign aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters". Trees are for shelter. In @Exodus 15 they were to shelter Israel in their youth, coming in to the wilderness. At the end of the wilderness the young become trees themselves, they have grown up. If there is not the soil in which souls are to grow there is sure to be *climbing*, because
{121}
naturally we look for eminence; and if you climb as sure as possible you will have a fall.
Rem. The young should be attracted.
J.T. Yes, they should be taught how to love. The Lord has taught us how to love; we should never have known otherwise. In @John 13 the Lord teaches us how to love. The difference between the Lord's last supper and other suppers is this, that in the last supper He provided for a continuance of the feast in His absence. He had other suppers before that. You cannot have a love feast without love: now, the Lord provided for the continuance of the love feasts; and He did it by His own service. He laid aside His garments and girded Himself. If you have not the service you cannot have the love feast. Now, the service is seen in *going down*. A Christian's stature is seen in his ability to go down. The more a man descends, the more he shows that he is great.
Ques. Then you would say it is of more importance that young believers should have the shelter of the assembly than that they should come out in testimony?
J.T. Surely. They ought to grow. You will find the Israelites had to be twenty years old to be taken account of in Numbers.
Ques. But would you discourage a young person who wanted to go out in service?
J.T. Ah, well, we have to take things in the Spirit, and not in the letter. You require strength for testimony.
Rem. The young have tender shoots; if you put anything heavy upon them you may break off the shoots.
J.T. Whereas the tall cedar will stand a good deal. You may depend upon it there is nothing that will stand but love. The Lord enjoined it saying, "have love among yourselves".
{122}
T.M.G. @Philippians 2.
J.T. Yes. "Let this mind be in you that was also in Christ Jesus".
Rem. "Faith and hope shall cease, and love abide alone".
J.T. I do not know anything more interesting and more blessed than a love feast. In the Scriptures, Jude speaks about them, "these are spots in your love-feasts". Now, it is quite impossible to have a love feast unless you have the love; and where are you to get it? You must have it, and I must have it, if we are to enjoy the love feast.
Rem. As you say, it is not provided by one.
J.T. A brother may invite a good many of the saints to his house, and set a feast before them in temporal things; but, then, you cannot do that in a love feast. The Lord alone could do that.
Ques. I think you will have to explain more about the love feast.
J.T. It is clear you cannot have a feast without something to partake of, no matter what kind of a feast it is; and if you are to have a love feast it is quite clear you must have love. I believe @John 13 is the means the Lord presents to us for a continuance of the love feast. He rises from supper; the love feast. Well, now, how are you to have the next? That is the point. The fact that you have had one will not guarantee that you will have another.
Ques. Is that implied in "I have given you an example?"
J.T. That is the point in it. If the service is not continued the love feasts will not continue.
Ques. What do you mean by saying, if we have not the service we shall not have the feast?
J.T. The Lord rises from supper; that was the termination of the feast, and He lays aside His garments, and washes the disciples¬ feet. If that service does not go on you will not have another feast. We
{123}
have to do with the world, and are consequently dulled and perhaps defiled; and if this service is wanting amongst us the feasts will be wanting.
W.K. You mean the Lord's service?
J.T. "If ye know these things happy are ye if ye do them". The happiness is not in the knowledge of them, but in the *doing* of them.
W.K. Do you call the doing of them the feast inside?
J.T. No, I call it the means by which the feast is perpetuated.
T.M.G. Because it must be a question of part with Him for the feast.
Ques. Is this service carried out as we come together?
J.T. I think it is carried out through the week. If you see anything in your brother that is not right, you go to him; if you do not, you have a spot at the love feast. There was a spot at the last supper, Judas was there; and the light was so great that he went out in to the darkness.
Rem. You would not be taking into account your standing in the meeting.
J.T. No; if you do you are likely to regard some services as beneath your dignity. So the Lord said, "Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye do well, for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet". The twelve refused to be deacons. I am not criticising these men, but *there* are the facts, they refused to be deacons. Stephen superseded them, so the Spirit gives us the history of Stephen; and the apostles are in the second place. Now, Paul, instead of refusing the work of a deacon, took it up, and he regarded it as glory to serve the saints even in that way. See @2 Corinthians 8: 23. So that true love will stop at nothing for the good of the saints.
T.M.G. Well, that is the principle of washing
{124}
one another's feet. It is not a question of seeing a spot upon your brother, but I suppose it would be practically carried out if Christ has His place with me, and I am occupied with Him. If I come in contact with you, you will be made to feel it; that should be the effect of it.
J.T. If you see a spot upon your brother you cannot expect him to have water to remove it, you must *bring* the water.
T.M.G. But you may do that, though perhaps unconscious of any spot upon your brother; you may by being occupied with Christ yourself and in coming in contact with your brother have that effect upon him.
J.T. It is what is of Christ in you, the grace and humility, that is effective.
T.M.G. Quite so. "I have given you an example", the Lord said.
J.T. I believe if there were more faithfulness amongst us in that way there would be much more spiritual power in the meetings, but things are allowed to drag on; and the Spirit is grieved; therefore we do not have the love feasts.
T.M.G. We may have the feast, but not the love feast.
Rem. And we may be like the Jews; they had their own feasts.
{125}
LEVITICAL SERVICE
@Numbers 3: 1 - 13, 44 - 51
J.T. An important fact was dwelt upon whilst we were considering the first two chapters of this book yesterday in regard to the numbering of the congregation. In chapter 1 the numbering begins with Reuben, who was Israel's firstborn, whereas in chapter 2 Judah comes first. In the one case it represents God dealing with us on the ground of our responsibility here; whilst in the other case it is a question of God's sovereignty. We are taken account of in our responsibility; but then, as regards our position with reference to the tabernacle, it is a question of God's sovereignty. He puts forward whom He will; so that Judah becomes the leading tribe in the arrangement. I do not know whether you have noticed that.
J.G. Yes, I have. Chapter 1 is the natural order; chapter 2 is the sovereignty of God.
J.T. Yes; and while we were reading this chapter it occurred to me that the same thing is seen in the Levites. It is said that Gershon was the eldest of the sons of Levi; and yet, when the arrangement of the service comes in, in chapter 4, Kohath is taken first. That, I think, is a principle of the very greatest importance as regards our walking together. Priority is not according to what we may be here naturally. The arrangements in connection with the sanctuary, and in connection with the testimony, are according to the sovereignty of God; it is whom *He will*; whom *He* selects. Judah generally stands for the counsel of God. It settles a good many difficulties, if we recognise that God is sovereign; and that in the arrangement of things in the assembly, nature has no place; and even our acceptance of responsibility to serve, does not prove the nature of our
{126}
service. We are all responsible, whether as military men, or Levites; we are taken account of, and held responsible; but when it comes to actual work, the sovereignty of God is seen. So, in chapter 4 Kohath is seen to have to do with the most sacred things. One might plan to be or to do something, and might culture himself accordingly; but, after all, God may pass him by.
Rem. The desire to serve is not a qualification.
J.T. No; the desire is right, but it is not a qualification. The qualification comes from the Lord: "unto everyone of us is given grace", but it is "according to the measure of the gift of Christ",
@Ephesians 4: 7. And then we read, "he gave some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers".
T.M.G. The first verse you quoted would be the responsibility: "unto every one of us is given grace".
J.T. Yes, everyone has received a gift; but then, there are specific gifts which the Lord gives; and He gives them according to His own sovereign wisdom.
T.M.G. Do you not get the same principle in @Matthew 25 in the parable of the talents; and also in @Luke 19 in the case of the pounds? Every one has a pound; there is responsibility. In @Matthew 25 it is according to the giving of God: there it is five, and two, and one.
Rem. No amount of ability can determine things in connection with God's testimony.
J.T. I think the principle that is set forth in Numbers would overthrow the existing order of things around us, if it were accepted that the Lord has supreme rights. That is not admitted in the religious denominations, for there it is a question of arranging matters according to man.
Ques. Would you not say that that spirit might
{127}
get amongst those even where outwardly the authority of the Lord is recognised; and that is what we have to guard against?
J.T. It is very important to distinguish between natural ability and spiritual ability. Where there is spiritual ability, you have to support it, because that is the evidence that there is a gift from the Lord.
T.M.G. There might be a good deal of natural ability, and very little spiritual ability.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Would the desire to serve always go with the ability?
J.T. Well, of course one may neglect one's gift, you know. It is right for one to "take heed to the ministry" God gives him, and see that he fulfils it. @Numbers 3 opens with the generations of Aaron and Moses, in the day that the Lord spake with Moses in mount Sinai. It is well to note that, before we take up the subject of levitical service, because it is to bring to light the true position of Christ and the assembly, before you have the Levites presented. You will observe that Moses¬ sons are not mentioned; it is a question of Aaron. Moses had sons, we know; but they are not mentioned here.
Rem. Moses sets forth Christ as the Apostle.
J.T. Yes; He is the Apostle. The epistle to the Hebrews does not give us apostles; it gives us one Apostle. But, then, there should be a company of priests; and so you have Aaron's sons. Another thing worthy of notice is that Aaron is mentioned first. So you can see in these things that the priesthood is in the mind of the Spirit; whilst the authority of the Lord is seen in Moses. In the sixth verse Moses is instructed to "bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest that they may minister unto him. And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation
{128}
before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle".
W.K. What do you understand by "keeping his charge"; it occurs very often in connection with the priests, and the Levites generally.
J.T. Well, the high priest is charged with the service of the sanctuary, and the Levites are at his bidding, to carry out his instructions. So that all ministry really flows from the direction of the Lord in that way, as Priest.
T.M.G. "A minister of the sanctuary".
J.T. Exactly; it is, as it were, God taking account of the service; and He brings in the Levites, and presents them in that way to the Lord, as priests; so that He may have them to aid Him in the service of the tabernacle.
W.K. In verse 38, where the various tribes of the Levites were to encamp is spoken of, we read; "but those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be Moses, and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death". Very frequently that question of the charge is put in this connection.
J.T. Yes; and does it not remind us what a very serious thing it is to be placed in connection with the things of God. It is no light matter.
W.K. Had not the apostle Paul the sense of that in his service?
J.T. I think so. @2 Corinthians 11 gives us the best example of levitical exercises in the New Testament. Paul says, after recounting what he had passed through; "besides these things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches".
W.K. That is, he had it all the time.
{129}
J.T. Paul was a man under a *charge*. He says, "Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not?" And then in @1 Corinthians 9, he says, "Necessity is laid on me; yea, woe unto me if I preach not the gospel". If people become exercised about coming into fellowship, it is a question of whether they are going to take up the *charge*. Another important principle comes in, and that is, the Levites began to take up the charge at twenty-five years of age; but the full age was thirty.
T.M.G. Why twenty-five?
J.T. Well, they had to learn, you know; it is a kind of apprenticeship. The general age of the Levite in service is from thirty to fifty; but entrance into it at twenty-five shows that to take up the charge certain development is required.
W.K. You have to be educated.
J.T. This book is written after the people had been a year and a month in the wilderness; showing that a certain experience for military service is required, and they were reckoned from twenty years of age to be soldiers. But to have to say directly to divine things requires more than that; you require experience; thirty is really the age at which the Levite begins properly.
W.K. They entered fully into the service then. Rem. You would like to see young people pray to the Lord in the assembly, would you not?
J.T. Yes; where there is prayer in the assembly, there is evidence of levitical exercises.
T.M.G. "Behold, he prayeth", is said of Saul, @Acts 9: 11.
J.T. That is a good commendation.
W.K. It showed he was suitable for the service; he was in practical dependence on the Lord.
J.T. It is well to have the priestly family defined;
{130}
so they are brought into evidence first; and then the Levites are brought forward, and presented to the high priest.
W.K. What is the point in the different families; I mean the Kohathites, and the Gershonites, and the Merarites?
J.T. Well, when you come to chapter 4 each family is allotted its special work; and the fact that there were different families shows that there were different services; but all were under the same authority.
T.M.G. "Differences of administrations, but the same Lord".
W.K. That would be like @Romans 12, where all are in the body, and all acting for the good of the body; but each one has his own particular burden to carry. Let each one mind his own work, according to whatever service has been given him to do.
T.M.G. And yet not acting in independence.
J.T. All is to be under the superintendence of the priest.
Rem. "In the sight of Aaron their father". They would have the consciousness that the eye of the high priest was upon them.
T.M.G. What is said to the Thessalonians is, "Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father".
Ques. What is the thought of giving the Levites the place of the first-born?
J.T. Well, that signifies God's rights; and even the deficiency between the number of the Levites and the firstborn of the children of Israel, was made up by money; showing there is nothing passed over by God; nothing slipshod. So that His rights are recognised in the congregation.
Ques. Is not the thought of the firstborn peculiarly finked up with the affections?
{131}
J.T. I think so; the firstborn has a double portion; so that the assembly comes in for that.
T.M.G. "The assembly of the firstborn".
J.T. God has the right to put a family in heaven; "for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sin, hath quickened us together with Christ ... and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". That is His sovereign right; no one can dispute that. Then He has a right to take account of us in service down here, on the earth. It is a question of the sovereign rights of God in either case. There is nothing that men are so slow to admit as that; we are all inclined to resent it, and yet our blessing in every possible respect depends upon it.
Rem. We all admit the doctrine of it, but when it touches us, it is then we are tested.
J.T. There should be great exercise. I am sure our blessing lies there, in admitting the rights of God; and He has the right to place a family in heaven.
T.M.G. As has been said, He exercises His rights in mercy.
J.T. The Levites were taken account of from one month and upwards; whereas the military are numbered from twenty years and upwards.
T.M.G. Why the difference?
J.T. Being taken from a month old signifies that God *holds* the believer for service. He does not necessarily put him into it then. When the time comes for putting him into it, then God shows His sovereignty.
T.M.G. Once he is taken up, he belongs to God.
J.T. So you can understand that the Levite represents the firstborn; they represent all the saints; because when you come to Christianity, the
{132}
Levite is not different from the military man; he is the same person; but viewed as a Levite, you belong solely to God for His service.
T.M.G. And that is what God had in view in taking him up.
J.T. Yes; you see we are needed down here, and we are needed in heaven. There is nothing that can be more precious to the heart than that thought.
God really requires us *there*; and He is going to place us there because of His great love wherewith He loves us. But, in the meantime, we are needed *here*. Our place in service down here, and our place up there, are according to God's wisdom.
Rem. So that this time down here is of all importance.
J.T. Yes. A babe of a month old is held for service, as much as a man of twenty years.
W.K. So that all are training and qualifying with a view to that service.
J.T. Yes; Paul speaks of himself as separated from his mother's womb, and called by God's grace. You see, he was in God's mind separated to Him from his childhood; and in due time he was called, and then he was put into the ministry: that was when he was put to work. It is interesting to consider that all our exercises in regard to the saints is in reference to Christ. The Levites are given to the high priest.
W.K. "Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him".
J.T. Then in the 9th verse it reads, "Thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron, and to his sons; they are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel".
W.K. Yes, they come in, and are identified with him; but the great point is Aaron.
J.T. So that the Levite is not as great as the
{133}
priest; and his levitical qualities do not entitle him to priesthood. The great sin that came out in this book was that the Levites assumed to be equal to priests.
T.M.G. Is not that what is done in Christendom today?
W.K. Does that mean that your service does not qualify you to approach into God's presence as a worshipper?
J.T. True levitical service is according to state. But in Christendom a class has grown up that assumes priesthood, and that is *because they are Levites*, or ministers.
T.M.G. That was the sin of Korah.
Ques. Would you say that was infringing on the sovereignty of God?
J.T. Yes. Rem. That principle might be a test among ourselves.
J.T. I think anyone is liable to assume a place according to his gift; but it is not according to God. The greatest gift even Paul, ministered to the priests.
T.M.G. It is not a question of gift in the assembly.
W.K. You mean in function. Because you may be a great preacher, you may think you are therefore on different footing to others.
Ques. Will you say a word about verse 13, "I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel?"
J.T. The force of it is that they were set apart.
W.H.M. The first charge was that they were to be brought near to Aaron.
J.T. Yes; it is very important for the Levites to keep near to the priest.
W.H.M. Yes; and then they had ability to serve in a godly way.
J.T. In this book they have the charge of the children of Israel; whereas in the book of Joshua
{134}
they have a heavenly portion, having no inheritance on earth.
Ques. Would @1 Corinthians 12, answer to levitical service?
J.T. Yes; in the way we have been speaking of. I think God delights in variety; but it is variety in unity. All the heavenly bodies set that forth; there is variety, but perfect unity.
W.K. They all work to a common end.
J.T. "He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ". It is that all might come "in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". Levitical service does not go into eternity; but the results of it remain; and how important it is that you are working for eternity.
W.K. You may be very small, and able to do very little, but if God works through you, that will remain.
J.T. So Paul says, "Your labour is not in vain", though it may seem to be in vain in your own eyes.
Rem. "I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought", @Isaiah 49: 4.
J.T. It is very interesting to connect that with the Lord's ministry here. Really, the Lord's ministry was connected with conditions He found here; hence He has to say, "I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain; yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God". Outwardly, it was in vain; but it all came out in resurrection. Hence we have in the resurrection chapter (@1 Corinthians 15), "your labour is not in vain in the Lord". We are now on a different platform: "be not weary in well doing";
{135}
you may not see many results, but be not weary in it; "in due season we shall reap if we faint not". There are many things the Levites may be engaged in, as we may see in chapter 4, but it is a precious thing to be brought near to the High Priest; to be brought near to Christ, and to be presented to Christ, so as to be constantly under His eye. And then to find each family numbered carefully, so that the Lord knows each name.
W.H.M. Is not that God's thought? A people near to Him. There can be no service apart from that.
J.T. Quite so; and no true servant wishes it otherwise. What can you do without the Lord?
W.H.M. We are perfectly helpless.
J.T. You would feel a most feeble individual, if trying to serve without the Lord.
Rem. And that is why it is so important to have divine principles kept before us.
J.T. If the Levite is going to serve, not only the Lord, but also the saints, what a valuable man he is. You must not assume you are honouring a man because you listen to him. If a man has a gift, he is given to the sons of Aaron, as well as to Aaron; and, as a gift from the Lord, he is a valuable man, and ought to be cared for.
Rem. That is a very important principle. You recognise him as coming to you from the Lord.
J.T. Yes; and it is for you to care for him. The book of Deuteronomy insists on that.
W.K. You put your hand in your pocket.
J.T. Yes. Take a woman like Lydia; see how she valued the Levites. Now, she says, If you count me worthy, come into my house. She felt honoured by the apostle's presence in her house.
Rem. God claims their cattle, as well as themselves.
J.T. Well, all that emphasises the thought of
{136}
God's rights; all that appertains to a Levite is God's.
Rem. Jehovah is their inheritance; but they are Jehovah's.
J.T. Yes; just so. The cattle are very useful. If a man has a business, it belongs to the Lord; so all that appertains to the Levites is the Lord's.
Rem. You find that coming out in the beginning of Acts.
J.T. Yes; Barnabas was a Levite; and he had land, which he sold; and he brought the money which he got for his land, and laid it at the apostles¬ feet. He recognised that they could dispose of it more wisely than he could. But you cannot do that nowadays; because there are no apostles. You have to be responsible yourself, and act as a steward in regard to your possessions.
T.M.G. And as we read in @Luke 16, "If ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own?"
J.T. I believe it would be a wholesome thing if we valued the Levites more. Here you see they are brought to Aaron, and given to him; and then to the sons of Aaron. The Lord values the Levites.
W.K. And we are to esteem them very highly for their works¬ sake.
Rem. Imitation is seen in Acts, in the case of Ananias and Sapphira.
J.T. Yes, they pretended to give all, and kept back part. A Levite may assume to be more than he is; and that works out evilly. The Levite is to keep the priest's charge; he cannot be greater than the priest, and that keeps him humble.
J.McF. What would answer to the Kohathites?
J.T. That comes under the divisions of service. However, as you mention it, the Kohathites had to do with the precious things: the things within the veil, and the things in the holy place, and they
{137}
carried them on their shoulders; only they were not allowed to touch or look upon any holy thing.
W.K. They had no wagons; the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari had.
J.T. That shows there are some things that are more sacred than others in connection with the service of the tabernacle. There is another thing the Kohathites are the most favoured of the servants.
W.K. You have spoken of the Levites, and the priests; will you just make it clear that there are not two classes now.
J.T. There are not two classes; for we are all priests and Levites; only, if you get up to minister to the saints, you are thinking of promoting the priestly state in them. But you do not interfere with the Levites in what has been given them to do. The Lord says to Peter, when he asked Him "Lord, and what shall this man do?" "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee Follow thou me". Peter, and the man he was asking about, were both Levites. But if you go to visit the saints you regard that as priestly.
Rem. In going to see one who may be sick, you would place yourself, as it were, at the disposal of that person.
J.T. If a Christian is right, when he is visiting, he says to himself, 'Well, the Lord has given me this man to visit, to help to carry'. That is the mutuality of love.
Ques. How can that be more promoted amongst *us*?
J.T. I think @John 13 is the great chapter for levitical work.
{138}
PRIESTHOOD
@Exodus 28:1 - 21
J.McF. Why are all the vessels described before we come to the consecration of the priests?
J.T. I suppose the order of things with which priesthood is connected must exist before you have the priest to carry on the service. Certain things come in afterwards, such as the golden altar, the altar of incense.
J.McF. Yes; they are not described in the first part of it.
J.T. No, they come in to chapter 30.
Rem. You must have the means to approach, before you can approach.
Ques. Would not the means to approach refer more particularly to the altar?
J.T. Well, it does; and therefore you have the altar in chapter 27. I think the brazen altar is the great feature as regards approach; that is, if man, as such, is to approach. If a *priest* is to approach, it is in connection with the golden altar. So that the priesthood really comes in between the brazen altar and the golden altar. If a *man* from the camp is to approach, the brazen altar is the great feature; so it is the main thought, in that respect, in Leviticus. If man is to draw near to God, he has to say to Him primarily at the brazen altar.
Rem. That just takes you to the court.
J.T. Yes. What meets you at the outset in drawing near to God, is the thought that sin must be judged. That is what God impresses us with on entering into His sphere. The first great thing is the brazen altar; God signifying that sin must be judged. We can only be with Him on those terms. But then, the golden altar is for the priest's approach. I think that passing the brazen altar we touch priesthood. But things are often defective on the line of
{139}
priesthood, for the reason that the truth implied in the brazen altar is not generally accepted. Sin must be judged if we have to say to God at all.
Rem. There must be a foundation laid in our *souls*.
J.T. Yes; otherwise we never really reach priesthood in our souls; we never take up our functions if sin is not rightly judged.
J.McF. When you say sin must be judged, that goes further than sins forgiven.
J.T. Quite so; it is the complete removal of the man that sinned; because the sin offering implied that.
W.K. It would be a great thing if people had @Leviticus 4 in their souls; that is to say, to understand the meaning of the carcase of the sin offering burnt, not on the altar, but outside the camp, where the ashes are poured out. If people apprehended that in their souls, they would be capable of taking up priestly functions. You are going in where God is. It is not God coming out to where you are; I mean in the type of the golden altar. I am sure what you say is true, that the defect lies in not apprehending the truth of the brazen altar. Anyone would be glad to accept that they were forgiven; but to feel that what you have done, the sins that you have committed, are so heinous in the sight of God, that the man who had committed those sins must be consumed to ashes, for he never could come into the presence of God.
J.T. The brazen altar measured five cubits long and five cubits broad, and it was three cubits high; and it was overlaid with brass. These are features that have to be noticed. God met man there; it was man's condition; it was human measure; and it refers to Christ bearing sins publicly; really, we may say, between heaven and earth. There it was that God judged sin; and it was a standing thing;
{140}
it was there permanently. So that if a man has to say to God, that is what confronts him. Directly you want to have to say to God, what confronts you is that God must judge sin; and Leviticus is that you put your hand on the head of the offering; you identify yourself with your sacrifice, as offered on that altar. The golden altar, on the other hand, was one cubit in length and one cubit in breadth. What the one cubit suggests is unity. It is the place of the priest's approach; it is a place of prayer; and it is a place of intercession. I believe that the great source of weakness among the saints is that the truth of the brazen altar, the judgment of sin, is not accepted.
Rem. Directly you enter the court of the tabernacle the brazen altar confronts you. It is sin dealt with sacrificially. It is not sin judged at the great white throne; it is what God has done with sin in Christ.
J.T. An understanding of @Psalm 22 forms the true basis in our souls. There is the sin bearer; the One who was made sin, and yet infinitely precious to God in it. He cries from the depths, and He says, "thou art holy, thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel".
Ques. The height of the brazen altar is three cubits: what does that signify?
J.T. The number three is usually *complete* testimony; hence death and resurrection; "the third day he shall rise again". I think that in Christ as the Sin-bearer, is a testimony to inherent power of life, hence resurrection; and yet answering to man's weakness, for He was crucified in weakness; five is the symbol of weakness.
Rem. So we see in that, as you were saying, the One who was in the fullest way under judgment, as entering into man's condition, and yet at the same time is precious to God.
{141}
J.T. Yes. I do not think God could be glorified at the great white throne as He was in the cross. In the sacrifice there is the judgment of sin infinitely; "thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel". Christ, according to His own infinite being, recognised what was due to God in sin-bearing; so that sin is judged according to God in the brazen altar. We may judge sin, and the more we judge sin, the more we love Christ; but we never judge it infinitely; we never judge it as God judges it; we could not from the very nature of our being. We judge it comparatively; some judge it more than others; and the more we judge sin, the more we love Christ; to whom much is forgiven the same loveth much. So I suppose the apostle Paul judged sin more than any of us; but then, he did not judge it infinitely. Sin has been judged vicariously; it has been judged in the Person who bore it; that is to say, the Lord's mind was exactly God's mind when sin was removed.
Rem. I suppose according to the measure of our apprehension of sin, we judge it in ourselves.
J.T. I doubt very much whether anyone ever judges sin without the Lord's support; the Lord helps us to judge it.
Ques. Speaking of the great white throne, do you mean the judgment there refers to what is merely objective?
J.T. There is really no adequate estimate of sin as Jesus had it. No doubt the consciences of the lost admit the justice of the verdict. We cannot over estimate the importance of the judgment of sin in the brazen altar.
Rem. If those who appear before the great white throne accepted that, they would not be there.
J.T. I think everyone consigned to eternal punishment will own that God is justified in what
{142}
He does. But then, it is another matter to say that they have a just estimate of sin.
W.K. They weep, and gnash their teeth; which is quite the opposite idea.
J.T. The necessity for judging sin is not generally accepted amongst the saints, and hence the weakness in the priesthood.
Rem. There cannot be prosperity of soul until these things are really accepted.
J.T. I think not.
Ques. What do you mean by the weakness of the priesthood?
J.T. I mean that we are not in the acceptance of priestly privilege. Every believer is a priest from the divine point of view, but we have to reach it in our souls; and in order to do that we have to pass the brazen altar in our soul's apprehension. @Exodus 28 opens up the subject of priesthood; and nothing can be more interesting. You have the dress of the priest; and whilst Aaron's sons are associated with him in the priesthood, we can easily perceive that the Spirit of God is mainly occupied with Christ. We come in at the end of the chapter; indeed, we are in view all the way through; but the great central thought in the chapter is the high priest, and his dress.
Rem. Referring to Christ as High Priest. He is the One in whom sin has been infinitely judged.
J.T. Quite so. He is the victim. He is the sacrifice, and then He is also the Priest. "Take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel". The first thing that strikes you is that it is a man taken from among men; that is the priest. You do not get the thought in Moses of the apostle being taken from among men. The apostle comes out from God, but the priest is taken from among men.
{143}
Rem. I suppose the apostle would be seen more in the setting up of the tabernacle.
J.T. And the priest is to maintain the service in it.
W.K. "Every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way"; and then the apostle adds, "for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity", @Hebrews 5:1, 2.
J.T. The idea there is that the high priest is taken from among men; hence he is on man's side, and is therefore sympathetic. That is not the thought in the *apostle*. The apostle is on God's side.
W.K. To make Him known.
J.T. Yes.
J.McF. And I suppose you have the idea of the *apostle* up to this chapter?
J.T. Yes; it was almost entirely that up to this chapter; but here you have a man taken out from among the others, and marked off by this peculiar dress. Hence it is a wholly new man in the antitype; a different order of man; because the blue refers to the Lord's humanity. He is a heavenly Man. A man with a robe like this, complete in one piece, is a man of another order. The Lord historically had His part among men; but it came to light that He was of another order; that is to say, He was a heavenly Man.
Ques. Do you speak of the whole garment being blue?
J.T. Yes, the robe of the ephod; there were divers colours in the ephod, but the robe of blue has reference to the Lord's humanity; who He was.
Rem. It is a very beautiful description of the garments; "holy garments for glory and for beauty".
{144}
J.McF. Is the thought in "garments for glory and for beauty" the same as we get in Hebrews; "crowned with glory and honour?"
J.T. Yes, in some sense. The thing to lay hold of is, that there was a Man here among men capable of entering into their sorrows and their exercises; and it came to light that He was a heavenly Man, really the second Man out of heaven; but a Man with a heart capable of taking in all the saints. The high priest had the saints on his shoulders, in the two stones; and he had the saints on his heart, in the twelve stones. Hence I doubt very much if we ever touch priesthood subjectively until we love the brethren. That is one of the best evidences of the priest, whether he has the saints on his shoulder and on his breast. If you love the saints, you support them according to your measure; that is the shoulder. So that a man is marked off as a priest in that way; and the saints take account of him.
Rem. Affection and support are what mark him.
J.T. There is no value in talking about love if you do not put your hand in your pocket. The great thing is to show your affection; and you show your affection by the support that you give.
Rem. The twelve tribes were represented on the breastplate.
J.T. Meaning that all the saints are there. Each tribe had its precious stone, meaning, that in the Lord's heart each saint has his name.
W.K. Collectively on the shoulders; and individually on the breastplate.
J.T. What comes out in @Revelation 12 is that when the Lord enters heaven there is warfare; and the secret of it really is that He entered heaven as a Priest; and immediately there is an anti-priest, "the accuser of our brethren". The Lord intercedes for the saints; so that the issue is really between the affection that Christ has for the saints, and the
{145}
hatred that Satan has for them. These two things cannot exist in heaven -- the love of Christ, and the hatred of Satan. So Satan is cast out. The Lord is the champion of the saints, and the end of the war is that Satan is cast out of heaven: "the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night". It is a terrible thing to be an accuser of the brethren.
Rem. That is Satan's work.
J.T. Yes. It is a very touching thing that the saints, in that way, became the occasion of the war. The Lord espouses our cause, He champions the saints, and this chapter shows us the place we have in His heart.
J.McF. If we love the brethren, it shows we have come under the influence of the priest.
J.T. You want to seek the company of priests, to seek a company that love one another. So we find a beautiful touch in the end of Romans. Paul, speaking of Phoebe says, "I commend unto you Phoebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea; that ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you; for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also". As in the meeting she was to be supported.
W.K. "Whatsoever she hath *need* of"; that injunction goes a long way.
J.T. In Paul's letter to the Corinthians we find the same thing. He says, "Ye are our epistle written in our hearts; known and read of all men".
Ques. The stones in the breastplate were precious. Will you say a word about that? 
J.T. I think it shows the intense interest that the Priest had in them; the preciousness of the saints to Him, that they should be engraved there.
{146}
Rem. I suppose permanency is shown in it.
J.McF. His own perfection as a Man would be presented in all that.
J.T. The more the light shines on the breastplate, the more the names appear. You can understand the Lord interceding. He received the Spirit for the saints; that was the first great intercession. He says, "I will beg the Father, and he will *give you* another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever", @John 14: 16. That showed the place they had with Him; and following upon that you have the idea of warfare. Satan accuses the brethren day and night, @Revelation 12.
Rem. How precious that we have a place on His shoulders.
J.T. You remember what was said of Benjamin "The beloved of the Lord he shall dwell in safety by him; he will cover him all the day long". We are supported by infinite strength.
Rem. The Shepherd puts the lost sheep on his shoulders. In Isaiah we read that "the government shall be upon his shoulder".
J.T. We can see that the whole weight of the support of the saints is on Christ.
Rem. How it magnifies the greatness of His Person!
Ques. What is the thought in priesthood?
J.T. Well, I think we have it indicated here; "that he may minister unto me in the priest's office". It is what Christ is doing. It is what the servant of the Lord carries on Godward; and, as we have been seeing, it involves that the saints are sustained for God.
Ques. Would it refer in a special way to Lord's day morning?
J.T. Well, I think priesthood has a very wide bearing. When we come to the book of Leviticus you have a very wide sphere; there it is the sanctuary,
{147}
but in the book of Numbers you have the priest in regard to the Levites¬ service. Then we read later on, in Malachi, that the priest's lips should keep knowledge; so that he was to teach the people. But the primary thought is that approach is equal to the revelation. That has been often mentioned; but I think what ought to be borne in mind is that the equality of the approach has reference to what Christ is personally: it does not refer to us; we could not compass full revelation. We have part in the approach, but it is as having part with Christ; so we read in @Hebrews 10, "and having a great Priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart". He knows God perfectly; the One who approaches is equal to God; that is where equality lies, it is in the Person of Christ; it is the same Person that has revealed God that approaches God.
Rem. And such an High Priest became us.
J.T. Yes; and what a place we have. "Holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners". I think it must be infinitely gratifying to God to see man as in Christ approach Him. Approach is to God and God delights in it. What meets the eye of God is the breastplate. That is to say, the Man that *approaches* is a Man that *loves*; he loves the saints.
In Zechariah we read: "he shall build the temple of the Lord and shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne; and the counsel of peace shall be between them both"; chapter 6: 13. That is, between God and the Priest; there is a perfect equality between God and the Priest; and I believe it all lies morally in that there is the love of God seen in a Man.
Ques. Would you kindly say a word about verse 15, "the breastplate of judgment".
J.T. Judgment is according to love. Judgment is not based on anything else. There is a good deal
{148}
taught on that line in the last chapter of Leviticus; where, if one make's a vow, it should be valued according to Moses¬ estimation; and then afterwards according to the estimation of the priest; and it would be according to the shekel of the sanctuary. As a matter of fact, everything is judged according to the balances of the sanctuary; that is where we arrive at the true estimate of things.
W.K. That is, in God's presence.
J.T. You get a true estimate of things there. There is not a man in the world who has a true estimate of things, unless he has been in the sanctuary.
W.K. It is remarkable there was such particularity about getting exact measure and weight.
J.T. Any vow you make is estimated according to the shekel of the sanctuary. The brethren may under-estimate you, or over-estimate you; but in the sanctuary everything is rightly estimated. It is very comforting.
W.K. What is the point in the breastplate being four-square, and a span long and a span broad?
J.T. Square is usually taken to mean universality. It takes in all creation.
W.K. And then the span; would that refer to a man?
J.T. A man's measure, I suppose.
Ques. What is the thought of *glory and beauty* in connection with the holy garments, in the second verse?
J.T. It refers to God's glory in a Man. It is what God sees in Christ as on our side. From God's side He is "the effulgence of his glory, and the expression of his substance". That is what is stated of Christ as a Man; that is what He is from God. He sets forth what God is towards us; but then, as Man towards God, there is perfect beauty there.
{149}
LIGHT
@Isaiah 60: 1 - 3; @Acts 9:3; @Acts 22:6; @Acts 26: 13; @Ephesians 1: 3 - 6
You will understand from these passages that my thought is to say a word about Light; and I wish specially to enlarge upon what may be regarded as *our* light. The passage in Isaiah speaks of a special light. The chapter is addressed, as you will readily perceive, to Israel; and she is called upon to "Arise, shine, for thy light is come" -- *her light*. That is to say, there was a special light which has reference to that nation. You will remember how Simeon took the little Child into his arms in the temple, as recorded by Luke, and he refers to the Lord in this way "A light for the revelation of the Gentiles". There he alludes to the Gentile's light. Christ would be a light to the Gentiles; whereas, Isaiah refers to Him as Israel's light.
Now, I want to make clear that there is a special light for us. Light is referred to in Scripture perhaps as extensively as any other subject. It is primarily referred to as a necessity. You will find, I think, as a principle, that whatever God commands is an absolute necessity. He is said to have commanded *light*; He is said to have commanded *life*; and He is said to have commanded *repentance*. These things are necessities on account of conditions here. The necessity for the command that there should be light was obvious, because darkness prevailed. Darkness, we are told, was on the face of the deep; hence God commanded what was a necessity; He commanded light, and there was light. On the first day in @Genesis 1, light is commanded, without saying whence it came, or what was its origin. We have the simple fact stated that God commanded light, and that there was light.
{150}
Now, when you come to the fourth day you find a great luminary in the heavens. There is the source of light, and its position. The fourth day may be said to be Christianity. The third day is resurrection. If you look at the passage you will see what I mean. On the third day "the earth brought forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind". On the third day the dry land appears; and on the fourth day the light, is set in the heavens, alluding to Christ as having gone up into heaven.
Now, that is the point that I desire to lead to; that the Light is in heaven now. First of all, Christ had to become Light upon earth. "The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man"; it does not say here coming from heaven. That is John's presentation of it. A divine Person in the world is Light, and He sheds His light on every man. *Man* was in view. Man was in total darkness; and Christ coming into the world is light.
It is like the first day. God commanded the light. It is not there a question of whence it comes, or where it is, but that it is a necessity for every man. It sheds its beams on every man; not necessarily that every man's soul is illuminated, but the light is there for all. Not simply that it was Israel's light; it was *man's* light; it was universal; He shed His light on every man.
What perfect light was in the life of Jesus! "In him was life, and the life was the light of men". That holy, separate, devoted life was the light of men in this world. The life was the light, the life of that Man! Would that we could ponder that; "in him was life, and the life was the light of men"; not of angels, but of men. It was universal. John Baptist was not that light. Jesus was that light. He was here absolutely for God's will. His life in that way was light. Well, now, that was universal;
{151}
it was not special. You can understand if God is revealed there are no preferences; He is no respecter of persons. Men viewed as they are, as men in this world, come under the notice of God for blessing, but He is no respecter of persons in that way. The gospel is a testimony to what the light was. "God said, Let there be light, and there was light". The Lord said, according to John's record in chapter 12, "While ye have the light believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light". He said that, and immediately He went and hid Himself; the Light disappeared. It was there, and it shone universally, and He appeals to those to whom it shone. He says while ye have it, believe in it. Let that be an appeal to our hearts; as believers in it you become sons of the light; and then the Lord goes and hides Himself. The Light was about to disappear. The light that shone in Israel was about to disappear, the holy life of Jesus. "The people which sat in darkness", the prophet says, "saw great light".
Well, now, that is the first thing in the first chapter of the book of Genesis; but on the fourth day, as I have said, the great light is set in heaven. The light is transferred to heaven. I wish to dwell upon that; and what I would say to you is that *our* light is particularly Paul's light. I know of no subject, in a way, that is more interesting than that. We want to understand what *our* light is. There is Israel's light; there is universal light; there is the Gentiles¬ special light; there is the light for the assembly. Now, it is for us to discover what that is. I think Paul comes forward as the special vessel of the assembly's light, and therefore I read those three passages in which we have the account of his conversion. In each of the passages you will find that it is formally stated that the light *came from heaven*. In the first passage it is simply stated that a light was there from heaven. In the second passage it is said that a *great* light was
{152}
there, but still from heaven. In the third passage it is a light *above the brightness of the sun* from heaven. You will observe, therefore, that the Spirit of God gives increase of appreciation of the light. I need not say it was the same light that is referred to in chapter 9 as in chapter 22, and as in chapter 26. It is the same light, but the speaker has increased appreciation of it. The first speaker is doubtless Luke; the second speaker is Paul himself. Luke gives the simple statement that a light from heaven shone; he is careful to say that it came from heaven. If you are in a dark room it matters little whether there is a gas light or electric light, or some other light; you want *light*, but in the passages I am referring to, the *kind* of light that is shining is in view, the source of it, it is from heaven.
I refer to the tabernacle for a moment. You will recall that there was a candlestick there. The light from it was not to shine in the court of the tabernacle; it was not light for the wilderness outside. What was the object in the candlestick with its seven lamps? It shed its light upon what was *within*. It is not to expose the darkness outside; it is not to expose the dark crevices in our hearts. The light in the sanctuary is to bring into evidence the beauties of Christ; it is to bring into evidence the things connected with Christ; the "things above". The angels are there entirely subject to God's will; hence the Lord says, "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven". Why, then, the necessity for light in heaven? The Lord Jesus Christ entering into heaven shed His beams upon all that is there. The heavens are open to us, as you see in Stephen's case; he looked up stedfastly into heaven; he could look in there; there was light there; he saw the face of a Man whom he knew. He saw "the glory of God, and Jesus". It is a wonderful thing to look in there. A light was to be in the tabernacle perpetually.
{153}
Aaron was to take care that it was there. As a priest enters, what does he see? He sees all the beauties of Christ; and the things above are in full view; what a thing it is to look in there.
Do you know what gives us a true estimate of the things in this world? No one has a true estimate of the things in this world until he goes into the sanctuary. Asaph says, "Until I went into the sanctuary of God, then understood I their end". Now, what do you see in the sanctuary of God? You see Christ; you get a view of Christ. You come out, and you see that the man that is outside cannot remain; he is entirely different to the Man that is inside; and the Man that is inside is in God's favour; He is accepted of God for ever; He is the accepted Man. The man here is rejected; hence Asaph saw that God would make an end of them; they may flourish like a green bay tree, but God will make an end of them. God will not go on with two men; He will go on with one Man. The Man that is accepted inside is the Man that is to continue, and to prevail; and if you see Him inside, when you come outside, you make up your mind that the man that is outside must go. He says, "then understood I their end". Let us draw near; you see all that is there in heavenly light; and, as the hymn puts it,
<blockquote>"Heavenly light makes all things bright, <br>Seen in that blissful gaze". (`12:3)</blockquote>
There is not only the exposure of the darkness here, but the light of Christ brings everything that is in the mind of God, in heaven, into evidence; you can well understand the apostle Paul saying, "have your mind on the things that are above". That really means entering into the sanctuary of God, "where Christ sitteth", the accepted One; He is undisturbed. He is not simply *standing* there now, He is *sitting*; He is at rest there; He had not where to lay his Head when here; but He is sitting
{154}
there. The book of Revelation shows us Christ coming out; and so the encouragement in Colossians is to "have your mind on the things that are above, not on things that are on the earth; for ye have died, and your life is hid with the Christ in God. When the Christ is manifested who is our life, then shall ye also be manifested with him in glory". It is a wonderful thing to go into the sanctuary. As I said a moment ago, you never have a true estimate of things here, until you enter the sanctuary of God. You not only see the Man that is there, but your heart is drawn to Him; you delight in Him. But more, you see the power by which God will remove the man that is here, and all his works; every trace of him is to be removed; "then understood I their end", Asaph said. What a great thing it is to "understand".
Well, now, you can see in these three passages in the Acts, how the Spirit lays emphasis on the thought of light in heaven; it comes out of that sphere; and it is a principle that those who are illuminated by any given light, make their way to the source of it; hence if you are illuminated by any light out of heaven, the answer to it is that you seek heaven. The light from heaven gives character to Paul's ministry; it was to be a heavenly ministry. The apostle Paul never gives up this line until he sets the assembly in heaven. That is the great end of his ministry. You will recall that in @Genesis 22, when the resurrection of Christ is foreshadowed in Isaac, the Spirit of God immediately proceeds to give us the genealogy of Rebekah; in chapter 23 Sarah dies, and is buried; and in chapter 24 Rebekah is brought to Isaac.
In the Old Testament Isaac answers to Paul's ministry; he is the heavenly man. Israel appears as a type of Christ, as the heavenly Man. Directly he is risen, typically Rebekah's genealogy is presented
{155}
to us. The Spirit of God has the assembly in mind directly you have the figure of Christ risen. Then Sarah dies, and she is buried. She is the first person in Scripture mentioned as being buried. She is buried in the light of resurrection. In chapter 24 we have Rebekah brought to Isaac, presented to Isaac to be his companion; typifying the assembly brought to Christ as in heaven. That is brought about by Paul's ministry; and what I would seek to bring home to our hearts is, that we should be in that light. It is our light. One of the greatest defects amongst us is that we do not appreciate our peculiar light. It has come directly out of heaven. The day is approaching when Israel's light will shine again; it is not shining now; a greater light is shining now, and that light is *our* light; and I would appeal to you as to whether you are in it. It should be the boast of our hearts that we are come into the greatest possible light, and we can call it *our* light.
Now, I read in Ephesians because that epistle presents this light to us. It is the suited presentation of the light to the assembly; perhaps the epistle least understood by us. Many prefer Israel's light to our light; and therefore I appeal to you. Look at how the apostle addresses these Gentile believers in Christ; he says, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings (now note, *where*) in heavenly places in Christ". The point is, not exactly the blessings, but, *where* they are. Where are they? In the heavenlies. We are not blessed on earth; Israel shall be blessed from heaven upon, earth. You will remember in @Leviticus 9, that Moses and Aaron "came out", and they blessed the congregation. That is future. @Leviticus 8 is our chapter; we come in there; and so in Ephesians. Israel will be blessed on earth. We are blessed with *every* spiritual blessing,
{156}
not one omitted, but where? In the heavenlies, in Christ. Now, think of that!
The Philippian epistle is the reflection of this in us; so that the apostle presses upon them that they are to be lights in the world. What kind of lights? Heavenly luminaries. As I said before, we belong to the fourth day. The fourth day speaks of lights in the heavens. "God said let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for years; and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, to give light upon the earth; and God made two great lights;" and then you have the stars. The Philippian epistle, I believe, presents the stars to us, the heavenly luminaries. We shine as lights in the world; we are children of God; and we shine; and so the apostle enlarges upon it. Our citizenship is in heaven; our blessings are there, and our treasures are there; our names are registered there.
Then the apostle goes on to show in @Ephesians 1, that it is all for the satisfaction of the heart of God; that is what it is for. You see the light in the heavens; you look in there, and what do you find? You see the glory; there is the shining out of the Father's affections; His heart is fully satisfied; He has the Beloved there, and the apostle says He has made us accepted in Him. If you were going to heaven tonight, and the word *Beloved* were uttered, to whom would you turn? To *Jesus*. Paul does not say who the Beloved is here. He leaves it for us to know. I have often thought, that in that vast throng we shall have no difficulty in discerning the Lord. We know His features. You remember how the bride, the feminine speaker in the Canticles, recognised His hand, without seeing any other part of His body; and she described His face and every part of Him; she could describe Him; and so,
{157}
beloved friends, in heaven we shall recognise the Lord, as the Beloved; and look! God has made us accepted in Him. Think of all the infinite affection that rests upon the Beloved, and we are accepted in Him there. Think of the presentation; we are to be presented faultless in the presence of the glory, with exultation! That is what God has in His mind for us. And it is to the praise of the glory of God's grace!
Now, I think you will understand how these few verses in Ephesians present to us what is specially our light. Would that we might ponder in our souls these wonderful statements of the Spirit of God in regard to ourselves, which are presented to us in this first chapter of the epistle to the Ephesians.
May the Lord bless the word to each of us.
{158}
RESPONSE TO GOD IN HIS OPERATIONS AND INTERESTS
@Deuteronomy 18: 21; @Luke 15: 25; @Acts 11: 22 - 26
The Spirit of God records, that from the very outset God had sympathy from His creatures in His operations. When the foundations of the earth were laid, we are told that "the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy". As God operated to effect His counsels, those who were regarded in the relation of sons were all interested; not some, but "all the sons, of God shouted for joy". On another occasion, at the greatest event, the birth of Christ, He again found sympathy on the part of these angelic beings. They took note of what was going on, and multitudes of the heavenly host were there expressing the profoundest sympathy and interest in that which had taken place on earth; and what had taken place was not specially for their own glory, for the Son of God did not become an angel; He became a Man. His incarnation involved the glory of an order of beings which was at that time inferior to angels, hence if there had been anything in those angelic beings of the nature of envy it would have manifested itself. But instead of that they expressed the profoundest interest and sympathy and delight in that which God was accomplishing.
Now the Spirit of God records these things for us; they are not recorded simply as an historical account. The Spirit of God never would engage Himself in merely writing history. What He records is intended to produce exercise in the people of God now. The Spirit of God records for us that all the sons of God were interested in the operations of God, and that is to produce exercise in us. All Christians are expected to be in sympathy with what God is doing.
{159}
The passage I read in Deuteronomy has reference to Israel. God did not limit the idea of sonship to angelic beings, but He gave that place to a nation or family. The fact is, beloved friends, the very existence of father and son in the human family, as a divinely ordered relationship, is but a testimony as to what is in God's heart. If God has placed in our hearts affections for a son and delight in a son, it is but a testimony to what is in His own heart. We have in the creation not only a testimony to "his eternal power and divinity", but we have a testimony also to His affections: for the relationship which God has ordained, called father and son, parent and child, and of brethren, are witnesses to the primary thought which He intended to accomplish through the incarnation of His own precious Son. In taking up Israel He brings His own thought nearer to us. His thought was that men were to be in the relationship of sons with Him.
Now Israel went down into Egypt, and there in the government of God they became bond-slaves. The government of God has to do with discipline, and discipline works out in us appreciation of the relationship. Israel went down to Egypt under the government of God. Egypt was no part of the counsels of God. It formed no part of the promises indeed Abraham was prohibited from going there, and yet we find that Jacob goes there. He is compelled to go there: the very necessities of the times forced him to go. He comes to Beersheba, to the confines of the land of Canaan and there God meets him. Jacob had his misgivings; we also have our misgivings; things sometimes are not clear to us; a cloud hangs over us, but we arrive at a point when God appears to us. God appeared to Jacob, and what did He say? "Fear not, I am the God of Isaac". He does not say the God of thy father Abraham, but of Isaac. Thus God caused light to
{160}
shine into the heart of His disciplined child, and that light was, that every thought he had cherished, all the result of light previously received, is immutably secured in Christ risen. Isaac is a type of Christ in resurrection, and God intimated to Jacob that every thought he cherished was secured in Him. That is wonderful light to shine into our souls in the moment of discipline.
From Jacob's point of view everything seemed against him, but then he learned that all these things were for him, and were but the occasion of God assuring him that every spiritual thought he had cherished was fixed in Christ Jesus, and established in Him. So the government of God goes on and Jacob goes down into Egypt. There his posterity remain for many years and under the government of God they become bond-slaves. God permitted His governmental dealings to go on till they realised what the bondage of this world really is. But in due time God remembered His people and He takes Moses and causes him to go through forty years of discipline. It is a disciplined man only who is suitable to become the vessel of light to a disciplined people. If we are a disciplined people we are in relationship with God: if not, we are not in relationship with God. @Hebrews 12 shows that. Moses was qualified by his experience in the wilderness to become the light bearer to a disciplined people in the land of Egypt.
Now look at the way God takes up Moses and sends him with a message to Pharaoh and to the people.
The message to the people announces God's faithfulness. He did not tell the people that they were His sons. He sends that message to Pharaoh. The message to the people announces His unfailing faithfulness, revealing Himself as Jehovah to them. To Pharaoh He says, "Israel is my son, even my firstborn: And I say unto thee, Let my son go,
{161}
that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn". What do you see in that? It is God announcing His eternal thought in regard of man, and He appeals to a well-known affection which had a place in the heart of Pharaoh, an affection which God had placed there Himself; for natural affection is of God. He says in effect to Pharaoh, 'You have a son, and you have affection for your son; I have the affections of a father. Israel is My son, My firstborn, and if you do not let him go I will deprive you of your son'.
He had an avenue into Pharaoh's heart by the affections which He had placed there as Pharaoh's Creator, and yet Pharaoh hardened his heart and refused to let the light shine into it. And the result was that God deprived Pharaoh of his son; and more than that, in depriving Pharaoh of his son, God secured His own son. He delivered Israel out of Egypt and led them into the wilderness. As He says, "I have borne you upon eagle's wings".
Underneath those eagle's wings were the affections of a father. The time for the display of them to Israel had not come. Christ must appear for that. When Christ appeared and went up out of Egypt, God does not simply tell others that He is His Son.
No, He opens the heavens and looks down upon the Son and declares to Him, "Thou art my beloved Son". There was God's Son in the Person of Christ here upon earth. God's affections expressed themselves to the Lord Jesus Christ, and they are known to us now by the Spirit.
Now I will turn for a moment to the dark side of the picture. @Deuteronomy 18 discloses to us how God took account of Israel's rebellion in the wilderness. The wilderness is the place of testing, the place in which is brought to light whether we have answered to the relationship in which we are set or otherwise. The wilderness may be divided into three
{162}
sections. The first section refers to the people under pure grace; @Exodus 15 to 18. All is on the principle of pure grace. The next section refers to the time of the law, and in connection with it you have the formation of God's system. In the first section the individual is under the reign of pure grace. God is revealed in pure grace; then you become associated with the system of things in which God's testimony is placed, and in which God's law must be adhered to. These are two sections of the wilderness, and in connection with both of these you will find irretrievable failure on the part of the people. They failed in both connections. In the first they speak against God and Moses; in the second they made the golden calf and said they would go back to Egypt. That is what the flesh is. Now the third section has reference to the Spirit. It begins with @Numbers 21. When we are no longer debtors to the flesh, we move on in liberty to the land of Canaan, but in each section it is the wilderness.
Now, beloved friends, what I wish to point out in connection with that is that the character of the stubborn son appeared in Israel. Israel was really the "stubborn son", and this is in keeping with the book of Deuteronomy, which deals with the relationship formed between God and His people. The priesthood and the tabernacle are not prominent in this book; it is a question of relationship formed between God and His people; and in the passage I read God shows how He regards the rebellion of Israel in the wilderness and onward. They were rebellious at every point, and wholly unsympathetic with what God was doing.
Now I pass on to show you how that same spirit of rebellion and utter want of sympathy was found in connection with the proclamation of the glad tidings. We have it in this wonderful chapter, @Luke 15. That chapter is not, however, so great as
{163}
chapter 14, which presents the "great supper", representing God's delight in Christ as having accomplished righteousness. God invites all to that. Chapter 15 has reference to God's delight in the returning prodigal; and the close of it shows us that that which delighted God was wholly without interest except in the way of opposition; to those who had the part and place of the "elder brother". The elder brother represents the man after the flesh in the place of privilege, and represents Israel as having the first place with God. There is no reproof in the father's words to the elder brother here: the next chapter suffices for that. It would not be suitable for the father to judge the elder brother; it was all pure grace. But see the hardening of heart expressed in the elder brother. The father comes out to him and says, "this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found".
He appealed to his heart. This should have touched him, but as of old in Pharaoh's case, he was proof against the divine appeal; that of a father; he disregarded the divine appeal to him as a brother; he had no brotherly affection. Pharaoh had no true fatherly affection; if he had he would have had respect for God's fatherly affection. The elder brother had no true brotherly affection; the Jew manifested utter want of it.
Now when you come to the historical order in Acts you will find the stubborn son expressed in Saul of Tarsus. He was the embodiment of all that was antagonistic to Christ, and to the disciples of Christ; and that in the presence of Stephen, who was the most wonderful expression of the Spirit of Christ. What made Saul doubly responsible was that in the testimony of Stephen there was the most perfect expression of the Spirit of Christ. Saul was one of those who held the clothes of those who stoned the martyr. The Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of the
{164}
true Son, was brought close to Saul, and in spite of that there was utter hatred; he went out of Jerusalem with authority from the high priest, displaying the greatest hatred to everything that belonged to Christ, "breathing out threatenings and slaughter". Such was the stubbornness of Israel against God and Christ.
According to Deuteronomy there was nothing for that man but stoning, that is what he deserved; but instead of that the Lord Jesus calls to him by name. When the Lord calls you by name it means that you have a place in His heart, and when He repeats it He shows the intensity of His interest in you. He said to Saul, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" He would inquire of Saul, 'What have I done?' What damage had He done to Saul? Nothing. When a father has a stubborn son you will notice there the evidence of unreasonableness, and that was the case with Saul, he manifested the most unreasonable opposition. There was no occasion for it, hence the Lord asks him what is his ground for it. Why are you doing it? Saul was kicking against the goads, and it involved suffering for him. He is brought low and becomes known no more as the embodiment of the stubborn son, but the great announcer of the obedient Son; that is Christ. His first preaching was about the Son of God, showing how completely he was converted from stubbornness to the Man who was manifested to him. What does conversion mean? It means that you are turned to Christ who is God's Son. Saul was converted to Christ, and he preached Christ: He apprehended God's Son, and he preached God's Son.
John says of Jesus, "We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father". Paul becomes the great announcer of this blessed One. The conversion of such a one as Saul shows the effect of the administration of the Lord. There are various
{165}
services, but one Lord. The whole chapter, @Acts 9, is engaged with bringing under our attention the authority of Christ. We must give way to the authority of Christ. The next chapter shows us the operations of God. There are distinctions of operations, but one God. Now God operates in Peter, and the sheet is let down from heaven to intimate what God's mind was towards the world. God's operations are universal, and He wants to enlist the sympathy of Peter in what He is doing. God is not defeated: He secures the sympathy of Peter, so that Peter should become the vessel for the announcement of the glad tidings to the Gentiles. God wanted to enlist the sympathy of Peter, and He did so. And while Peter was preaching, the Spirit of God fell upon those present. God did not wait for the Gentiles to say anything. When they were on the road to Him the Spirit came on them collectively. He had come upon the Jew, now He comes upon the Gentiles. Peter's sympathy was secured, and when they find fault with him, he said, "What was I" -- *God did it*. He did not arrogate the glory to himself.
Now in @Acts 11 you find the spirit of the stubborn son in that very Christian profession. Those of the circumcision contended with Peter, and he was forced to vindicate his preaching. He says, "What was I that I could withstand God?" But there was in those Christians at Jerusalem the lack of sympathy with what God was doing. We get a contrast to this in Barnabas; he had the true spirit of a true son; "when he came and saw the grace of God he was glad". The Spirit of God explains that he was glad. In the early chapters Barnabas was in sympathy with the testimony; he sold his land and gave the money to the apostles. In this chapter he is in complete sympathy with God; he was glad when he saw the grace of God. Then we
{166}
are told why, because "he was a good man". He was devoid of selfish motives. Goodness is an attribute of God, and it applied to Barnabas: Barnabas was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit; that man is in sympathy with what God is doing.
Now God is doing something today; God is never inactive; from the outset He has been operating. The question is, What is He doing *now*? If God is doing anything, He seeks to enlist the sympathy of His people in it. We should be exercised so as to be set for the promotion of whatever God is doing. He is doing *something*. Let us discover what that is. In a day of small things, He is not acting as in a day of large things, but the great thing for us is to be in sympathy with what God is doing. The widow with the two mites may be taken as a case in point. The temple then represented all that belonged to the interest of God on earth, and she was in sympathy with that. It was recognised as the house of God, and she was contributing to it: she discerned what was of God, and she acted to promote that. She was in sympathy with what God was doing.
{167}
THE SPIRITUAL SUPERSEDING THE NATURAL
@John 2: 1 - 11; @John 3: 27 - 29; @Revelation 19: 7 - 9
What I desire to say has reference to the spiritual in contrast to the natural. You will find in each of the gospels that there are certain lines of thought introduced at the outset of the Lord's ministry which afford a key to the understanding of them respectively. The line introduced in John at the outset of the Lord's ministry emphasises what is spiritual. John would lead our souls from the natural to the spiritual. He tells us in chapter 4 that God is a Spirit, and that is a leading feature of his gospel.
In @Matthew 5 you have introduced a new kind of legislation, a most important line of things for Christians. The chapter refers to what the Lord said on the mount. He emphasised what *He* was saying, "I say unto you". They had heard what others had said, and He did not set that aside, but now it was what *He* said. He introduces a new legislation; we are to be governed by this. It carries with it the authority of the Lord. It is a very important point for believers, especially young believers, to admit in their souls the authority of Christ. It may be new to you. You may be accustomed to the old principles, to what has been accredited in the world; but we have new principles that have been introduced by the Lord Jesus. That is a leading line of thought in Matthew.
In @Luke 5 you get introduced a *new order of things*. The chapter begins with the Lord in Peter's boat. The new order of things is marked by people who have learnt that they are sinful. Peter had learnt that he was sinful; that as sinful he was a leper, as a leper he was cleansed; as cleansed he received power and was sent to his house; and having a house he makes an entertainment for the Lord, and
{168}
finally there is the new wine put into new bottles. Manifestly a most important line of truth. Naturally we prefer the old wine, it is much easier. You can go on with less exercise; in fact, without any. A ready made religion demands no exercise; you cannot put the new wine into that. You cannot connect the Spirit of God with an organised religion on earth, governed by earthly principles.
In John it is the *spiritual*. We may accept the new order of things, and yet not be exactly spiritual. My point is to emphasise the importance of the spiritual. One has authority for saying that Christians are not always spiritual. The Corinthians were not spiritual. They were remarkable believers, too. They had a very great place in the ways of God. The assembly at Corinth was used in connection with the ways of God in a public way more than any other in a sense. God singled it out to unfold to it the laws, or principles, that should govern His house down here. But they were not spiritual, and as not so they came short of the heavenly joy that Christianity affords us. They came short of the assembly as the bride of Christ. You cannot afford not to be spiritual. Your life will be dim, so dim as to cease to be a guide. We have to shine in our own light. If you are in the light of the heavenly, you are going to heaven, and so you are a guide. The Corinthians were not, and the apostle says he could not address them as spiritual, but as carnal.
I would speak of the spiritual. It is a subject beyond one, in a sense, but I see it plainly marked in John's gospel. The marriage is introduced because it concerns the natural, and it is not the natural on the bad side, as it is presented here. In one sense the natural is wholly affected by evil. Yet the marriage institution is of God, and it is presented here as the side of the natural that God can own. There are many things that God can own. To deny
{169}
natural affection would be apostasy. Every legitimate affection we may have God respects. But the point is, are we *living* in these natural affections? This marriage in Cana of Galilee is viewed in such a light that Jesus can accept the invitation to it. "Both Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage". It was an occasion in which the world did not dominate. Simon the Pharisee invited the Lord to his house, but he did not invite the disciples. Had he done so, one would have assumed that he had respect for the Lord and His teaching, because he would have recognised those who followed Him, but he did not do so. But the disciples were invited to the marriage, so they were present with the Lord.
We are told that Jesus "manifested forth his glory". What became of the glory of the bridegroom and bride when the glory of Jesus was manifested? Where were they morally when Jesus manifested forth His glory? We are not told that the bride and bridegroom became believers, but we are told that the *disciples* became believers. They were believers in One who manifested forth His glory. It is one thing to believe in One who helps you, and another thing to believe in One who manifests forth His glory. The disciples had found a Centre. Think of the manifestation of the glory of Jesus! In coming in contact with souls, one finds a restlessness of spirit, whereas the initial idea of the assembly is a *foundation* -- "Upon this rock will I build my assembly". That does not suggest a restless state of things. Restlessness marks many, but it is because they are not resting in Christ as seen in His glory. The disciples believed in One who manifested forth His glory. Are you a believer in that One?
In the next chapter you see how John the baptist found the Bridegroom. He had found the spiritual Bridegroom. In the beginning of chapter 3 the
{170}
Lord insists on the necessity for the spiritual: "That which is born of the flesh is flesh". You cannot make anything else out of it. It may be admired here, but it is flesh. We want to get hold of the spiritual. The Lord told Nicodemus that he had to be born spiritually. He had to be born of water and of the Spirit. The natural mind cannot take it in. "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is everyone that is born of the Spirit". There is something about you, as born again, which is beyond the natural. A scientist can tell you a good deal about scientific things, but nothing about this. But a great change has taken place. You now look at everything differently -- there are desires after God, and a sense of sin as before Him. That which is born of the Spirit is spirit. The passage goes on to show the necessity for the Son of man to be lifted up. The person born again appreciates that "must". It is a very important "must". The allusion is to @Numbers 21, the serpent of brass lifted up. From that point the spiritual history of the people begins. In the uplifted serpent of brass the flesh was judged typically. God never spares the flesh. He has dealt with it according to His own nature.
You come to discover in yourself that the flesh is incorrigible, and you appreciate the fact that God has lifted up Christ, "that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". Then it proceeds with the heavenly. "If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things? And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven". So the heavenly and the spiritual are linked up together. Then you get the great statement as to God's love, that "God so loved the world".
{171}
All is leading up to what God is -- love. The next chapter, which deals with the gift of the Spirit, answers to it. There is response in believers in a spiritual way to God, who is a Spirit.
In the verses read in chapter 3: 27 - 29, we see how John the baptist came on to the spiritual line. He was the greatest born of women, but he disappears. It is only the spiritual man that will disappear voluntarily. The natural man never will. John rejoiced to see the moral worth of others, and if they are greater than he, he bows. And who is the greater One? The Lord out of heaven. Is that the way you are going to end up? John disappears as a spiritual man; and of what does his spirituality consist? He recognised the voice of the Bridegroom. He had no ear for the natural bridegroom. What would the marriage in Cana of Galilee be to him? He has heard the voice of *the* Bridegroom; there is only One Bridegroom for him -- "*the* Bridegroom". John had a spiritual ear to hear the Bridegroom's voice. He says, "this my joy therefore is fulfilled". He is a most remarkable example of a spiritual man. He says that the Bridegroom has the bride; she belongs to Him. The bride is not seen here. She is seen in @Revelation 19, 21, and 22. In fact, the Bible closes with a full view of her. She is there, the bride of the Lamb. Who is the Lamb? The Lamb is the suffering One. Our natural mind would delight in the heroes of this world. The Lamb is not that. He was the Sufferer. You will remember how the Lord first announced His connection with the assembly. It was from heaven, and He recognised it as suffering. He says to Paul, "Why persecutest thou me?" He is a Sufferer, and His bride is suitable; she is a sufferer. Are we sufferers? If we are spiritual we are. "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution", @2 Timothy 3: 12. Christ is our Pattern even in suffering, and we are
{172}
to be conformed to Him. "If we suffer ... we shall reign".
In @Revelation 19 the marriage of the Lamb is announced. I read the verses to show the full contrast to the marriage at Cana of Galilee. The bride made herself ready. We ought to make ourselves ready. The bride hears the Bridegroom, and she makes herself ready. In @Revelation 22 she is quite ready. She says, "Come". She is prepared for Christ. Remember, suffering is a mark of glory; it is the order of the day *now*. The Lord has been the Lamb and the Sufferer; His wife must be suitable. She is a sufferer and she shines in bright garments.
May the Lord greatly encourage us along the spiritual line.
{173}
DIVINE INFLUENCE
@Genesis 2: 8 - 10; @Ezekiel 47: 1 - 5; @Revelation 22: 1, 2
My desire is to show the various phases of the source whence divine influence flows, and I take up the figure of a river as representing this influence in Scripture. A river represents a source of influence. In some instances it is found to be a bad influence. As a matter of fact, whatever you find of God in the Scriptures is sure to have, in some sense, a counterpart on man's side; that is, God would influence man, but Satan would also influence man. Satan would have his river; but one is encouraged in taking up the figure, because Satan did not introduce the first river.
In the first Scripture I read the source of the river is Eden, the sphere of delights, or pleasure. In the second Scripture, the source of the river is the house of God. In the third Scripture the source of the river is the throne of God. I want to speak of these different phases of the influence that God proposed to exert over man.
We are all under some influence; it is quite impossible that any of us should stand alone. It is quite impossible that any one could stand in this world without coming under some influence. And the question is, what influence are we under? That is a serious question, especially for young people. And I do not mean simply the promptings of your own heart; they are never right, but I do not refer to them *now*. I refer to what is outside you. You are under some influence, and that influence may have gained on you according to your natural proclivities. It may be the influence of the world of pleasure and this counteracts the sphere of delights; or it maybe an influence from the religion of the world, that would counteract the house of God; or it may be an influence from the political world,
{174}
the side connected with rule and government, and that is opposed to the throne of God. I am not calling in question the rulers of the different nations; they are not to be set aside; we are told to respect them; I look on them as a divine provision for the moment, and the worst kind of government is better than none. But what I refer to is the moral influence that issues from the political world. Think of the dark counsels that lie behind the governments of this world, the sinister motives of those who pretend to govern men.
What you find in the river that flows from God's throne is that it is "clear as crystal". Can you see through what is going on in the different governments of the world? Are they transparent? No, there are dark counsels behind them, and they permeate down to the lowest strata of the political world. Their influence is not like that of the water of life. It, is not life-giving, but death-giving.
Then look at the world of pleasure: Go down the main streets of the towns and cities or anywhere where there are houses of amusement. What an influence over the young, and over the old, too. There is a deadly stream issuing from that source.
Is it life-giving, clear as crystal? No, it is dark and death-giving.
Take the religious world, which assumes to be the house of God. Organised earthly religion is opposed to God. God has abandoned it. "Ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father ... But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth". Organised religion is, in that sense, abandoned by God. And to go back to what God has given up is apostasy. I am not using strong words, but mild ones. Scripture uses stronger ones. To go back to what God has abandoned is apostasy, and from that apostate system issues a death influence.
{175}
I have classified the influences under three heads: firstly, the world of pleasure; secondly, the world of religion; and thirdly, the world of politics. You are under some of these influences if you have not bowed to the Lord Jesus.
I take the last one, mentioned in Revelation, that is, the throne. God has set Christ in heaven. God hath made "that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ", says Peter. If God has done that, He requires you to respect what He has done. He has placed Christ on the throne, and He looks to man for submission. And how wonderful the result of Peter's address! Three thousand were convicted of sin, saying, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" 'You crucified him', says Peter, and 'God has made him Lord and Christ'. They were  pricked in their hearts. It is a wonderful thing to be pricked in your heart. "It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks", the Lord says to Saul. It is a terrible thing to resist God. I have seen it, and it ever ends in disaster. You cannot do it with impunity.
Instead of reproving Saul of Tarsus with bitter taunts, as He might have done, the Lord said, "It is hard for thee". What grace in this! And is it not hard for you? You have to resist your praying mother and father, and your, perhaps, Christian friends; and your conscience has no rest at all. You may assume a very composed exterior, but your conscience has no rest. "It is hard for thee". Those words were fraught with grace. The Jews were pricked in their hearts. They did not say so, but there is better evidence; the Spirit says so. They asked what they should do. They were told what to do. They were told to repent, and that not in bands, but "every one of you"; and what were they to receive? The gift of the Holy Spirit. By bowing to the throne you get the Spirit. What an
{176}
influence the gift of the Holy Spirit is! See the effect it had on them. Was there ever such a power for good in the world as was evidenced on the day of Pentecost? There was a mighty power for good introduced, and it was there for those who bowed to the throne. I love the description the Spirit gives, "clear as crystal". It is divinely described.
In @Genesis 2 the influence proceeds from a source of *pleasure*. The river did not have its rise in the garden, but in Eden; and it was intended to influence the garden. Flowing into the garden as a river, it becomes universal in its influence. It becomes *four*. When the Spirit of God came into the world to the Lord's people they became evangelical. They said virtually, 'All must come under the influence of this'. This river was parted and became four. Four in Scripture usually refers to what is universal. It refers to the geography of the spiritual world.
There is such a thing as divine geography. The four streams or "heads" flowing out of Eden allude to it. The *source* of the river is a sphere of delights. The Spirit of God has come out from the Father and the Son. It has come from that source; it flowed in here, and coming in here it became parted so to speak. You all remember the character in which the Holy Spirit came, as "parted tongues, as of fire, and it sat upon each of them". And thus the testimony was, "We do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God". What an influence that was, carried north, south, east and west! It was a wonderful and blessed influence, coming out from the Father and the Son. Has it not flowed in a westerly direction? It has flowed in all directions. The saints of early days became evangelistic; the river flowed in four distinct streams. The question, as I said before is, whether your heart has come under the influence? It is the source of real pleasure; there is no other. There is a verse
{177}
in the Psalms which says, "There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God", @Psalm 46: 4. The mind is directed from the singular to the plural, the *streams*. The influence became diversified, and what is the effect? The streams make glad the city of God. Think of the infinite joy that exists between the Father and the Son. The Spirit of God has come out from that holy sphere. Is it not a gladdening power? A joyous influence? The happy faces of many Christians are a testimony to that, but, alas, there are many whose hearts are not glad; they are true believers, but they are not glad. "There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God". I would transfer the figure to those who believe. Why are you not glad? There is that mighty source issuing from that sphere of delights to make your heart glad. Are you seeking gladness in man's world of pleasure? "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again". The gift of the Holy Spirit, viewed in the light of what I read from Genesis, is a gladdening influence. You ought to get into touch with the streams that make glad the city of God. I would emphasise the universal influence of it.
In Ezekiel it is not the universal influence. What you get there is the infiniteness of it. You cannot compass it. It was measured to four thousand cubits, and then it was a river, impassable, a river to swim in. That is what you want. It is a wonderful thing to get your thirst quenched and your heart made glad, but look, a river to swim in! That is a wonderful thing, and that is what I call *deliverance*.
You are free of the world and the flesh there. From whence does the river come? From beneath the house, beside the altar of God. Jesus suffered for that. The altar was the place of suffering: the offerings were sacrificed there. Think of the Lord Jesus Christ delivering Himself up in love for us!
{178}
"He offered himself by the eternal Spirit, without spot to God;" and so this wonderful influence, the Spirit of grace, has flowed out. It is impassable, but you can swim in it. Many, alas! are only up to the ankles, maybe up to the knees, or the loins, but you want waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over. Whilst the river is the Holy Spirit, unquestionably, it is the Spirit of grace. It is the Spirit adapted to human needs, and meeting man down here, and having the water of life. It flows from beside the altar, and everything touched by it lives. You see in the verses below that fishers were there. That type of death (the Dead Sea) is rendered living. From the north to the south there are fishers. There were no fish there, but the river changes the whole scene, and so "their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many".
In the last scripture I read, you have the waters described. It is not the extent, nor the breadth; it is not the universal character of the river for there are no streams. What we are engaged with is the kind of water. It is "clear as crystal". It is wonderful to look into that. You come in among the Lord's people, and you find there transparency. Go into the world, and you find double dealing everywhere. The world is marked by deception, but among the Lord's people normally there is respect for the authority of Christ, and for His commandments. You find there love for one another; the saints are free with one another. Practically, you can see how important it is, if we are to be here in testimony for the good of others, to be transparent. The river is clear as crystal. "Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour", @Ephesians 4: 25. If you have stolen, steal no more, but labour and give to others. What transparency! How good and how beneficial! The river of the water of life
{179}
is clear as crystal. There is a street in the city, and you can walk there. Can you walk in the world? There is not a single road morally. But you can walk in the city of God alongside the river. It is accessible on either side. Do, you think that any sect in the world is placed there? Every sect is one-sided, but there is no one-sidedness, no partiality in connection with the river of God. And what is there? There is the tree of life, and no longer guarded by the cherubims; but on either side of the river; and even the leaves, what you see in the most casual way, they have healing in them for the nations. Such is the source of influence that issues from God's throne.
Then you get the great issue of God's dealings from the outset, when all that sin has brought in is removed. Then we shall see His face. You cannot fail to see that there is at the present time an influence for good, and the question for your soul to answer is, are you under it? If not, you are under one of the other three influences, the world of pleasure, or of religion, or of politics. May the Lord draw you from each by bringing you under the influence of the Spirit!
{180}
BEHOLDING THE GLORY AND PROSPERING
@Isaiah 53: 10, 11; @Ephesians 5: 1, 2
In reading the writings of those who speak of Christ, it is well to weigh the history of the speakers; indeed, on general principles it is well to take account of the history and associations of any one who speaks of Christ. No one can rightly speak of Him who has not seen His glory; I refer to the prophet Isaiah. The apostle John, in chapter 12 of his gospel, cites from this prophet. The chapter in John is that which closes the Lord's public relations with Israel. John quotes from chapter 6 and also from chapter 53 (see @John 12: 38 - 41), and having quoted from the prophet, he establishes the prophet's authority to speak, in that he says, "These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him". Esaias saw His glory. You can understand what these words would mean from the lips of John, for John had seen His glory; he tells us so, "And we beheld his glory".
One cannot but dwell upon John's reference to and estimate of Christ with the most profound pleasure; he speaks so truly, so accurately, and with such interest of the One he loved. He says, when he speaks of the glory, "We have contemplated his glory, the glory as of an only-begotten with a father".
Think of that! A man of like passions with ourselves can say, "We have contemplated his glory, the glory as of an only-begotten with a father"; and then he adds, "full of grace and truth"; *full* of grace and truth. What perfect blending, grace and truth! That was what marked His Person in the eyes of John as he saw His glory, He was *full* of grace and truth. You can understand what these words, this comment of Isaiah's, would imply in the ears of John the apostle; how he would value such
{181}
a record. He says, "These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him".
Isaiah says in chapter 6, "I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up". Do not think that this is beyond you. It is not beyond you, for it is the privilege of a Christian, to have seen the Lord upon His throne, high and lifted up. This is the light conveyed to you in the gospel. The gospel commences with the Man, whom Isaiah portrays in this chapter as sitting upon the throne. How wonderfully that throne is adorned! What an influence issues from the throne with Him upon it! We are all more or less accustomed to the thrones of the world, to the governments of the different nations of the world; is there any one sitting upon a throne today who adorns it? The throne is right, for it is the form of government that God establishes, but which of them today is adorned? Ponder the influence of the thrones of the world. From whence does the river of the water of life spoken of in @Revelation 22, which descends "clear as crystal", proceed?
Whence did it flow? Out of the throne of God and of the Lamb; that influence is as clear as crystal. No darkness came from behind that throne; there are no selfish workings or motives behind it, all is bright as crystal, and the river is said to be a pure river, a river of the water of life, it is life-giving.
Now Isaiah saw that in principle; he saw the Lord sitting upon His throne, high and lifted up, "and his train filled the temple". The throne was filled and adorned by that Man, and the temple too. The throne and the temple go together. Have you seen that glory? As I said, it is not beyond you. If you have not seen it in the principle of it, you are hardly a Christian; but as a true believer in Christ, you have recognised Him on that throne, and you submit to Him unreservedly. You have seen His glory.
Now, when you come to @Isaiah 53, you have
{182}
another view of Christ, but not less glorious. When John alluded to Isaiah as seeing these things, "when he saw his glory, and spake of him", he did not simply refer to chapter 6, he referred also to chapter 53, which depicts the suffering Man here. There He is the suffering Man down here. Is it less glorious than that which chapter 6 relates? No, it is His moral glory, it is His glory as Man. "Now", says the Lord, "is the Son of man glorified". The Son of man is glorified in carrying out the will of God; that is the peculiar glory of the Son of man. The Lord said that when Judas had gone out. What a contrast between the Lord and Judas! The Lord had loved Judas, and felt his defection. I need not cite the psalms that speak of this. The Lord had genuine affection for that man, and He felt his betrayal; but God considered for Christ. There were the twelve, but the number was broken; out of twelve only eleven were left. He lost a man who was a thief, but He got another who was a thief.
Did not Christ get that thief on the cross? God gave Him that thief, not as a thief truly, but as a genuine admirer of that glory. He saw the glory, and he was a thief no longer. If you see the glory of Christ, you will never be a thief, you will not rob God even: you owe something to Him. "Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth". Is not that man for Christ? That man has seen the glory, and he is reflecting the glory. That man who labours with his hands is no longer a thief; he is labouring with his hands the thing that is good. He is a giver; that is glory. Judas¬ place was filled in the heart of Christ by the thief on the cross. Suppose that thief were to have come down from the cross and got the Holy Spirit, what would he have been here? He would have been a reflector of the glory he had seen.
{183}
He saw the Lord upon the cross literally, but he says, the cross is no place for the Lord, the throne belongs to Him, and the thief in the vision of his soul saw that.
@Isaiah 53 is really the counterpart of chapter 6. It is Man down here carrying out the will of God; it is the Man of Luke's gospel. Would that the Lord would give us a view of that glory! It is the glory of the Man who puts every other man out of your mind, out of your vision. It is the glory of the King that puts all other kings out of your mind; they have no glory in this respect. Chapter 6 puts the political world out of your mind, eclipses it by the surpassingness of this glory. Chapter 53 puts every other man out of your sight. There is no other man than this One to speak of. "Of whom", says the eunuch to Philip, "speaketh the prophet this of himself, or of some other man?" When the prophet spoke of himself it was, "Woe is me"; but he spoke of Another; he spoke of One whose glory he saw -- Jesus. That was what Philip told the eunuch. How one would love to have listened to that sermon! "He began at the same scripture and preached unto him". Whom did he preach?
Not the Messiah, he preached Jesus, the Man. I am not belittling the other; he preached the Messiah to the Samaritans, the anointed Man; but to the eunuch he preached Jesus.
Young people are liable to be greatly damaged by men. There is nothing, in a sense, that we are more prone to than hero worship; certain men acquire huge proportions in our minds, but they are not entitled to it. Sometimes we see men as trees walking: we know what trees are, tall and conspicuous. We want to be instructed in the simple elements of the gospel, I mean Philip's gospel. Philip is the only man in Scripture called an evangelist. I do not say there were not others, because there were. Paul tells us, that "he gave ... some, evangelists";
{184}
but Philip is specifically called one, and he well deserved the title; he preached according to the requirements of his congregation; he preached the Messiah to the Samaritans in order to set aside their pretensions, but when we come to the eunuch, what he needed was a Man for his affections. That is what we all need, we need to know Christ as an Object for our affections. The apostle says in @Romans 7 "that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God". You may depend upon it that the true way of deliverance from the influence of man, or men, is in having Christ clearly and distinctly before your soul in all His beauty, and hence Philip's gospel is, he "began at the same scripture, and preached unto him Jesus". I have no doubt Philip saw more of the glory than Isaiah did; Isaiah had seen it, but Philip had the Holy Spirit. Isaiah did not have the Holy Spirit as indwelling; Philip did, and hence he had a fuller view of Christ's glory. What was said of the deacons in @Acts 6 is that they were "men ... full of the Holy Spirit". Philip was one of these; he was full of the Holy Spirit and, being so, he saw the glory. The Holy Spirit, filling a man, will occupy him with Christ, He never occupies us with ourselves. Look at Stephen; there was the perfect reflection of Christ in a man full of the Holy Spirit; it was not less so in Philip in another way. In his evangelical service he was full of the Holy Spirit, and as full of the Holy Spirit he saw the glory. And how wonderfully he could speak of that Man -- Jesus. I have dwelt on these things in order that you might have clearly before your souls what the apostle John had in his mind when he said, "These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him".
What I want now to say a word about specially is this, that in the hand of this Man the pleasure of
{185}
Jehovah prospers. That is what I want to encourage you with, and you can see it is a wonderful thought, when you consider what the pleasure of God is. It was as if the Lord Jesus said to the Father, What is your pleasure? "Lo, I come to do thy will". As become Man, He was here for that will. He was here for the carrying into effect of the divine pleasure, so the prophet says, "when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand". That is what I want to dwell upon. I want to engage you with this Man, undertaking to carry out the divine pleasure. His soul has been made an offering for sin; remember that His soul was in it. I speak reverently of the Lord; all the inner feelings, all the inner motives of the blessed Lord were in it; but He saw a seed. I think that must have been a wonderful thing to Christ; there were those who were like Himself, there was a seed. He said He had laboured in vain; He had spent His strength for nought and in vain; nothing had been effected for Israel, but there was a seed. Let us ponder that; the Lord Jesus saw it, He saw the seed. There is to be a seed like the Lord, like Christ. "He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days". He is the Man who lives; He has title to live. He had title to live before His death, but then there was the glory of the Son of man. "Now", He says, "is the Son of man glorified". There was the complete carrying out of the will of God, and He says, "God is glorified in him", and "if God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him". What is all that for? It was God showing His delight in the perfection of the work of His Son, viewed as Man here; He glorified Him immediately; that is to say, the Son of man has not to wait for the public display, when all creation shall be put under Him, He is glorified
{186}
immediately. The Father did that, the Father glorified Him at once, and I have no doubt but that the seed which the Lord Jesus saw was part of that glory.
But then His days are prolonged. "He shall prolong his days". Is He not worthy to live? Is He not entitled to live? Is it not for God's satisfaction and for our blessing that He should live? "He shall prolong his days". In @Psalm 21 we read, that He asked life of God, and God gave Him length of days for ever and ever. The soul that knows Jesus delights in that, "length of days for ever and ever".
In His hand the pleasure of the Lord is to prosper. I ask you, what is it that is prospering with you? There is only one thing that the Lord Jesus has undertaken to cause to prosper, and that is the pleasure of God. It is a searching thing as to whether there is something before me which is for my pleasure that is not according to the pleasure of God; if so, it will not prosper, you will have no help from Christ in it. You may not prosper temporally, for that may not be God's pleasure for you, John desired for Gaius that he might prosper as his soul prospered, but if your prosperity exceeds the prosperity of your soul, the Lord is not in it. He has undertaken to carry out that which is for God's pleasure, and it is that which prospers in His hand. It is wonderful how the touch of Christ causes things to prosper. You may be in a small meeting, isolated and with little to help: turn to the Lord. He will cause you to prosper, but how? For the pleasure of God. The pleasure of God prospers in His hand. What a wonderful thing it is to be in His hand! You may have observed Christians making headway spiritually and have rejoiced in it; what is the secret of it? They are in the Lord's hand, that is the secret of it. The pleasure of Jehovah prospers in His hand. Do not take yourself out of His hand. He may bring
{187}
you through deep waters, but He will be with you in them. It is worth while going through them if He is with you in them. They are the waters of affliction, but remember the waters of affliction shall be turned into waters of blessing. Ezekiel's river was a marvellous river; it is a river that cannot be passed through. Such is the extent of the blessing the Lord leads us into. He may have to lead us through the waters of affliction, but if He does, He is with us in them, and we would not be without them, if we have Christ with us in them.
At the waters of Marah the wood was thrown in that was Christ. If He underwent the judgment of God in the sea we must have Marah, and we would not be without it. It is our privilege to taste that bitter water, similar to, that in the Red Sea, but He is with us in it and the waters, instead of being brackish, become sweet. They are sweetened by His company and our prosperity is in them. "The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand". One loves to see a Christian prospering. The Lord is set for our prosperity, our soul prosperity, because that is for the pleasure of God. He is going to bring in a world for the pleasure of God. "Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hand". The kingdoms of this world are to become His; He is to rule over them: What for? For the pleasure of God. It is for the pleasure of God that there should be a righteous rule here, and that men should live under it, and be maintained on this earth in life. The Lord Jesus will do that for the pleasure of God. The angels understood it; they said, "Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good pleasure in *men*"; not man, but in *men*, here living for the pleasure of God. "The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand".
Now before that time of public peace arrives there has been here a tender plant for God in an adverse
{188}
soil. The Lord was that. He grew up here, deriving nothing from the soil. There was nothing to derive from it; it was a dry world, but He flourished; He was the green tree. What green is to the eye, Christ was for God's eye, the one green spot for the eye of the Father down here. The Lord says this green is to be extended. "Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples". There is to be here a generation or a seed after the kind of that Man, which is to be for God's pleasure; the green is to be here; God's eye is not withdrawn.
In @John 12: 39, 40, the world is left, and there is judicial blinding. Judgment is there, and the prince of this world is to be cast out. The Lord withdraws from it; He withdraws into a circle, that was all green for God. Judas was there for a moment, but his presence marred it. There was no green in Judas; there was nothing for God's pleasure in him; but he went out, and the green remained. Look at that circle after they received the Spirit. What a reflection of Christ! The Lord provided for it. He Him self had been for the pleasure of God. God delighted in a mind like that. "Let this mind be in you", says Paul, "which was also in Christ Jesus". That is what God delights in in men. What kind of mind was Christ's? It was a descending mind, a mind that went down for the good of others. You see what I have done, He says to His own in @John 13. Now, this is to be seen in you all. "If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet". Every one of us is taken in there. If God sees you stooping down to wash that brother's feet, you are for the pleasure of God. If there is one thing I covet, it is that I might have the consciousness of moving about for the pleasure of God in this world of lawlessness. I think every Christian should desire it. Thus there is a green spot
{189}
for God. Who does that? Those who are in Christ's hand. @John 13 is the hand of Christ; the pleasure of the Lord is prospering in it: and what is the pleasure of the Lord? That the saints are to love one another. What kind of love? The kind of love Christ showed them. That is the new commandment.
For John, everything begins with Christ; hence he indicates the kind of love that is to be amongst the Lord's people; "As I have loved you", and as that kind of love grows amongst us, the pleasure of the Lord is prospering in His hands, and so it will go on until the New Jerusalem appears. The New Jerusalem is the full result of the pleasure of the Lord having prospered in the hands of the Lord Jesus. What a prospect! There will be full measure in it; it comes up to the standard.
On the mount Moses received the pattern of the tabernacle. There was only *one* pattern; it does not say patterns. Christ is the pattern of everything for God's pleasure. The heavenly city is the holy city, the New Jerusalem, and it is according to the pattern; it answers to the measure, and hence it is for the pleasure of God, and as for the pleasure of God, it has the glory of God. It is not simply that it is glorified, but it *has* the glory; it comes down from heaven with it. What a wonderful thing that is, and that is to be the bride of the Lamb; the suffering Man here has a suitable companion in the bride, who herself has suffered in measure as He did.
I touch on the passage in @Ephesians 5: 1, 2, because it shows us the idea of the way of life; "walk in love", not simply when you are in the meeting; it is a question of *walking* in it. A person who walks in love has his foot dipped in oil; he has a peculiar kind of walk. "Looking upon Jesus as he walked". That is the pattern; that is the walk.
"Walk in love". "Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children; and walk in love, as Christ also
{190}
hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour". There is the idea; He was for God's pleasure, and as we walk in these footsteps we are for God's pleasure, and no greater privilege can be ours. It is given to us to be here in this world, where Christ has been, where the apostles have been, for God's pleasure. It is a responsibility too, so do not put it away from you. It has been seen in men of like passions with ourselves. We have the Spirit of God; we have the example of Christ, the example of the apostles. "Mark them which walk", says the apostle, "so as ye have us for an ensample". Remember the apostles, remember Paul; in them we see the reflection of the walk and ways of the Lord Jesus Christ.
May He give us in these days to be in His hand, and to remain in His hand; for as we remain there the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in us. His work shall be promoted in us, and thus we shall be for His pleasure here.
{191}
"TAKE THE ROD"
@Numbers 20: 1 - 13, 22 - 29
My thought is to show, from this scripture, what grace is. We are living in a dispensation of grace. How far we enter into that is another matter, and my thought is that we might enter into it. It is a favourable moment, one which may be likened to a fair wind to a mariner. It is a moment in which not only is the *mind* of God favourable towards all, but His power is in our favour. The day of Pentecost, recorded in the second of Acts, is an illustration of what I am saying. It was likened to a fair wind, the testimony moved on and the moving on of the testimony meant blessing for man. Chapter 7 shows there was rather a contrary wind later; it was an adverse wind when Stephen was stoned. Satan has a time of power over the wind as God allows. But in chapter 2 we see that things began with a very favourable wind. The mind of God towards Israel was favourable, and not only so but His power was favourable. Hence we read of a sound coming from heaven, "as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting". Now that rushing mighty wind, as I understand it, was an instance of the favourableness of God's power, it was favourable to Israel at that moment, it was the day of Israel's opportunity. A more remarkable day even than the day of the Lord's presence in their midst. The Holy Spirit is likened to a rushing mighty wind: a wind out of heaven. Scripture speaks of a north wind, and of a south wind, but here it is a wind out of heaven. On a previous occasion the waters of judgment had come out of heaven. These were not favourable to man. "The windows of heaven were opened", and there issued forth from those windows the waters of judgment. They covered the earth and they represented God's power in
{192}
judgment, but here is the power of God in blessing, in the form of a wind.
Now I do not know whether you have thought of that, or whether you have come under the influence of that favourable wind. There was first of all the testimony of it in the saints, the one hundred and twenty, and Peter stands up. So doing he represents the mind of God. He unfolded in his address what was in God's mind, a wonderful thing to listen to! He was allowed to finish his sermon in this chapter, but not so in chapter 10; there he only *begins* to speak when the Holy Spirit acts. God cut short his address by the gift of the Spirit. In chapter 2 he is the mouthpiece of the Spirit of God to unfold to Israel God's mind about them at that particular moment. "The promise is to you, and to your children, and to as many as are far off". The mighty wind had spoken, the power of God was there, and it was in their favour. It was available for every repentant Israelite, and we read there were three thousand of them in that day. Three thousand of them affected by the light and affected by the power. Any real repentance is brought about by the wind; it is the wind that does it! You see men brought down from their pretensions, that is the effect of the wind. The Lord said, "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh ... so is every one that is born of the Spirit". The wind is in operation in its sovereignty, and it commands its own objects. How many there are who can thank God for the moment when they changed their minds about things! When they looked at the world with a different eye, it ceased to afford satisfaction to them; they looked at the people of God with a different eye, they thought of the Scriptures in a different way. They thought of their sins and they felt them, and owned them. There was an inexpressible longing, and desire and need,
{193}
which only God could meet. What do you think brought that about? Not all the armies of the world, or all the navies of the world; not all the learning of the world would bring that to pass. That is the miracle of God's power; it is the effect of the wind, the sovereign achievement of the Spirit of God.
In @Acts 2 the great point that is unfolded is that it is a moment when the mind of God is favourable; forgiveness was there through the death of Christ, and the gift of the Spirit was there waiting. "Repent and be baptised ... for the remission of sins". The gift of the Spirit was already waiting to be given. Was not that a favourable moment -- a wonderful moment? Everything went down before it. Every adversary silenced, every enemy in opposition to God put down at that moment, not in the way of judgment, but in the way of moral superiority. It was the day of grace. The Lord had said to Peter that repentance and remission of sins were to be preached "to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem". Wonderful thing to have started where Jesus died, where He was murdered! Now that was a favourable moment for Israel. We get the opposite to it in chapter 7, where the adverse wind comes in. The wind had changed over. I refer to that only by way of contrast.
In the beginning of @Numbers 20 Israel is found murmuring. They chode with Moses and with Aaron. That was the position at that time, and then God shows how He will meet it. Although there was all the outflow of God's kindness and grace towards them, there was rebellion. They chode with Moses and with Aaron: the two men whom God had used for their deliverance and blessing. They were rejecting the vessels of their deliverance, the only hope, in that way, that they had.
Well now, what I want to set before you is the manner in which God met it. I want to impress
{194}
upon you "*grace*". "Take the rod", God said to Moses. God had caused a rod to be used for judgment, but it is not so here. There had been two rods; in fact, the two are presented here, but when He is going to set forth His grace, He only refers to one.
He said. "Take *the* rod", as much as to say, There is only one rod now, and that is Aaron's. Now Aaron's rod is really Christ in resurrection. That is all there is now, and it is infinite. If it be a question of meeting a soul's need, it is the only rod. God never surrenders His authority, that is Moses¬ rod; He never surrenders that, but the authority set forth in that rod has been fully met in Christ. In the book of Exodus Moses¬ rod is used for smiting, "Take thy rod with which thou smotest the river, and smite the rock". The smiting is all over now. The Lord Jesus looked on to it in the garden of Gethsemane, it was not over then. It was there in all its significance, as measured by Christ. The authority of God was there, the majesty of God was there, it was all there. The smiting was all future *then*, and Jesus knew it; He said, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me". There *was* the persecution of One whom Jehovah smote. Christ was smitten, but that day is now past, and hence, from that point of view, there is only one rod. God said, "Take the rod" without saying which, as much as to say, "there is only one".
Now consider what Christ was in resurrection!
He bore in His body the marks of the smiting, but it is all past now, and "by his stripes we are healed", for "the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all". All has been perfectly measured. God measured it, and now God is speaking. Christianity is a day of *speaking*, not *smiting*. I do not deny that the day of smiting will come. God's authority has been set aside, and those who have part in that will certainly come under smiting. Paul puts all that into a very
{195}
small compass, saying, "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha". Now think of that! If you have no love for Christ in that day, that will be your judgment, but there is no smiting now. This is the day of speaking. I would connect the speaking with the Spirit. You do not have to smite Christ for the Spirit, that was where Moses failed. This chapter presents God shedding forth His grace. There was no excuse for the people whatever, no merit in man, but God takes occasion to exercise His grace. He said to Moses, instead of answering back to the people, "Take the rod and speak to the rock". It spoke of Christ in resurrection. That rod had bloomed blossoms, and had borne almonds, and God said, Take it and speak to the rock. Moses was to meet their murmuring in the Spirit of Christ; that is how God's grace would meet the position. There was only one rod in His account, and that one was Christ in resurrection.
Now Christianity is regarded as a dispensation of speaking. God speaking to man about Christ and man speaking to God about Him. The gift of the Spirit was in connection with speaking. The Lord said, "I will beg the Father", that was speaking, but all the smiting was over before that. He had settled the question of sins and then He speaks. God is speaking to us about Christ; it is all a question of Christ. The Gospels often speak about dumb people, but God has no pleasure in dumb people. He wants you to speak, and He gives you the Spirit in order that you might speak. Paul learnt to speak. The Lord spoke to him first in the Hebrew tongue, and Saul answers the Lord, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" It was speaking from heaven and speaking from earth. Then the next thing you get in regard to Saul is, the Lord speaks *about* him. He spoke about Saul to Ananias. He said, "He is
{196}
praying". Wonderful moment! That was the Lord's introduction to, and commendation of, Saul. He was in favour with heaven. I am bold to say that all heaven was interested in that man. "There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth". Not only interest but great joy, think of that! Well now, the Lord spoke about Saul to Ananias, and He said, "Behold, he prayeth". That is to say, he is speaking to God. Did it ever occur to you that God is listening? The Lord's commendation of Saul was, "Behold, he prayeth"; he was speaking to the Lord. You will remember that @1 Timothy 4 speaks of every creature of God being sanctified by the word of God and prayer; the one is God speaking, the other is man addressing God, that marks the dispensation. Things are brought on to a new platform on that principle, God speaking to man and man speaking to God. I know of no greater remedy for any anxious soul than prayer. If you pray, you must get something. I am not prepared to say what you may get. The Lord sees and judges all that, and He is a far better judge than we are. I know this, you will get the Spirit. I am not saying for a moment that you may not get it without prayer, you may, but I desire to impress the importance of speaking to God.
Well now, He said to Moses, "Take *the* rod". I do not dwell upon Moses¬ error, it only brought out the proof of the abundance of God's grace. Moses used his own rod. We are living in a day of officialism which is standing in the way of God's grace. It is a positive hindrance to the full outflow of, grace, the officialism which exists in this world, religious officialism. I would have the greatest respect for Moses, but he fell back on his officialism and committed this offence. If God is exercising His grace in this day, He is not calling men rebels. You cannot win a man by calling him a rebel, grace does not call him a rebel. But, in spite of the officialism, the water
{197}
flowed, and thus we can thank God for it. It may be that a soul is allowing officialism to stand between him and God, standing between his need and the grace of God. Well, the grace of God is there, and it overflows; the waters of God's grace flow freely; grace is on the throne. That means that there is no demand being made upon you. God's mind in regard to you is simply forgiveness, and to give you the Spirit. All the officialism in Christendom cannot touch that. A throne, in Scripture, is absolute, and if grace is on it, man cannot touch it. "Let us come boldly to the throne of grace". God loves that. We find the Beloved in the Canticles saying, "Let me hear thy voice". He loves to hear our voice. He desires that we should approach in humbleness, and with the sense of need, not in the energy of the flesh.
Now I just want to go on to the end of the chapter before closing, because I think it enlarges on the point of grace. I do not know how you take account of the death of the Lord's people? It is a very remarkable thing here that Aaron is directed to go up to the top of the mount to die. Now the Lord Jesus Christ came down to die. You know how the Spirit of God puts it. "He that ascended is the same also that descended into the lower parts of the earth". He went down to die. Death for Him was not at the top of the mount, though He spoke about it there. Moses and Elias with Him, spoke about it there, but He did not die there. He went down to die. If it be a question of God's judgment, the Lord Jesus went down to die. "Thou hast brought me to the dust of death". That was not on the top, that was in the valley. That was where all the pressure of evil was, where Jordan ran. Rivers do not run to the top. Jordan is a type of all the concentrated power of evil. The Lord Jesus went under all that. He went down to die, but the saints go up to die. This is a very remarkable evidence of the grace of
{198}
God to Aaron. He was dying under judgment, in a sense, he could not go into the land; he was to die on the top of the mount. It is as if God were to say to him: Aaron, come up near to Me, you must not die far away. And he was not alone, others were with him. God alone was with Moses when he died, and God buried him. These two wonderful men, although they dishonoured God, see how God honours them in their death. If you have to die, if dissolution comes in, it becomes the experience of grace. You go up to die, there is no judgment in it, there should be no fear of death for the Christian. You go up to die. Aaron had companions, he had Moses and Eleazar with him and he died on the top of the mount. There is nothing to fear in it, since the Lord Jesus has died. There is no smiting for you, the Christian sleeps, he is put to sleep through Jesus. I love that thought. "Them also who have fallen asleep through Jesus will God bring with him".
Moses was brought into the land upon the mount of transfiguration, and that will illustrate what I am emphasising, that even the death of a believer is an evidence of grace, the grace of God going on to the end. We are kept by it, we stand by it, and we fall asleep by, it, and when Christ comes out, we shall come out with Him. Those whom Jesus has put to sleep shall come out with Him. What a triumph of God's grace! "At this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought?" At *this* time! When there is the completion of the mind of God, we shall see everything has been accomplished from beginning to end by God. "What hath God wrought?" "That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace", @Ephesians 2: 7. Today is the exceeding riches of God's grace and we shall come out in His glory in the future.
{199}
WHAT GOD WILL SHOW US
@Genesis 13: 10; @John 16: 13 - 15
My thought is to point out the importance of having divine things *shown* to us. There are things which we see, public things, which are visible to all those who have eyes to see, but there are also things which are not public, things which have to be shown to us. It is of these I desire to speak. As regards the public things, they are such as are available to every one; the sun in the heavens, for instance, the moon and the planets, all these things are visible. So in the same way there are moral things which are public; they are there for all men, and their presence is a test to all. The fact that there is a moral system of things has placed all men under responsibility; every one is tested as to whether he has eyes or not.
John tells us that man naturally has not these eyes which see; he says, "Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God"; the kingdom of God was there to be seen, it was there in the Person of Christ. Elsewhere the Lord says, "Blessed are your eyes, for they see". The things they saw had been sought after and desired by kings and prophets of old, but they were not then visible, but in the coming of Christ into manhood certain things had become visible, and their presence here became a test as to whether men had eyes to see or not. The Lord could speak of the kingdom of God as among them. He said, It is in the midst of you. Even in the ministry of the seventy the kingdom was present, for He said to them, "into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you", @Luke 10.
{200}
Well, so it is now, and the presence of the kingdom of God puts all men to the test as to whether they have eyes or not. It is said of Isaiah that he saw the glory of Christ; that was a wonderful thing to see. John had just been citing from @Isaiah 6 and @Isaiah 53, and he adds, "these things said Esaias when he saw his glory, and spake of him". What glory was it which he saw? It was the glory of the King. Have you seen that? The testimony of it is here; there are those here who are witnesses to the fact that Christ is enthroned above. It is public. No one is a true believer in Christ who has not recognised Him upon the throne; he is one who has seen the glory of the King. That is what I understand by the glory of the kingdom. You will never come under a healthy, life-giving influence till you submit to that, till you come under the influence of Christ upon His throne. His influence is like a pure river of life, clear as crystal. These are things which are said of the kingdom, and its presence here, as I have shown, places all men under responsibility. @John 3 teaches us that naturally we have not eyes to see, and that in order to see the kingdom of God we must be born again, and further, we must be born of water and of the Spirit before we can enter the kingdom. We must have the Spirit in order to see what is spiritual.
That there are things which must be shown to us is a principle which runs through the whole of Scripture, but we get the idea first in connection with Abraham. The Lord says to him, "Get thee out ... into a land which I will show thee". I want to engage your hearts with that. God desires to show us His purposes; He desires to bring us into the land of His counsels. Then on our part there has to be the desire to have them shown to us. Moses had seen the display of His power on mount Sinai; indeed, it was visible to all in the camp; it was
{201}
public, and in that way placed all Israel under responsibility. Moses was not only shown things, he was shown a pattern, the pattern of all that was for God in Christ. You will never have a true idea of what is suitable to God until you see the pattern, and the pattern is Christ. Moses saw that in the mount; he was taken up by the Lord and given to see the pattern of all things in Christ. After the breakdown of Israel and their re-establishment in connection with the intercession of Moses for them, he says to Jehovah, "I beseech thee, show me thy glory". He had a taste for divine glory; he desired to see more, he desired to see the Lord's glory. You might have thought he had seen a very great deal of glory already, but not so in his account. He desired to see what lay behind the power which had been displayed.
To return to Abraham, God had said to him, 'I have a land, and I will show it to you'. Abraham sets forth the path of an individual believer, he was the pattern of the man of faith. I commend to your study these chapters in Genesis, they record Abraham's altar building. He was not a Babel builder, he was an altar builder. Now your altar sets forth the extent of your progress in the knowledge of God, and this is plainly indicated in the altars which Abraham built. He built several altars, but we are not told that he was directed to build any. The book of Genesis deals with the histories of the men of faith, and there are no instructions throughout it for building altars. The fact is, that having faith, you are sure to do something in regard to God, that is what I understand by an altar. If you do something in regard of yourself, you are building up Babel; but if you do something in regard of God, that is an indication of where you are spiritually; it is a response to God. The first altar that Abraham built shows that he had God before him; he had been an idolater, but what a wonderful
{202}
change; he now had God before him, and he builds an altar to Him, to Jehovah.
Then with the next altar, we read, that he called upon the name of Jehovah; that shows progress. The young believer has God before his soul, that is what first marks him; but the next step is he will call of the name of God, as Abraham did here. He disregards every other name; he distrusts his own name, he trusts alone in the name of Jehovah. God now is his protector, his trust, his confidence, and he will put no confidence in any other name; he calls upon the name of Jehovah. Circumstances came in with Abraham as they so often do with us; things do not turn out just as we expected, we are tested and fail. So it was with Abraham, he is tested by circumstances, and he turns aside to Egypt, but he is recovered from the point of his departure and brought back to God. He has failed in his trust in God alone, and he turns to Egypt for help, but God comes in in discipline, and he is recovered.
That lesson learnt, he has more to face; he has to lose his brethren. We all have to learn this; we have to lose our brethren. Maybe we have learnt the vanity of human resources, we have come to depend upon God alone for help, but then we have to be tested, we have to lose our brethren. Brethren become the greatest test to us. It should not be so; the very name indicates the opposite, a brother should be a friend, and normally it is so, but here is the test. It will be your test, it has been mine.
What are you going to do with them? I verily believe, beloved brethren, that the Lord would teach us this greatest of lessons in the discipline of God, how are we to treat our brother? What are we going to do with him? Abraham here acts nobly, he acts with God. Who is content with separation? A worldly brother. Abraham did not desire separation, he felt for Lot; he was Lot's friend; he prayed
{203}
for him, and Lot never lost his place in Abraham's heart.
Now I ask, Are we content with separation, when it comes to a test in our relations with our brother? Could we have left Abraham? Think of him, of the place he had in the mind of God! of the place he had in the counsels of God! Think of his faith, and yet Lot was content to separate from that man! Abraham was a model, even for ourselves, he was "the father of all the faithful", and yet Lot is content to separate from him. We see people moving off, dropping out of the ranks, I would say to them, Whom are you leaving? From whom are you separating? Are you leaving the people of God? Think of the place they hold in the heart of God, in the mind of God, in the counsels of God. Think of their dignity, of the place that God has given them, think of what they are to Christ. Are you going to leave them? Are you going to leave those who are the depositaries of God's testimony? Will you move away from that? To do so is to prove that your heart is in the world. Lot's heart was in the world. "He lifted up his eyes"; many a young man has done that. And in which direction did he look? It was towards the plains of Sodom. It was before the destruction of Sodom, he would never have lifted up his eyes there if the destruction had taken place. If we lift up our eyes to the world, it is before its destruction.
God is allowing the world to prosper at the moment; in His all-wise ways He is letting it develop and prosper in its own way, and so it was in Lot's day. He looked towards the plain before its destruction and it was a very desirable place in his eyes. To look upon it after its destruction was to become a pillar of salt, but Lot did not see its destruction, and it was beautiful in his eyes. It was a wonderful plain, well-watered and verdant. You get two
{204}
thoughts brought together here to express how it appeared in Lot's eyes; it was like the "garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt as thou comest to Zoar". These thoughts are not akin; the garden is the garden, and the land of Egypt is Egypt; they are not akin to one another. But Lot's eyes were in that direction, and he saw the plains as the garden of the Lord. The plains of Sodom were in his heart, and depend upon it, you will go after that which is in your heart. I do not pursue that thought further but I come to Abraham. God said to him, "Lift up thine eyes". He was invited to lift up his eyes, and that is what is the mind of the Lord for us. Look northward and southward, and eastward and westward, that is the divine domain.
Now the Lord said to the disciples in @John 16, that the Spirit having come would show them "things to come". That is one thing. And then He says also, "he shall receive of mine and shall show it unto you". He further adds, "All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I ... he shall show it unto you". The Holy Spirit having come He not only shows us things to come, that I refer to the millennial world, but lie shows us the Father's things. Eternal things have come; they have come at this present time in this sense at any rate, that the apostle can say we look at them. "While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal". The Holy Spirit has come out carrying tidings of all that belongs to the Father, not only of the millennial world, but of what belongs specifically to the Father, the eternal things, and they are the Son's things, and the Holy Spirit is here in order to show us *these* things.
Moses said, "Show me thy glory", and then he said, "Let me see the good land". He had to wait
{205}
till the glory to see it, but you will remember how he was taken up to the top of mount Nebo and shown all the land of promise. Abraham was to look northward and southward, and eastward and westward, he was at the *centre*, that answers to the epistle to the Ephesians. But Moses was in the wilderness, and he got a divine view from the top of the mount into God's land, that answers to @Romans 8. It is one thing to look into the land from the top of the mount; it is a wonderful thing to get there, but it is another thing to *be* there. If you get a look in you will want to go in, and so Romans lays the ground for Ephesians, and if you go in, you will be taken by the hand as it were, and shown things. It is a lovely thought that the Spirit should really take us by the hand and show us things! It is the Spirit who leads us to the top of the mount; we are led to that eminence by the Spirit; the flesh diminishes, you are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, and then you get the vision of God, you are conducted to a point of eminence from whence you can look into God's land.
I know of no more wonderful thing than to be taken up by the Spirit and shown the land of purpose. I have often thought of the Lord Jesus as a Teacher; what it must have been to hear Him expound in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself! I have often pondered over what He would say as to the ark and the altar; what He could say as to the priest and as to David. Well, in a parallel sense, think of the Spirit taking you up and showing you all the beauty of God's land. "He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you".
Then another point: in order to see that, you must leave the world. Our hearts are very reluctant to leave the world, very much more so than we sometimes admit. And again, it is one thing to leave the world, and another to go into the land; you do not step from one to the other; the Lord Himself
{206}
did not. When Moses and Elias spoke to Him on the mount they spoke of His departure out of the world; He went out of the world at Jerusalem. Many would think He went out of the world at the mount of Olives; but no, He went out of the world at Jerusalem, He went out of it under reproach. He did not go to heaven under reproach. There is the place of reproach for us, it is where we, too, go out of the world, and in order to enter the land we must go out of the world morally. The Lord did not go up till forty days after; going up is another matter. His going out of the world was public, but His going up is private. It will be so with us; when the Lord carries us up it will be private.
Now suppose we had been with Mary when the Lord Jesus went out of Jerusalem bearing His cross; what thoughts could we have had of that city? Could we have gone back and become magistrates there? Mary says, "*They* have taken away my Lord!" -- they. Who are they? The world. Shall we affiliate with them? Be amongst them? No, we can only go out from them; they have crucified our Lord. Well, if the Lord went out at Jerusalem, let us also go out, and then we shall know what it is to be taken up by the Spirit and shown another world, the Father's world. "He shall take of mine and shall show it unto you". The Spirit is still here, and He is set to lead us in where all the Father's things are, and are known to be the Son's things. May the Lord give us to desire to see them like Moses!
{207}
GRACE AND GLORY
@Luke 9: 18 - 22, 27 - 35
My wish at this time is to speak about *grace*, and to connect with it the thought of glory. These thoughts are intimately connected in Scripture, and inasmuch as we are said to appear in the future to the praise of the glory of God's grace, it is important we should be acquainted with grace. It is perhaps the most elementary thought in connection with our salvation but the least understood; the full bearing and result of it is its glory. You will find that comments in the New Testament on Old Testament events or persons always throw a flood of light on the events or persons to which they allude. So you get the idea of glory attached to certain Old Testament events. I refer to one specially as supporting what I say, God's call to Abraham. Stephen, in the power of the Spirit, refers to it. He begins his address by alluding to the "God of glory". The God of glory beginning to operate had His glory in view, but in order that the glory should be reached there must be a vessel through whom it was to be reached, and in reaching it *grace* has to be resorted to.
So you find in @Hebrews 9 the "cherubim of glory". The Spirit of God, who knew what was involved in the cherubim, alludes to them according to His knowledge and calls them the cherubim of glory, which overshadowed the mercy-seat. What lay under the mercy-seat referred to Christ, to Christ become Man here with the will of God in His heart. He said, "Lo, I come to do thy will;" it was His pleasure. He *descended*, becoming Man in order to effectuate that glory. So Stephen's address leads to that point, he saw the glory of God. *Where* did he see it? With Jesus in heaven, beyond the reach of the attack of man. What I have to say lies between these points. That blessed Man had been on earth,
{208}
the cherubim were not required in heaven, they were required when Jesus was on earth, their outstretched wings overshadowed Christ, hence the glory. Every look of God on that Man had behind it His divine affections for Him. Every direction from heaven with regard to the Babe, the Boy, the Man, had the love of the Father behind it; there, behind the veil, were the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy-seat. The mercy-seat and all beneath it suggested the blessed Man in whom the grace shone forth on earth, so we can understand the expression the "cherubim of glory". The divine interest in that Man is testified to by the cherubim of glory.
In coming to Luke we are prepared for this; he is the one writer who undertakes to write with method. Every inspired writer had a divine end in view, each spoke according to what he saw. Luke, by the Spirit, had a wonderful vision of Christ; he writes for us a full outline of His sayings and doings; the circumstances of His life are set forth, His boyhood, His manhood, all to enhance for us His grace. Israel had said at Sinai, 'Let us not hear again that voice'. They trembled, they said to Moses, "Speak thou with us ... but let not God speak with us".
@Exodus 20: 19. God says in Christ, 'I will take you at your word, the voice, though divine, is to a *man's* voice'. Elihu said to Job, "I am according to thy wish in God's stead;" @Job 33: 6. How considerate God is! Elihu says; I am a man as you are, "My terror shall not make thee afraid", @Job 33: 7. That is Luke's gospel, it is God drawing near in a Man, whose infancy is described, whose mother is introduced, and all that pertains to His boyhood and manhood, and the Spirit gives us His genealogy right back to Adam, and actually says Adam is of God; thus the race is accredited in every possible way.
Is there anything to fear in that Man? Jesus could say, "My terror shall not make thee afraid". Yet
{209}
He was truly divine, for Luke is careful of this, "that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God". The Lord Jesus is carefully identified as regards His supposed parents, He was perfectly Man and His genealogy is traced right back to Adam, and Adam connected with God. God is impressing on us that He would disarm us of every possible fear, so that Jesus goes back to where He was brought up, and there He stands up and reads, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor". There is grace in every movement, nothing to repel, nothing to deter man. "Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him", @Luke 15: 1. The atmosphere around Jesus was full of liberty and sympathy, there was attraction in it, they drew near to him.
There is a remarkable example of this grace in chapter 7. The Lord is invited to dine with a Pharisee. It was in circumstances that would have forbidden any one to draw near, and yet there was one who had such a sense of the grace that was there, that she drew near; we often call her a sinner, but she was a saint! She drew near to Christ, she anointed His feet, she touched Him with the touch of love; no other can be a priestly touch but the touch of love. She did the service, and the secret of it was that she had learnt grace; she had been forgiven *much*. That was grace, and she in result loved much, so she does the service, under reproach in the world, under a stigma. Those in official position neglect Christ. He is neglected. Now while attending to Christ you are not to think of people's opinions. We need no official position in *attending to Christ*. If you have learnt grace, nothing in the way of privilege is equal in the present time to *attending to Christ*. Simon spoke within himself, "This man, if he were a prophet, would have known".
{210}
The Lord did know. He knows all that is in the heart. He judged accurately about the woman; the greatest sinner that has been forgiven is the greatest lover of Christ. If you love Christ you will attend to Christ, and He notices and will justify you. See the dignity with which He justifies this woman. He used words with intent, with meaning, saying "she loved much", and when He said much He meant much.
Now in @Luke 3, directly the Lord was baptised, we see what He is in relation to God. What comes to light is what He is in regard to God. It says of Him, that "the heaven was opened ... and a voice came from heaven". The Father would indicate what the relations were to Himself, saying, "Thou art my beloved Son". Then you have what He was in regard to Satan, and finally what He was in regard to man. I am speaking of these things that you might have an apprehension of Christ. The first point, and most important, is the Father's estimate of that Man. Luke tells us, *He was praying*. In that connection I would remark the Lord has great pleasure in a praying person, it is not only that you gain by it, but you are after the pattern of Christ in it. Saul was a man of whom the saints had good reason to be afraid. I am very afraid of men who are in opposition to Christ, men who are brought up in priestcraft, or steeped in lawlessness. I have great fear of such. The Lord knew what the saints would feel as to Saul, and He actually introduced him to the saints. It was a serious matter to introduce a person to the circle of fellowship. Now the Lord did it, in Saul's case; it shows His care for the brethren, and He did it with this commendation "Behold, he prayeth". That is, he is after the pattern of Christ.
If I know you are praying for me, I have no fear of you, you will not do me any harm. There is
{211}
nothing to fear from a praying man. Samuel was a most remarkable man, he said, "God forbid that I should *sin* against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you", @1 Samuel 12: 23. If you love the brethren, you will pray for them, and then they will have nothing to fear from you. The saints had nothing to fear from Saul, the sequel shows they had a great deal to gain, and so it is in measure with every praying man. Prayer moves heaven. The Lord here in @Luke 9 prayed alone. He did not pray with them, but they were there. Luke's point was to show that He was a praying Man. Why was He praying there before them? They were to learn to pray. One of the disciples asked the Lord, "Lord, teach us to pray", and He taught them. There was a point of correspondence between Christ and His followers, they learnt to pray. The first point is Christ's relation to God, He is a praying Man, and God announces His personal relations with Him. "Thou art my beloved Son". This is the Man who is before the eyes of others, praying.
The next point is what He is in regard to the devil, @Luke 4. What came to light in this connection is the perfection of dependence on God. Man is to live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Mark, by *every* word. God never says anything aimlessly. There is no word in the book written aimlessly, and it becomes man to note *every* word. If you are to live a true man in this world, you are to live by every word. We may not feel the need of them, but *Jesus did*. He regarded every word of God and lived by them, and doing that He bound the devil. He put Satan behind Him, but He put man before Him. Satan is behind Him and is *bound*, men are all before Him.
The next point is all the race of men are before Him. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". He preaches to all men, we are all before Him there,
{212}
every one of us before Jesus, Satan is behind. He deals with Satan in a demon possessed man, saying to the demon, "Come out of him!" It was as if a citadel were called upon to surrender without any conditions! The devil went out of the man and did no harm. This was not only an act of power, but of *grace*, for the Lord thought of the man. You may be suffering, the Lord takes account of it, the suffering will do you no harm, but supported by the sympathy of His heart it will do you good.
Next we get the feverish woman, and feverish people are very difficult to get on with, but the Lord touches her and the fever leaves her; she is affected by the *grace* of Christ, for she arose and ministered unto them. Then He goes on to His own city, and as the sun was setting they bring those who were sick with divers diseases to Him and He healed them all. There was no weariness in Him. Even in @John 4 the weariness did not prevent the activity of grace. The Lord *must* relieve man; being the vessel of grace He must do it. The Lord was untiring in activity, the sun was setting, and then He says, "I *must* preach to other cities also". I wanted to enlarge on the Lord Jesus as showing the grace of God to man.
Now in @Luke 9 He says, "Whom say ye that I am?" He wants to know what they have learned. Peter says, "The Christ of God". What is your estimate of Him? What do you say? Peter says, "*The Christ of God*". He was correct and entirely in accord with the Lord's mind. The Lord had in every way magnified the grace of God to man. Peter gives an address on that later on. Now, what is your estimate of Jesus? That is the question that precedes the glory. If you have not formed an estimate of Christ you will not see the glory. Peter had an estimate. Nicodemus said, "We know thou art a teacher come from God". Peter said, "The Christ
{213}
of God", that is very much more. He, as it were, says, 'You are the Man whom God has taken up to show His grace'. This is all the Spirit records here as to Peter's confession. In Matthew there was more, but here it is just this, Peter has an estimate of Christ according to *grace*.
When it comes to glory you have the Lord's sovereign selection. Think of our being selected sovereignly by Christ in order *to go up*! Men who have formed a right estimate of Him here are to go up! How can we be to the praise of the glory of His grace unless we have formed an estimate of Him down *here*? He puts the question, "Whom say the people that I am?" Then He makes a sovereign selection. He says, "There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God". It was not to be seen then in the sense of active power down here in this world, but the kingdom of God in the sense of majesty and glory. We all understand it in natural things. In the colonies they see the kingdom; that is, they get its protection and prove its power and benefit, but the glory of the kingdom is really seen in London; so the Lord Jesus makes a sovereign selection. We all are to go up to see His glory, but we go up as those who have an estimate of Christ as the vessel of grace, and it is essential that we should have this estimate if we are to be for the glory of His grace.
Two men record for us what was seen. I like to read Scripture as recorded, and then what a person says: for example, in @Acts 10 you have Peter's sermon and in chapter 11, Peter gives an account of it, it is interesting to compare them. It is the same thing here. You get Luke's account of the transfiguration, and in @2 Peter 1: 17 we have Peter's account of it. He says, "there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son ... . And this voice ... we heard". Peter had
{214}
been asleep on the mount, but he is not asleep when he writes his epistle. Many of the Lord's people are asleep now! You need both eyes open to see the glory; when they were fully awake they saw it. It had been there before, for we are told, "as he prayed the fashion of his countenance was altered", that was *grace*. That countenance was to be looked at by men; His raiment was changed. Three men were there, for Jesus was to have companions in glory. Peter and John and James were asleep, but when they awoke they saw His glory and they heard the Father's voice.
The apprehension of grace qualifies us to ascend; being there you see the glory of Christ. I do not think this is beyond the reach of Christians. You are never right until you apprehend the glory of Christ; until you get a glimpse of the glory of Christ you are exposed to the influence of the world. One glimpse of the glory of Christ and the Father's voice heard will set you free for ever, your heart is *fixed*. The office of the Spirit now is to bring that before the Lord's people. Paul says, that we all with unveiled face behold it. Do you behold it? There will be nothing different in heaven to that lovely face seen on earth, the glory of God will be seen in that face, that face will be distinguished from all others in the glory, it sustains the glory. What a view! The Lord prayed "that they may behold my glory". We shall behold that, but there is that which is peculiar to Him as a Man carrying out the divine will, and that is seen now by the power of the Spirit. We all with unveiled face behold it and the effect is that there is a race down here like Him morally; we are changed into the same image. Beholding the glory has a transforming effect that goes on from glory to glory. How many glories are there? Paul says "from glory to glory". As you behold it there is constant change and there is increasing grace.
{215}
We become more gracious to each other. The Lord gave Paul all that were in the ship, it was the moment of grace and Paul appreciated that. We do not want to lose the saints; if God gave Paul all, he values them. God gave Paul *all*, and in spite of the wreck he wanted to present the assembly to Christ. You want all the saints, we do not want to lose *one*. The Lord would preserve the truth and preserve us with it. How? By mutual consideration. What is the mystery? It involves our relation to one another. Paul knew he would not be with us always, but if we all know the mystery, then Paul can go home.
The one who prays has the saints on his heart, he does not want to lose one, and the Lord will give you every one you seek, and there will not be one lost. All the saints will get to land somehow, it may be in a humiliating way, but Paul will get his "all".
May we learn the grace of Christ, and knowing the grace we shall see the glory.
{216}
THE SPIRITUAL SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY
@John 13: 1 - 17, 34, 35
Christianity is a spiritual order of things which has been introduced into the world as it is, and yet is entirely apart from it. John, in his gospel, gives us the spiritual side in Christianity. Each of the evangelists emphasise among other things a particular side in Christianity, and I think John emphasises what is spiritual. It is he who tells us that "God is a Spirit", that "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit", and that worship must be "in spirit and in truth". The words, too, which the Lord spoke, He Himself said were spirit and life; thus we see that John enlarges on that side. Matthew enlarges on what we might call the legislative or administrative side. At the outset of his gospel you have the Lord going to the mount in order to inaugurate a new kind of administration. In Mark, He goes up to the mount to inaugurate a new kind of service, and He takes the disciples up that they might be with Him, in order that He might send them forth to preach. In Luke, He gives an entirely new order of things; but in John He introduces a totally spiritual order of things. It may help if we bear in mind that Christianity is a spiritual order of things here in which we are privileged to have part.
Referring for a moment to Luke's gospel, in chapter 5 we get a new order of things; the chapter ends with new wine in new bottles. The new order begins, as the first part of the chapter shows, with men who know how to judge themselves. "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord". Next we see man, a leper by nature, cleansed and brought into the congregation; then the palsied man gets power; that is a new thing, and later there is Levi's house, a totally new thing also; Christianity is seen in a very special way in the Christian household. A man
{217}
who acts in his house in the power of the Spirit of God is sure to give character to it, and he uses his house for the Lord. Levi made a great entertainment for the Lord. It is an entirely new thing. Then you have the idea of the Bridegroom, and the children of the bridechamber fasting whilst He is away, and at the close the Lord speaks of the new wine. I think Luke gives us, in this way, a new order of things here, while the old still remains.
Whichever side is presented in the respective gospels, in each case it is *new*; it is new legislation in Matthew, new kind of principles; in Mark a new kind of service, because the servants are marked by being in the company of Jesus; in Luke, new circumstances for man. When you come to John, it is spiritual, and necessarily an out-of-the-world condition of things, and for entrance into this we are wholly dependent on the Spirit of God. The spiritual in John is in contrast to the natural, or the flesh. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit", not *the* Spirit, but *spirit*, the *kind* of thing it is; that is the fundamental basis of the new structure. I believe there is a very poor apprehension amongst God's people of what is spiritual, and I think John helps on that line, because he insists that "God is a Spirit", and consequently having to do with God must be on spiritual lines.
In chapter 2 there is a scene which is clearly connected with the natural. The Lord was there at the marriage. It was not a scene dominated by the principles of the world, for the Lord was invited there, also His disciples, and His being invited was not simply a question of patronising the Lord, as was the case when Simon the Pharisee invited Him to his house, but there was respect for the Lord, as well as respect for His disciples. One has often said, if you respect a man you respect his family. The
{218}
truest way of showing your interest in him is to show interest in his family. The scene was not governed by the principles of the world, but still it was natural. The Lord was not the Bridegroom there; but He manifested forth His glory, and in that way He drew attention to Himself on spiritual lines. He manifested forth His glory, and His disciples believed on Him; they saw something there outside of what is natural.
In chapter 3 He is the Bridegroom, He is recognised as the Bridegroom, but that again is on spiritual lines. In the beginning of the chapter we see how the transition from the natural to the spiritual takes place. We are transferred in our hearts and minds from what is natural to what is spiritual. John the baptist proves himself to be spiritual in that he recognises the heavenly, and disappears in the presence of it, verses 30, 31. That is an illustration of what a spiritual man is. Now in verse 35 you have man in the Person of Christ recognised in His supremacy as Administrator. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand"; that is to say, He has the administration of what is of God; and in chapter 4 we see, that what He is administering is spiritual. "The water which I shall give him shall be in him a fountain of water springing up into eternal life". Luke gives in a beautiful way God and man; but here in John it is the Father and the Son, so it is a system proceeding from the affections of divine Persons. We know that the Son will administer the kingdom in the future, and reign over the house of Jacob for ever, but John is not occupied with that, but with Christianity; and so we get, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". He has something to give, and what He has to give is spiritual, "living water".
{219}
To compare again for a moment these two gospels, Luke and John, Luke gives us more what is in the presence of the world as the result of, Christ's death and resurrection. We have His being anointed, the official side, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor". That is external, but depends on what is internal; the effect was public. Christianity is the result of that, seen in people known in the world, who have been taken up by the Lord, and are changed. John gives, as I have said, what is spiritual, and when you come to that, you are connected with the unseen side of things; with God and Christ, with the Father and the Son. You have access to an unseen order of things, to what is spiritual. What you get in chapter 13 depends on these things, and your thought of Christ must necessarily be spiritual.
The Lord was going out of the world, and He was going to the Father; these are two distinct things, His going out and His going in; a good many days intervened historically between them. On the mount of transfiguration Moses and Elias were speaking to the Lord about His decease *which He should accomplish at Jerusalem*, not about His going to heaven. You must go out to go in. The Lord went out in order to go in, with us there must be the acceptance of death in affection and attraction to Him; and this involves complete severance from the world. There is a great deal more in it than you are apt at first sight to think. Heaven is not your side at all, you are *taken* there; you could not go to heaven of yourself if you wanted to. It is no act of yours, you have no power to go; but you have obligation and power to go out of the world. I think it is well to see that: going put of the world is a question of obligation. Whilst the Lord was here in it you could not go out of it; you could not leave it whilst He was here; but He has gone out of it, and He
{220}
went out of it at Jerusalem. You cannot go, out of the world in an unseen way; going out of the world is a public thing. We go out of it in being true to our baptism. Baptism is a public thing, but our going to heaven is not seen by the world. They did not see the Lord go; He went up to heaven from mount Olivet, but we go out of the world in public.
The Lord went out of the world at Jerusalem. He was not seen any more, and if we are true to our baptism, we are not seen any more; if we are true to our privilege we do not shine in this world. Many think they can go out of this world by keeping quiet and saying nothing; but going out of the world involves reproach. We go out because He went out. "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach". Moses knew something about that. It is true that we have received the Spirit that we may follow Him into the new scene, but there is an intermediate period here. We go out of the world, but we do not necessarily go to the Father then. The man in @John 9 was forced out; he did not go out. That shows the effect of the man's testimony; he was in accord with the situation, he did not want to stay.
Chapter 13, which we have read shows us the spiritual order of things as maintained here. We are in the world to be here in testimony, and this chapter shows how we are maintained in it. Feet-washing supposes that we are in the world, and it provides that we should have part in the spiritual order notwithstanding that. It is affection for the Lord, understanding that He has gone out, which leads us out of the world. We can understand from this chapter that the disciples would not go out again into the world; Judas had gone out into it. In fact; the world from the moment that Judas went out into it took another character; not only had Christ left it, but Judas has gone out into it, and by
{221}
that fact there is a totally new element of evil introduced into the world. A man who had been a companion of Christ, who knew all about Him in that sense, who had had part in the most sacred privileges, went out into the world; and the world from that day to this has a wholly new character. John, in his epistle, speaks of this. He speaks of antichrist going out, and of evil spirits having gone out into the world. Suppose you had been in the Lord's company as contemplated here, you would never think of going out into that world. There are two distinct positions; His own circle is outside the world. The world is viewed as a distinct thing from this point onwards.
I can understand that John and Peter after they got the Spirit would understand the situation defined by being "not of the world", but there is besides a distinct link with heaven. Being not of the world is a question of testimony: it shows you are loyal to Christ. That is why the testimony ought to be as public as possible. We are to be like Amasai as recorded in @1 Chronicles 12. When David challenged them as to their fidelity, he declared, "Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse".
The private side is contemplated here in @John 13 we are to have part with Christ in a spiritual way. The Lord felt what He was going to suffer from the power of the world outwardly; but He knew everything was in His hands, and He was wholly engaged with His own. He acted in the consciousness that He was going to the Father and that having come from God He was going to God. In John, the world and the Father are invariably contrasted. The Lord came into the world in grace, and now the hour is come when there is to be the judgment of the world. His going out of it was a deliberate act. In another sense they put Him out of it. I think God viewed as
{222}
such is in connection with man, and man, in sonship relation, which is in mind in the name of Father.
It is a wonderful thing to have part in what is spiritual. We are spiritual beings by the work of God. "He that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit". Wrought us for what? To occupy a spiritual house, a house from heaven. As having the Spirit of God, and being formed by the Spirit, we are too great for our present earthly tabernacle house. Our bodies are not equal to what we are as the subjects of divine workmanship, the inner is greater than the outer. As heavenly we require a heavenly house, not a tabernacle house any more. Our present one is a tabernacle house, but the one we shall get is a house from heaven, a building from God, never to be taken down. Houses are not put up to be taken down, houses are put up to stay; tents are to be taken down.
There are many things contrasted in Scripture; the natural and the spiritual; the earthly and the heavenly; the old and the new order of things; then we have the temporal and eternal. What refers properly to Christians goes beyond the world to come.
When we get our heavenly bodies there is nothing to be added to that as regards ourselves. We may be seen in different positions, but we have already part in the eternal. Things which Christians are called to are present, and there are things to come, but we have part in eternal things. "All things" necessarily includes more than the assembly. Jesus knew that, so it is complete victory here. He knew that *all* things were given into His hand; in the consciousness of that He stoops down and washes the feet of His saints. The Man who has all things given into His hands is engaged with the saints.
{223}
Washing one another's feet is a thing we ought to consider. One would like to get hold of the meaning of "one another"; that is, what saints are to each other. We can never be too thankful for each other. We are given to each other, and we are necessary to one another. We are to wash *one another's* feet; so also we are to love one another and have love among ourselves. If such an One as Christ devotes Himself to the saints in this way, it shows what they are to Him. "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me". That must be spiritual, because the Lord contemplated being with the Father; and having part with Him would of necessity be of a spiritual character, not as they had had it when He was there with them corporeally.
Consequent on having part with Christ, they could have no part then in the temple; the temple system was all over for them. The world system implied what was religious, and in their case it was divinely instituted. All this is to be given up, and what is spiritual was to take the place of that for them and for us. The washing is the application of the death of Christ to our walk and ways; but, as a matter of the practical working out of it, you must have the water, and you must have the towel, before you can do this service. I think it results from the place Christ has in the soul. You go to a brother in the freshness and power of your enjoyment of the love of Christ, and it lifts the person up out of his circumstances, out of that which defiles him; and, of course, the conscience must be affected; but the difficulty often with this service is not having the towel. I think the towel implies resurrection; that is to say, the towel is that which sets a person at ease, the spirit is left at perfect ease, and the soul is at peace, but that can only be in resurrection; every disturbing thing is gone in resurrection. Being girded with the towel is the token of His service.
{224}
I think the towel indicates that He would be known to them in resurrection; everything that would cause a disturbance in the soul should be removed.
"If I then your Lord and master". The point in this was to show that if such an One as He in His divine greatness rendered this service, it would be a great incentive for them to render it to one another. I have often said the first letter to the Corinthians is the water, and the second is the towel. The first brought in cleansing, and the second letter set them at their ease. The Lord laying aside His garments is an example, and on our side it is a question of laying down our dignity, if we have any. We are content to go down, to be nothing. In that way you would not be above the one you are washing. You do not give him the impression you are above him, and you have come down to help him; you take the place of being one like himself.
What an experience to be in the company of One risen from the dead. In Colossians the saints are said to be raised by the faith of God's operation that raised Christ. As far as I see, the light of that in the soul sets it at perfect ease in the presence of God, because a risen man is suitable for going to heaven. I think resurrection takes you in spirit out of the world. Baptism in Colossians seems to imply resurrection. The whole point in this chapter is that it is an object lesson. He wanted them to know what He had done. How important it is that we should know what the Lord has done, and that as He has done we should do also. Feet washing is an act of love, it is not official. You will never wash a person's feet unless you love him; your love would not allow a spot on him. It is a spiritual order of things in which the governing principle is love. Have love among yourselves. "One another" implies every one of us. You cannot say a gifted brother is to do it. It is "wash one another's feet".
{225}
*Pages 225 - 294  --  "Christianity  --  a Spiritual and Heavenly Order of Things", New York, 1914 (Volume 22)*.
"THAT WHICH IS BORN OF THE SPIRIT IS SPIRIT"
@John 3
J.T. The exercise I had in suggesting this chapter was that we might look at the purely spiritual side of the truth, which John especially presents. Luke gives us what comes under the eye of God and man, in perfection in the humanity of Christ; then, afterwards in the Acts, that perfection is seen in the saints. It is more what is external in Luke. The Lord says, "The Spirit of the Lord is *upon* me"; then in @Acts 2 we have it stated that the Holy Spirit "sat *upon* each of them". I thought it would be helpful if we could see how God works in us from the beginning in order to bring about a spiritual superstructure.
R.S.S. Is your thought that we have to go to John to find what is underneath?
J.T. That is what I thought, and the theme of the gospel in this respect begins in chapter 3. In the second chapter we have, in the marriage of Cana of Galilee, the natural at its best. God is a Spirit, and it is evident that the order of things that He has in His mind must be spiritual. At the marriage feast the natural side of things is seen at its best; but the Lord manifested forth His glory there, and His disciples believed on Him. In this way their minds would be diverted from the most attractive side of the natural to the spiritual. We can understand that He who manifested forth His glory in such a remarkable way at the marriage feast, would become the object of interest to those who believed on Him, rather than the bride and bridegroom.
E.J.McB. Then, speaking practically, what is required essentially is a spiritual beginning. The
{226}
close of the second chapter indicates this; the Lord could not commit Himself to the natural man, although many believed on account of the miracles.
J.T. There was no one amongst them whom He could trust.
E.J.McB. He knew not only the outward conditions of man, but He knew exactly what was in man.
J.T. Yes. At the wedding He manifested forth His glory, and His disciples believed on Him; it seems as if the Lord intended to divert their minds and hearts entirely to Himself. We can understand how the principals at the wedding would be entirely eclipsed in the minds of the disciples; then in chapter 3 we see how He is apprehended as the spiritual Bridegroom; John the Baptist refers to Him as such. What intervenes in this gospel between the account of the marriage in Galilee, and the Baptist's reference to the Lord in chapter 3, shows how the spiritual man is formed.
T.R. The believer, as seen in John's gospel, has a progressive character.
J.T. And it begins in chapter 2, where His disciples believed on Christ.
Ques. Did the Lord introduce the spiritual order of things so that there might be that which would answer to God?
J.T. Yes. One leading thought of the gospel is, that God is a Spirit, and, that they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth. He seeks persons who are formed spiritually and according to the truth; hence the necessity for what is taught in chapter 3.
Ques. Would you say that the end of chapter 2 is to instruct us as to what man is naturally?
J.T. Yes, to show that he is utterly untrustworthy. However he might have been affected externally by the Lord's works, he had to be born again.
{227}
Ques. Would you say that this had taken place already in the disciples?
J.T. It surely had taken place in those who really believed on Him.
R.S.S. I suppose it was true from the outset in those who had faith.
A.F.M. What about Nicodemus himself? Had the work begun in him?
J.T. The beginning of the chapter establishes that fact; the others were utterly untrustworthy, whereas Nicodemus was distinguished from them. "But there was a man ... he came to him by night and said to him, Rabbi, we know that thou art come a teacher from God". The fact that Nicodemus is so marked off from the others, as recognising that Jesus came from God, is evidence that a work of God had begun in him; his subsequent history would confirm this.
F.L. Undoubtedly Nicodemus saw something of that moral glory shining in the darkness; he came to Him by night, indicating a divine work in his soul. This ends in full identification with Christ afterwards.
E.J.McB. The Lord takes up the thought of being born anew to bring in the spiritual side from the outset. It is important to note that in this scripture the work in the individual is made specially prominent. The whole being is affected. Look at a child; the possibilities of the man are there.
J.T. The man is there in embryo.
A.F.M. You are speaking of the whole being being born again; we are born of the Spirit.
J.T. It would be a great help if all believers were to see that in taking them up, God intends them to be wholly spiritual. God has taken us up for that, as we see in @2 Corinthians 5, "he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God". The foundation of the spiritual structure is taught in the chapter before
{228}
us; the Lord says, "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit".
E.J.McB. I think we must all confess that we have been in the habit of emphasising, that "That which is born of the flesh is flesh", but I doubt that we have emphasised the fact, that "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit".
J.T. The question arises in the mind as to what is spiritual. Now the spiritual will show itself according to the circumstances in which it is found. Among the first evidences of spirituality is the judgment of sin; there is a respect for God and the things of God, and coupled with this is self-judgment. The evidences of spirituality begin to show themselves in this way.
E.J.McB. The Lord's explanation to Nicodemus helps us.
F.L. That is, we first have to perceive the kingdom, and then, following, there is the entrance into it.
E.J.McB. If there is a movement Godward there is ability to perceive, and what we perceive is spiritual. The kingdom is spiritual.
B.T.F. Would you say that @John 3 refers to the sovereign side of God's work? If there is a single longing in the soul for God He meets that longing.
J.T. Yes; and that longing after God is the proof that the person is born again. It is true that we should not rest in what we are subjectively, but in what God is as revealed in Christ; but at the same time, it is confirmatory and comforting to be conscious of the evidences of God's work in us.
Ques. Would you say that an evidence of the spiritual is that we love one another? I remember hearing a sister say that God had worked in her soul because she knew that she loved the brethren.
J.T. The elements of help are in the Lord's remarks here, "Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God". That is negative;
{229}
but then He says, "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit"; that is positive.
F.L. In answering Nicodemus the Lord checks the suggestions of the natural mind.
J.T. The trend of the teaching here is to set the soul on spiritual lines.
B.T.F. New birth relates to what is effected in the soul before it is indwelt by the Spirit.
J.T. God will not recognise man as born after the flesh. He did in Old Testament times, but now if man is to have to say to God, or the things of God, he must be born again.
E.J.McB. It involves absolute sovereignty.
Ques. In the latter part of the chapter John says of Christ, "He must increase, but I must decrease". Is there not in that a contrast with the system with which he had to do?
J.T. In John the baptist we have an illustration of the spiritual man. When some great truth, or principle, is unfolded in Scripture sometimes an illustration of it is given. In @Exodus 21, in the "Hebrew servant", we have the Man who answers to the covenant in chapter 20. So here in the Baptist we have the spiritual man represented; in chapter 2 there is the, bridegroom of the natural order; but in chapter 3 John recognises the spiritual Bridegroom. John was the greatest of the natural order, but he disappears joyfully before the heavenly Man.
F.L. So that it is not a system that he represents, but individual exercise in the presence of Christ.
J.T. He disappears not regretfully, but joyfully. John shines here as spiritual; he was evidently the subject of the work of God.
B.T.F. What is the distinction between again "born" and "born of water"?
J.T. Born of water is an enlargement of the thought, introducing the cleansing element. You judge what is unclean.
{230}
E.J.McB. When spiritual ideas are appreciated there is an evidence that God has wrought. "Born of water" is to hate what is evil; "born of the Spirit" is to love what is good.
F.L. "Born of water" is cleansing, and makes way for the gift of the Spirit; "born of the Spirit" prepares us for the whole spiritual range of things opened up to us. All is the sovereign work of God.
J.T. "That which is born of the Spirit is spirit"; but it does not say that that which is born of water is water. In the former there is something positive; there is that which is capable of answering to what God is.
F.L. Nothing precedes being born anew; it is the sovereign work of God. "Born of water" would lead to self-judgment.
J.T. God effects something in man which answers to Himself in the principle of it; but the person who is the subject of this work is sure to go through a serious experience. What is said of Jabez in @1 Chronicles 4 may serve to illustrate it; he was born in sorrow, and hence the name given him by his mother, but he was more honourable than his brethren. This kind of honour is the fruit of God's work in us. He prayed to God, and God granted him his request and blessed him. Jabez is a remarkable illustration of spiritual progression.
E.J.McB. We see the principle of this in the word, "he that hath suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin". We must have sorrow here if we are set to go on.
J.T. New birth really occasions sorrow at the outset.
B.T.F. The soul need not be disheartened on account of this sorrowful exercise.
J.T. It is a good sign at the beginning, but we progress beyond it. Jabez asked for enlargement;
{231}
enlargement is really after we receive the Spirit, consequent on known redemption.
E.J.McB. There are many who have the Spirit, but are not spiritual.
J.T. The Corinthians were not spiritual, although they had the Spirit.
Ques. What brings about a spiritual state?
J.T. The first evidence of it is that a man judges himself. God sovereignly acts in a man's soul, and in connection with this there is light from God which leads to self-judgment. Water undoubtedly refers to the testimony of the death of Christ, which is the only means of cleansing. As cleansed the man is "born of water". Spirit is seen more in affection and intelligence, answering directly to God.
E.J.McB. The first effect of the light is self-judgment: God came out in His beloved Son and this leads to self-judgment.
J.T. In understanding the Son of man lifted up we see that God has judged, according to His own glory in the cross, what we judge in ourselves. In the allusion to the brazen serpent in verse 14 we see that sin has been disposed of, so that the believer's conscience is thoroughly at ease in this connection; then in verse 16 you come to the full light of what is in God's heart for man.
E.J.McB. In the presence of such light there is sure to be a movement in the believer's soul.
J.T. @John 3: 16 presents the great thought of God's love for man, eternal life. It is like the land of Canaan, which was the great end for Israel.
E.J.McB. John the baptist is a picture of how the spiritual man makes way for Christ, and what is of Christ. Generally we are very natural, affected by everything around us but what is spiritual. God is a Spirit, and His thought is to affect us by what is spiritual. The great man here is he who gives way to Him who is heavenly.
{232}
J.T. The result of God's dealing is that we become spiritual; the principle gives character to the whole man. In the house of God only what is spiritual is of value.
E.J.McB. In the first epistle to Corinthians we have proof of this.
{233}
THE SPIRIT AS POWER OF DELIVERANCE AND WORSHIP
@John 4: 1, 2, 46 - 54
J.T. This chapter supposes the teaching of chapter 3, but deliverance here is not only from what is natural, but from what is sinful. We have not the honourable marriage link, as in chapter 2; the relationship is utterly degraded here and the woman lawless. Her circumstances therefore are sinful; but withal there is a thirst and the Spirit here meets this need. The main feature of chapter 3 ends with verse 16. It sets out what God is and what He had in His heart for man, everlasting life. But what the Father seeks from man is presented in chapter 4.
E.J.McB. That is interesting. The Lord's question to the woman to call her husband brought out her circumstances; she had been lawless, but underneath there was thirst.
J.T. We have developed here a very important principle. In the light of the situation established in chapter 3: 35, man is to pray. "The Father loveth the Son and hath given all things into his hand". The Baptist called attention to Christ, not as officially sent to do so, as in chapter 1, but as one whose joy was fulfilled in hearing His voice; but the Father loves the Son and trusts Him implicitly, so that He delivers all things into His hand. This is the situation, and chapter 4 is founded upon it.
R.S.S. What was your thought as to prayer?
J.T. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldst have asked of him and he would have given thee living water". To understand the situation indicated in chapter 3: 35, induces confidence to pray. John the baptist represented the old economy, but he gives way to Christ, the heavenly Man. Christ,
{234}
receiving all things from the Father, necessarily supersedes the economy that had existed at Jerusalem; the gift of God was, according to the new economy, set up in the Son; all was on spiritual lines.
E.J.McB. What an appreciation John had of Christ! There was One to whom the Spirit was given without measure; then in chapter 4 we learn that a prayerful attitude is to be the result. What the Lord desired was that souls should be in communion with the Father, that there should be worshippers in spirit and in truth.
J.T. First Christ gives the living water, so that the soul may be delivered; then He brings in a worshipping company; see verses 23, 24. As the Father loves Him, He loves the Father, and so brings in what the Father seeks.
R.S.S. In the woman there was an thirst underneath as away from God.
J.T. The Holy Spirit is introduced figuratively in a peculiar and forceful way. It is said that "the water ... *shall become* in him a fountain of water springing up into eternal life". God's thought for the believer is that he should be set up in *spiritual independence* in the very place of his degradation.
The spiritual man is really the only person independent of the world.
A.F.M. There is a great contrast between Nicodemus and this woman. Is there any connection between them?
J.T. Nicodemus came from the religious quarter of the world, but the woman from the sensual. The teaching as to new birth was to meet the pretensions of the religious man after the flesh. With the woman the case was different; she was abandoned to evil, but there was thirst and the Lord proposed to meet this in grace. He proposed satisfaction in a spiritual way where lawless nature failed.
{235}
E.J.McB. If a man is incapable of pursuing the spiritual, he is likely to pursue the sensual.
F.L. We may say that in Nicodemus man was at his best; but even here nothing for God was reached. "The flesh profits nothing". All is dependent on the Man who came down from heaven.
J.T. The word *husband* is very remarkable here; but in five husbands the relationship was evidently perverted, and then the woman was living with a man who was not her husband, so that she was utterly lawless, but there was thirst there and the Lord proposes to meet this by the living water.
J.S. In this chapter the subject of God's worship is introduced.
J.T. Yes. The teaching of the chapter involves the liberation of the believer from the influences that would hold him naturally; he is set up in spiritual independence and all earthly ceremonialism in the worship of God, is superseded for him.
F.L. Is not spiritual independence illustrated in Rebecca? She is brought, as it were, to Isaac by means which he provided.
J.T. The believer, as in the light of the situation at the end of @John 3, has everything in Christ; he only needs to *ask*.
E.J.McB. As set up here in the power of the Spirit we can respond to the heart of God.
J.T. You are thus delivered from the claims of current religious organisations. The systems come into their present form through the doctrine of Balaam; he could not curse the people, hence he resorted to doctrine which had the object of corrupting them. Christendom is a growth out of the doctrine of Balaam; it has in it the principle of accommodation; the standard is reduced to the level of natural conscience, whereas true worship and Christian practice were to be according to the truth, and Christ is the truth. God admitted no lower standard.
{236}
E.J.McB. Balaam, through Balak, taught Israel to sin. In the five husbands here no doubt there was legalised sin.
A.F.M. In verse 14 it says, "the water shall become in him a fountain of water springing up".
J.T. The word refers to the activities of the Spirit in the saint after He is received, not exactly to the fact of His reception. As recognising the Spirit, we are not deterred by any difficulty in our way, for we shall have abundant support. Paul is the great model Christian; his energies did not flag; he was equal to every situation; in Philippians his spiritual energies are set before us in a remarkable way.
E.J.McB. Great emphasis should be laid on the close of the previous chapter; we are in the presence of One in whom the Father has found His unbounded delight, and into whose hand He has committed all things.
Ques. Does the "gift of God" refer to "all things"?
J.T. Yes; all things are given into the hand of the Son, but at the present moment He gives the Spirit.
F.L. In the coming day He will administrate other things, but today He gives the Spirit.
A.F.M. It is clear from what is before us, that we should continue in prayer.
J.T. Christianity is a spiritual order of things, and it is characterised by prayer. It is very suggestive in this respect, that Paul, the great architect of the assembly, is introduced to the saints by the Lord, as a praying man.
E.J.McB. In Jude we are exhorted to pray in the Holy Spirit.
J.T. A man who prays for you would not do you any harm. Ananias was in dread of Saul, but the Lord says, "he is praying".
{237}
E.J.McB. Prayer leads to spiritual independence. @Acts 4: 23 - 31, indicates how things were to go on practically in the assembly.
F.L. Prayer is a proof that the flesh is subdued and repudiated; there is no pride nor hardness of spirit in the attitude of prayer.
H.M.B. While you stand praying, you forgive.
Ques. Is not the principal object in the gift of the Spirit that the Father might have worshippers?
J.T. First the believer is to be delivered in his affections. The thought of the Lord here is that these should be directed into new channels. In the types certain entrails of the offerings, especially the fat that covered them, were burned on the altar of burnt offering; they are said to be an offering "of a sweet savour unto the Lord". This shows what the inward motives and affections of man, as governed by the Spirit, are to God. How different it had been with this woman heretofore!
A.F.M. This woman had not a proper head; are we not recovered by Christ as Head?
J.T. Christ is the new Husband. Really we may say that one is not qualified for ordinary marriage unless married to Christ first, @Romans 7: 4. What an effect the Lord's interview with the woman had on her!
F.L. "Come, see a Man!"
J.T. Were the five husbands now before her?
They were entirely superseded. Now it is one Man; she has deliverance.
E.J.McB. Her expression here is beautiful, showing how the Lord is before her mind and heart.
J.T. Christ is now the source of supply; she has abandoned the flesh and its resources.
Rem. In connection with this the well would spring up.
J.T. "Come, see a Man". Now that the Spirit is come the bearing of this may be understood;
{238}
the woman is delivered from lawlessness, and we can understand how that henceforth Christ would be all to her.
E.J.McB. How she would have appreciated Philip's preaching afterwards if she had heard it in Samaria! He preached Christ, and there was great joy in the city.
J.T. I am sure the natural relationship of marriage would afford much more joy if the spiritual preceded it. The married life of many saints would be much happier if they understood the relationship to Christ according to @Romans 7.
R.S.S. What is involved in being married to Christ?
J.T. Jehovah was Husband to Israel; but in no such way as Christ is Husband to us. Marriage supposes a new establishment, for a man leaves his father and mother; he leaves the old system, so that in being married to Christ we are set up in independence of the world; He supports and protects us.
F.L. In principle these things are illustrated in the woman here. Christ was so much before her in her testimony that many of the Samaritans believed.
E.J.McB. A distinct evidence of the Spirit is that we speak of Christ appreciatively. What will free us from lawlessness and legality is to have the affections captivated by one Man.
J.T. And there is no limit to His resources.
R.S.S. The Lord speaks of salvation here. We must know salvation before we can worship.
J.T. Yes. The woman had expressed certain Samaritan pretensions which the Lord dissipates. In the ways of God on *earth* the Jews have the first place; salvation was of them. The Lord's remarks here sustain God's ways in connection with Jerusalem, but He immediately proceeds to the period of Christianity in which there should be true worshippers to worship the Father in spirit and truth.
{239}
E.J.McB. It is only by the Spirit that we can be delivered from earthly religious props.
J.T. There is often a question as to what worship is; it is more to be experienced than defined. If you see a worshipper you will get some idea of worship.
E.J.McB. If there are true worshippers there will be worship; real worship is a state Godward rather than utterance.
J.T. With disorder outside, nothing can afford more interest to the Father than a company of worshippers down here. It is a great testimony to what salvation is; worshippers are entirely free from the influence of things without.
R.S.S. The priests are *clothed* with salvation.
E.J.McB. There are two sides of salvation seen in this woman; she left her waterpot, and she was not afraid of the men of the city, for she went and told them about Christ.
F.L. The more independent we are of the world in the power of the Spirit, the less can we do without our brethren.
J.T. As together, we are all one in Christ and we are in the light of the revelation of the Father in the Son. We have access to the Father by the one Spirit; we are of the worshipping company.
E.J.McB. People of "independent means" together!
J.T. We have a point of sympathy in the revelation of the Father and the gift of the Spirit. What common motives and affections are thus produced in our hearts which occasion our being together!
{240}
HEAVEN IN RELATION TO THE TESTIMONY HERE
@Acts 2: 32 - 39; @Acts 3: 19 - 26
E.J.McB. I thought the early part of the Acts gives you the instincts and feelings of men that had the Spirit, but who were hampered by their environments from coming out spiritually; and I thought a little consideration in regard to these scriptures would be of great help as to our coming out spiritually now.
I think it would be admitted that the Acts is a continuation of the gospel of Luke. In Luke's gospel you have what was under the eye of God in the Man Christ Jesus. The eye of God could rest upon that Man, and everything in and about Him was spiritual. You cannot understand any of His movements, except you view them from a spiritual standpoint. I give you an incident out of John. In chapter 11, there is a family, and His love for it is manifest; there is one sick, and He stays away. It is inexplicable. One speaks reverently of the blessed Lord, but He was a spiritual Man, and if you look at it from that standpoint it is explained. In the early part of the Acts you have that Man in glory, and a generation here that is really formed after that blessed Person.
J.T. It was needed that they should learn that things were henceforth to be centred in heaven. Of course, the heavenly side is not seen fully until we come to chapter 11, but still it is intimated here in chapter 2 that the *sound* came from heaven.
E.J.McB. We can understand a butterfly emerging from the chrysalis; the capacity is produced for enjoyment of the thing into which it emerges. The exercises occasioned by the difficulties of their position enabled the disciples to come out into the light of the position established in Paul's ministry.
{241}
J.T. They were gradually set free from earthly environments. The time for it did not fully arrive until the testimony of the Spirit in connection with the old covenant and promises to the fathers had been rejected; but, nevertheless, the second chapter is an intimation of the place heaven was to have and that they were to expect things from there.
E.J.McB. To be practical, if God were to place many of us in conditions which were absolutely and entirely spiritual, we should be unequal to them. The very difficulties connected with our path and circumstances here are conducive to our becoming spiritual men. The Spirit of God is exercising us so that we might be down here spiritually.
J.T. @John 3 is really connected with this chapter in this sense. "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven even the Son of man which is in heaven". The end of the gospel of Luke tells us that He was carried into heaven. Now, the disciples would thenceforth expect things from heaven; and this chapter is the answer to that; still heaven, as yet, is not *opened through*. In the next chapter the Lord is said to be received there; "whom the heavens must receive until the times of restitution of all things". He is to be received and remain there, but the heavens are not opened through.
E.J.McB. What you are referring to as to heaven being opened is connected with the spiritual side of things.
J.T. Yes. The full bearing of the spiritual is heaven opened through, and a Man seen there. In the first chapter there is a cloud; the cloud received Him. The cloud period as yet remained; but with all that, they knew His whereabouts. It was not as of old, when Israel did not know what became of Moses. In @Acts 2 their expectations were realised in the gift of the Spirit, and Peter's explanation shows it was on account of what had taken place in heaven.
{242}
God had made His Son both Lord and Christ; but then, the sound came from heaven, meaning that *heaven is asserting its right to be heard*. Man had his place here, and he has his day, but heaven asserts its right to be heard. That is a great point.
E.J.McB. To link the two passages read, I thought you have external conditions that govern the outside sphere until the Lord returned. In one passage He has been rejected by man, but by God He has been made both Lord and Christ. You will get no outward change until He comes back, but the whole realm of the Spirit's activity is between these two points. It is not unfolded here, but the spiritual line is between those two points.
F.L. Would you say it became a principle that pressure must rest upon us always if we are to be partakers of His holiness?
E.J.McB. We touched upon it yesterday when we had the question of sorrow. "In sorrow thou shalt bring forth". Chapter 3 marks the position; you find men in prayer, they are in touch with the system of things where the spiritual is, but they pray. The enemy would like us to take up a position *here*. To have a creditable position in the world will defeat spirituality. I believe that is the great end in Babylon.
R.S.S. I was just thinking in connection with what you were saying, that the present order of things, Christianity, is introduced with sorrow. I refer to @John 16 where the Lord says, "A little while ... and again a little while". Referring to the little while He should be in the grave, and then a little while when they should see Him; when He was in the grave they were weighed down with sorrow, but when the Lord rose their sorrow was turned to joy, and no one ever took it from them. The Lord likens that to the sorrow of childbirth.
{243}
J.T. There is an interesting passage in that connection in the end of Isaiah. "Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child". There was no travail in connection with the birth of Christ; He was not the occasion of sorrow; it was before Zion travailed that the Man child appears. That is to say, travail is connected with us; this, no doubt, is on account of what we are.
E.J.McB. It draws a line between Christ and every other man. There is no travail in connection with Him, but when it comes to us the apostle says, "I travail in birth until Christ be formed in you". How wonderful is the exercise in that way! In other words, the sorrow has in view the formation of man after Christ; no doubt the Acts help us on that line.
J.T. The disciples were to be loosed from their earthly moorings, and were to expect things from heaven; and one of the most important principles indicated is that heaven is entitled to a voice, and that voice is supported in power. The Spirit appears in the character of cloven tongues as of fire; there is power to enforce authority.
E.J.McB. Connected with that you have the beautiful thought that, if heaven is entitled to speak, they are capable of hearing. In the spiritual man you have that, and consequent upon that he has heaven's opinion on what is found there at any moment. It is most valuable.
F.L. You are utterly apart from it if you do not hear the voice of the Spirit.
B.T.F. Would you draw for us the connection between today and yesterday: "If I have told you the earthly things and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you the heavenly things?" In our opening meeting we were dwelling upon earthly things.
{244}
J.T. We were remarking that the heavenly is introduced here: "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven". You arrive at heavenly things by following the Son of man.
In @John 4 the chapter read yesterday, the point is not that the water is given from heaven, it is that the water is *living*; but when you come to the Acts, what you get shows the emphasis to be laid upon "heaven", so that the sound comes from there, the sound of a mighty, rushing wind. In certain respects it is all a question of the source of the wind that may be blowing. In chapter 12 a mighty wind from another source was blowing. Paul also *breathed out* threatenings and slaughter; that is a wind. @Acts 2 is a rushing, mighty wind from *heaven*, and it filled the house; the point is that these men are endued by power from there.
A.F.M. I was going to ask if that was with a view to a continuation of what began in Christ?
Christ was heavenly, and it is now continued in the saints.
J.T. If you look at the way in which heaven comes into evidence in the gospel of Luke, its mind about Christ is in view; its appreciation of the intrinsic worth of Christ. In @Acts 2 there is a rushing, mighty wind; there is no such activity in connection with Christ. There was nothing in Him calling for such activity of the Spirit.
A.F.M. The point is that there might be continuation here.
J.T. In this chapter the conditions and need of man on earth are in view. He has no inherent power, so all depends upon what comes from heaven.
The chapter is a testimony to the irresistible power of the wind, whereas when you come to chapter 7 things are reversed; it is an evil wind.
E.J.McB. You can understand that the company
{245}
gathered according to this chapter would have their thoughts, in connection with the Son of man, turned back to @Psalm 8 and they would have the thought of His name being excellent in all the earth; but the fact was, it was excellent in *heaven*, hence they required to be educated into the thought that everything was transferred to heaven; and that this was with a view to something on earth which would be spiritual, and which really was in character mighty and rushing.
J.T. Quite so, and not punitory judgment as yet; the fire is such as to *sit* upon them.
E.J.McB. In @John 3 we see the full expression of the spiritual idea in John the Baptist. Do you not think you see it also in Stephen?
F.L. I think so; but the full development of it is really found in Paul.
E.J.McB. Reference was made just now to the adverse wind. No doubt the enemy tried to destroy what was spiritual; but the result of the adverse wind was that all broke out in fresh power; you have a greater opening up of spiritual things in Paul than in Stephen.
J.T. It would be a great thing to get into our minds, how God came in at Jerusalem in the assertion of the rights of heaven, and how the disciples were brought into accord with heaven. Peter's address is an account of what is in heaven, as explaining the effect produced on earth. Three thousand persons were brought under the influence of the Spirit come from heaven.
Rem. Heaven respects Christ; it is on account of that that it is said, "This is my beloved Son, hear him".
J.T. In that way it is a question of what is on earth in Luke's gospel, but in Acts it is more a question of what is in heaven. Christ has left earth and gone there.
{246}
R.S.S. Luke closed with the word that the disciples were to tarry in Jerusalem until endued with power from on high.
J.T. The gospel is Christ on earth, and the Acts is Christ in heaven.
E.J.McB. It is a principle of all importance to recognise that the position here must be governed by the position of Christ in heaven. Christ is of all importance with God, and it is a great thing to get the light in which Christ is presented at any particular moment.
R.S.S. Christ's position always determines ours.
E.J.McB. A heavenly man would not only walk uprightly, but would set forth what is heavenly.
B.T.F. Would you connect the gospels more with what David did, and the Acts with the work of Solomon?
J.T. Yes; I would say that.
E.J.McB. It seems to me that many have the thought that spirituality in a meeting is limited to one or two brothers or sisters.
A.N.W. Is "spiritual" interchangeable with "heavenly?"
E.J.McB. In Scripture "heavenly" is contrasted with "earthly", and "spiritual" with "natural". If we were spiritual we would be in God's thoughts of Christ at this moment; those are connected with heaven. Christ is coming back, as indicated in @Psalm 8. His name shall be excellent in the earth; but God's present thoughts of Christ are connected with heaven, and so the spiritual man would be heavenly. I do not know any better scripture to illustrate it than the passage in Ephesians: "Let him that stole steal no more"; that is not heavenly, "but rather let him labour that he may have to give"; that is heavenly; heaven requires that you should be dispensing.
R.S.S. Movement in a soul is connected with the
{247}
recognition of Christ as One chosen of God, as the fountain of a new system. It says, "To whom coming as unto a living stone ... but chosen of God".
F.L. In @Matthew 14 we get help in a practical way; the violence of wind and storm was satanic; but Christ was observed on the water and Peter, who represents the spiritual man, was enabled to walk upon it. "If it be thou, bid me come unto thee".
P.J. In regard to the environment of the saints in Acts, how may it affect us today?
E.J.McB. You can see plenty of people who are largely affected by the environment in which they live. Supposing a person comes into a meeting on conventional lines; it will be a great test to him as to whether he can really rise above it and be spiritual; unless he comes in on spiritual lines the surroundings will hinder him.
P.H.P. Are the Spirit's activities in the character of a rushing, mighty wind now?
J.T. I would say that. The Spirit comes in as armed with credentials; that is, with manifest power; heaven's rights are to be supported here.
E.J.McB. A space, as it were, has been cleared. Now the point is that we should be spiritual enough to occupy it.
J.T. If you respect heaven's rights in your own history God will support you. One has often noticed in the book of Numbers in the times of crises, and there were several of them, that the glory appears; that is, God does something to show that He is supporting His rights and those who stand by them.
E.J.McB. My own personal exercise has been greatly on that line, that we might have thoughts in accord with what God is. Just as in the early Acts every environment that had been sanctioned by God in the past was inclined to hinder them from apprehending the greatest Man, the One in heaven. If
{248}
you pursue it, what tender consideration God took with Peter to release him from the last trammel of that environment.
R.S.S. You refer to @Acts 10 in connection with Peter?
J.T. "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come", the Lord tells us, "he will bring demonstration to the world, of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment". "Of righteousness because I go away to my Father". Now it was a question of whom God would justify; there was an issue between Christ and the Jews; and consequently between the Jews and Christ's followers. How was God going to decide? The spiritual man counts upon God's decision; He decides things; you cannot justify yourself, though your position here may be called in question. Here were these disciples, followers of Jesus, but they were under reproach outwardly. The coming in of the Spirit was God's vindication both of Christ and the apostles; that is the principle upon which God has gone all along. God decides by some distinct mark out of heaven. They received the Spirit and thus were distinguished; "it sat upon each of them". This would silence every dissenting voice. I think the spiritual can always count upon that. God will distinguish, in some sense, those that stand by right principles.
E.J.McB. What would mark a spiritual man at a juncture like that would be that he would behave like a child; he would wait until the Spirit makes its influence felt.
Ques. Do you see that in Hannah?
E.J.McB. You do.
P.J. Is everything official set aside?
J.T. Those that heaven recognises must depend on heaven; they are not owned officially in Jerusalem; they are disowned there. But heaven had acted; the tongues sat on each of the disciples. God asserted
{249}
Himself and owned followers of Christ in this way.
F.L. I suppose that is in line with what is said in Timothy, "justified in the Spirit". That is the principle upon which God approves and supports what is according to Himself now. Whatever is approved of God has the support of heaven. As supported and justified in the Spirit it must inevitably be refused as distasteful to men.
E.J.McB. I think Scripture supports the thought. "Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you".
F.L. In connection with your remarks, we get the impression that if we speak at all we have to say something worth while, and very often we hold back the "five words" which would be said if we were spiritual.
J.T. I think it might be well to bear in mind that after the coming in of the Spirit men were able to say, "We do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God". All saints should be equal to that, but when it comes to teaching and preaching you must have gift; and so the passage in @Acts 2 teaches, us that when it comes to ministry Peter stands up, not with the one hundred and twenty, but with "the eleven". They were the gifted ones. Often you find the radical spirit that would set that aside; heaven asserts that it takes up whom it pleases for ministry; the Spirit comes to all saints, and all saints have capacity to participate in the things of God, but when it comes to ministry Peter stands up "with the eleven"; not with the one hundred and twenty. That is to say, we must distinguish in regard to gift. The Lord has a right to take up whom He will and endow him with a gift, and this is distinct from the reception of the Spirit.
E.J.McB. You get a beautiful picture here when Peter got up; there was the spirit of inquiry.
{250}
J.T. That inquiry brought out more.
E.J.McB. "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" Peter had brought out what God thought, and there seemed to be a great issue between God and the Jews; and this question drew from Peter the information as to their place in connection with the light that had come in.
B.T.F. Was there not something beyond the testimony of Peter and those with him? You have the cloven tongues as of fire, but the whole truth was not then unfolded by Peter.
J.T. Attention has been called to Paul; that the Spirit of God waited for the rejection, on the part of Israel, of the wonderful testimony rendered to them in the presence of the Spirit, before He cast them off. He waited till then to unfold the full heavenly position; and really you do not get the full spiritual position until Paul is called out. But then this chapter shows what heaven could do for Israel as testimony, and what heaven will do for Israel.
Ques. Would you tell us what heaven is doing for us at this present moment?
J.T. Heaven raised up men to recover the truth, so that we have the apostles¬ doctrine recovered; that is to say, the assembly's position in the counsels of God, and what it is as the house of God, as seen down here. Heaven has done that, and we can depend upon heaven to act for us upon those principles until the close.
C.H.B. Not only was the Spirit given, but gifts also are given.
J.T. What you find is that in the apostles these gifts were respected by the saints. "They continued stedfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine". The emphasis is on apostles.
E.J.McB. Recognition of gift helps us, because the Spirit of God is grieved if that which is the result
{251}
here of the glorified Man is despised. Where there was grace from God to recognise it, there was increased opportunity for gift.
F.L. When the Lord was here His ministry was limited, where there was a lack of faith; now if the truth is not appreciated a limitation is put, upon it. We should support what we have.
J.T. If you see what a gift is you recognise it; it is really an adornment. The greater number of gifts the better off I am. A gift is not the possessor's alone; it belongs to us all; you do not envy the man to whom that gift belongs; it is an adornment and it belongs to all the saints.
A.F.M. How do you recognise gift?
J.T. There is ability to express Christ, and there is power which makes headway against evil. A gift is a testimony to the Lord's care for the assembly.
It affords support and protection for the saints.
E.J.McB. We might say that if there were more spirituality there would be more recognition of gift.
R.S.S. There would be a better outflow. The apostle writes to the Hebrews, speaking of Melchisedec, "Of whom we have many things to say and hard to be uttered seeing ye are dull of hearing". If we were more receptive it would be far more easy for one to minister.
A.A.T. In the first part of the meeting we were occupied with spiritual men, and now with gifts; can one be without spirituality and have gift?
J.T. One has known, alas, that some have gift and no spirituality.
P.J. Judas had the gift of an apostle.
A.F.M. The Corinthians also were not spiritual, @1 Corinthians 3: 1.
A.N.W. Tell us how to "covet earnestly the best gifts".
E.J.McB. If you love the brethren you would look to be of the best possible use to them.
{252}
Ques. Is that laying down your life for the brethren?
E.J.McB. It is indeed. Supposing we are in exercise for one another, seeing need we would covet to supply the need.
P.H.P. Have not all the saints some gift?
J.T. In @Ephesians 4 we are told that "unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ". Each saint has something and this chapter shows that the gift sat on each. But then, in @Ephesians 4 we have also specific gifts.
F.L. The measure of gift which is viewed in Ephesians, as common to all, comes in as essential in our gatherings, because in a great many of our gatherings we have no one who is marked out specifically as gifted. We are therefore dependent upon that gift which is common to all, and is really the consequence of saints walking in the power of the Spirit.
Rem. The great service of some is to be alone with God in prayer for the saints, and the result comes out.
E.J.McB. Some have gift and are with God that the saints might be kept together. Every saint has some place wherein he fills some part of the whole; but then there is that which is distinct and given by the Man Christ Jesus, when gone on high. He ascended up on high. He led captivity captive, then He gives distinct divine gifts.
Ques. Are specific gifts set aside today?
E.J.McB. I do not think so. I can understand a brother who has a distinct gift, but who is isolated like John at Patmos. He would be with God, and written ministry from him might reach the people of God.
P.J. Epaphras laboured in prayer.
J.T. Having ascended, He gave gifts to men.
{253}
The Lord acted wisely. You must have authority, and so you get an apostle first, then a prophet. The apostles represent the authority of Christ, the prophet brings in the mind of God. Then the evangelist carries the gospel to men.
A.F.M. Then "pastors and teachers".
J.T. If the evangelist is successful you have a flock and so pastors and teachers are needed.
A.F.M. Is the gift of pastor and teacher combined?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Will you explain carrying captivity captive.
E.J.McB. When they put the stone at the tomb they thought that it defeated the Lord, but, going up, He carried their last weapon with Him. People expect outward improvement, but it is all outside of spirituality.
T.R. Is the exercise of spirituality not in view of placing the saints in a position of power down here?
E.J.McB. I believe the education today is in accord with the extraordinary position the saints will fill. If you have a man who is going to be a clerk all his life you do not trouble about languages, but if he is going to be Prime Minister he must have a special education. The Lord puts every one in exactly the circumstances in this life which are conducive to the development of what is spiritual.
T.R. Each one ought to be exercised as to his own position.
E.J.McB. Look at the easy way in which we change our circumstances. That is the reverse to spirituality.
W.L.P. That would apply to a brother taking a position where there was no meeting.
Rem. I would like to ask as to, "unto every one of us is given grace".
E.J.McB. Reference has been made to the gift
{254}
of grace, and I would say that every one is capable of filling a place that tends to the mutual profit of all. You can be just what you are where you are.
P.J. It is very simple to be a channel of refreshment to the saints as Onesiphorus: "he oft refreshed me". There is nothing I covet more than to be a channel of refreshment to the saints.
E.J.McB. My exercise should be that I should be in the light of heaven, and that requires spirituality.
{255}
SPIRITUAL MEN IN RELATION TO THE TESTIMONY HERE
@Acts 4: 31 - 37; @Acts 7: 54 - 60
E.J.McB. I thought both Barnabas and Stephen were suggestive of the spiritual man, and the effect of spirituality on man. In the first case a man is recovered of God; and in the second you find the effect of spirituality in its proper and right bearing.
T.R. Do you mean that in connection with the first there is a man set free to be here for God, and in connection with the second a man prepared to go to heaven?
E.J.McB. Properly speaking the, spiritual man is fit to go to heaven; the actual translation is, in a sense, a consequence and detail. What I think would help is to see how the effect of spirituality recovers you wholly for God. What is striking in Barnabas is that he has land and is a Levite. The Lord was the portion of the Levite; as recovered he becomes a serviceable vessel for the testimony in this scene.
J.T. Barnabas had great respect for the apostles. This marked him at the outset. He laid the price of the land at their feet. The same thing is seen in chapter 2. "They continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship".
E.J.McB. Is it not suggested in Barnabas¬ name? They called him the "son of consolation".
J.T. This chapter would help us to see how the early believers respected the apostles; those having lands or houses sold them and brought the money and laid it at the apostles¬ feet. It was not that Barnabas did not value the land; but he sold it and brought the money to lay at the apostles¬ feet; a great evidence of the respect he had for the authority vested in them.
F.L. Distinct spiritual marks came out in this man, and these were appreciated by the apostles,
{256}
for they give him another name. It was not his mother or father who gave him that name, it was the apostles who called him "Barnabas". He starts with appreciation for what the Lord had entrusted to them, and they reciprocate the appreciation.
E.J.McB. It is a great thing to get a name in connection with the testimony.
J.T. It is not here like the purchase of a worldly title. Barnabas had no thought of receiving distinction; that in being so designated by the apostles, it would give him a status amongst them; he really, had profound respect for them. To promote the testimony was his object, and he received his name in that connection. A spiritual man will always respect divine authority.
P.J. It is striking to see the conditions under which he identifies himself with the apostles; they were in reproach, and more than in reproach, they were being persecuted, as mentioned in the former part of the chapter. It is easy to speak about it now, but we should be prepared to take a stand with the apostles, or their testimony, under all circumstances.
E.J.McB. It is well to remember that the testimony is in as great reproach today, though in a different character, as it was in that day. If a person is going to identify himself with the testimony, it will mean a really spiritual move. You do not get identification with the testimony by merely attending meetings of brethren; it involves that a man's life and interests move in that direction.
A.A.T. I think it would help if you give us an idea of what the testimony is.
E.J.McB. I think you see the point of the testimony at any distinct moment is to appreciate what is of distinct interest to heaven. There has never been a moment in the history of this earth that there has not been something for God, of distinct interest
{257}
to heaven, that is the testimony. What is of interest to heaven at this moment is Christ; and the wonderful thing is that there is a company of people on earth who are formed after Him. The character of the moment when Barnabas comes to light is particularly instructive. You have outside, the raging of the heathen; the religious world, with its fearful sin, has allied itself with the heathen world; but inside you have people marked by prayer. In this connection this remarkable man appears.
J.T. I think the allusion to verse 25 is good. "The kings of the earth were there, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his Christ. For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together". They rightly gauge the situation in that prayer.
F.L. How comprehensive that is. It takes in the whole earth, every element, religious, political, educational, barbarian; it is a remarkable covering of all that world which Satan controls against the Lord and against His Christ.
J.T. God had anointed His holy Servant to carry out His thought; hence there was the testimony, and consequent opposition.
E.J.McB. I had thought that Barnabas got this name because he greatly appreciated the idea that was dear to the apostles. Amidst all the raging wind there was this man who appreciated the divine thought. It is exceedingly interesting at a particularly trying moment in the history of the testimony when some one steps out distinctly.
T.R. The Lord, in His grace, brings consolation through Barnabas to His servants.
A.A.T. Why is Barnabas singled out in this way? In the second chapter there were those who had possessions.
{258}
F.L. I think that is it; but he did it when the testimony was in reproach. I recall in a town where Christ was greatly dishonoured, the breaking of bread stopped, there was power for ministry. At that time three young sisters came into fellowship, when there was no breaking of bread; and I am sure they were "daughters of consolation". When the testimony is under special reproach it is very different to the time when things are outwardly prospering.
A.F.M. I suppose there was nothing wrong in Barnabas having land; the point is the use he made of it.
J.T. That is what I thought. So far as he had gone he would support the testimony; instead of using it himself he puts it into the hands of the apostles, indicating his respect for the authority that was there.
E.J.McB. It comes close to us in this way The Levite should be governed by the priest; Barnabas recognises the true priestly system of things; and, recognising that, he turns the land to good account and puts it into the hands of the apostles. The apostles were not priests more than other believers, but they were spiritual and as such appointed over divine things. My exercise in presenting this particular chapter is that we might recognise this so that what we have in the way of spiritual possessions might come under divine control, and so be for the good of all the saints. One sees a great deal of service but it does not secure results for God. Why? Because it is not under divine control.
R.S.S. It was the common people who supported the Levite, and it was the Levite who supported the priest.
J.T. Barnabas, in acknowledging the apostles, owns that they were of the true levitical family; his levitical privileges, as connected with the law, had come to an end.
{259}
E.J.McB. The effort of the enemy to destroy spirituality by a counterfeit is very solemn. I think one of the greatest gains we could have in these last days in spiritual things is that you get preserved from counterfeits.
P.J. Barnabas gives up earthly possessions for heavenly ones.
J.T. He acquired a place in the "walled city" which was secured to him for ever. I refer to @Leviticus 25. He gave up a place in the country, so to speak, for a place in the city. He obtained a place in the assembly.
E.J.McB. As regards the appointing of the deacons, it was what you might call an act of convenience rather than an act of the Spirit; the Spirit rebukes it, because He takes one of the deacons and puts him on a higher platform than any one at that moment. I refer to Stephen.
J.T. The Spirit of God takes up two men from the deaconship and gives them the first place in the testimony; and, for the moment, the apostles are in the shade.
F.L. Service is very glorious when you hear the Lord saying, "I am among you as he that serveth". Stephen and Philip are according to that. The Lord puts glory upon it.
A.M. Is that the "good degree" that Paul speaks of to Timothy?
J.T. Stephen and Philip purchased a good degree. The apostles said, "It is not reason that we should leave the word of God and serve tables". It is true that they were called to that, but one is compelled to own there were certain limitations about the twelve which do not appear in Paul. He never hesitated at difficulties, and never regarded any service as too much trouble for him. We find Paul taking up service such as this later, even working with his hands to supply the need of others.
{260}
E.J.McB. Do you not think the attack is really against the spiritual man? If you want the height of a spiritual man you must go to Paul. Take Peter for a moment: look at the difficulty he had in going to Cornelius¬ house; it was not spiritual; it was born of his environments.
J.T. It is very remarkable that if you despise anything that seems to come in your way God will use some one else, and that one is liable to eclipse you. "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might".
E.J.McB. Take those who were full of the Holy Spirit, when asked to serve tables, they did not say, 'It is too menial', but they took the service up. Then two of them stand out distinctly as serving in spiritual things.
J.T. The lessons drawn from these incidents recorded in the Acts are most essential that we should learn. It is a question of what the heavenly is. If an angel were to come now he would do *anything* the will of God required, and never question it. In the Gospels it is recorded that the disciples said to the Lord on one occasion, that He should send the multitude away; but the Lord says, "Give ye them to eat". The Spirit of Christ is to meet need. Now what you see here is that Stephen shines; his face was like that of an angel. There was a carrying out of the will of God in that man; that is the idea in Stephen; he went to the lowest point in regard to service; it is a question of God's will. The apostle says later in regard to those who carried money for the saints, "messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory", @2 Corinthians 8: 23.
F.L. We do not appreciate enough that with the coming in of the Lord Jesus there came a Man of another pattern, One who could say, "I delight to do thy will, O my God". Stephen's face shines in the light of One who delighted to do the will of God.
{261}
E.J.McB. I think the way he handled the Old Testament Scriptures was remarkable.
F.L. Where did he get his learning?
E.J.McB. "The spiritual discerns all things". There is very little doubt, if we knew more what it is to be really in the Spirit, in accord with the Man in glory, we should be able to understand and discover Christ in the Scriptures in the most extraordinary way.
Do you make any allowance for what has occurred up to chapter 7, regarding the order of the assembly, because of the fact that Judaism had not been finally set aside?
J.T. All that came out in the assembly was testimony to Israel; at the moment it was provisional. God had set up a new order of things in Jerusalem; that is to say, Jesus had gone out of the world at Jerusalem; He had died there. Moses and Elijah were speaking of that on the Mount.
Now, the grace of God is seen in that He establishes a spiritual order of things in Jerusalem on the ground of the intercession of Christ, which was available for them all. That was a wonderful testimony of the grace of God. But then the rejection of Stephen is the end of all that.
E.J.McB. Using a figure might simplify it to our minds. What you find is, that the encasing preserved the butterfly, and as it broke the butterfly got liberty; and you see a spiritual man in Paul; there was no room for what was spiritual in Jerusalem, but for a moment it was preserved there. The point is that the soul should rise to the thought of the heavenly man.
A.F.M. Was Stephen the butterfly?
E.J.McB. I think Paul was. Stephen is the last link with the earthly system and this was broken; the product is a man moving about over the whole earth in spiritual power; that is Paul.
{262}
Rem. So the Lord had raised up Stephen for a special occasion.
E.J.McB. I think it is an immense thing when anyone serves the saints to the extent that they are turned undistractedly to Christ. I see that in Stephen; everything else gives place to Him, and his testimony turns the saints to Christ.
Rem. This would involve the sovereign work of the Spirit at the moment.
E.J.McB. I do not think the Spirit of God works arbitrarily, but opportunity is given to each. You brush the saints¬ boots if you can, and if you are great enough to do it you will get spiritual advancement. We are surprised that the Lord does not give us something remarkable to do, but we are not great enough. When these people had to serve tables they served happily, and they, at least Stephen, began to be most profoundly instructed in old testament Scripture.
Rem. The Lord gives the principle, "If I, then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet".
E.J.McB. What one covets is to be spiritual enough to do anything for the saints; some of us say, If He gave me a little more room I could do something?
P.J. It is beautiful to see how Stephen takes character from Christ.
E.J.McB. "Such as the heavenly One, such also the heavenly ones".
J.T. He stands out as a board of the tabernacle; the tremendous pressure he sustained here reminds you of the Ark of the covenant; that is, of the Lord when here. The wind was blowing from another direction, and Satan brought to bear upon his spirit the whole pressure that he had at his command, so that you are impressed with the strength, or power of endurance, that was there. That is the idea of the "shittim wood" used in the ark, it is durable.
{263}
B.T.F. Do you take Stephen to represent the full light of Christianity?
J.T. I think personally he is a reflection of the heavenly; his face shines as that of an angel.
F.L. I suppose doctrinally he is illustrative of the end of @2 Corinthians 3. "We all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord".
E.J.McB. In principle, in the early part of the Acts, you have heaven looking down here, but with Stephen you have a man with his eye definitely fixed upon heaven, and the characteristics of the Man in heaven come out in him.
F.L. So he is transformed morally before Saul and the others. His words "Lay not this sin to their charge" are an expression of the spirit of Christ.
J.S. You were saying just now that the testimony was sustained through the Lord's intercession. What do you mean?
J.T. What was introduced in Jerusalem was in answer to the Lord's intercession. He had prayed the Father for the Spirit, and, having received of the Father the promise of the Spirit, He shed forth that which they then saw and heard. It is a wonderful testimony of grace that He should bring it in for *them*; it was available for those who had put Him to death.
R.S.S. "Father, forgive them".
J.T. It is quite in keeping with that; the Spirit was there for them; they had to be baptised and they should receive remission of sins and the Holy Spirit. Christ had brought that in for the Jews, and that continues as a testimony up to chapter 7.
Now you have it changed; it is a question of God closing with them. The incident of Stephen is like the closing up of the case on God's behalf, so that when God enters into judgment He might be clear.
{264}
God must be clear in what He is doing, and in grace He justifies Himself, in giving up Israel, through Stephen's address.
J.S. So Stephen goes back to God's beginning with Abraham.
J.T. He begins with God who has a glorious system in mind for Israel; they resist all that. "Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye". They had resisted that, but it was all over there. The God of glory had appeared to Abraham; the glory was now in heaven.
J.S. They had always, and still were, resisting the Spirit.
R.S.S. So Stephen's address was a justification of God.
J.T. Yes, that is what I understand.
F.L. One might say with reverence that he was God's advocate for the moment, and was delivering the final charge to justify God in setting aside Israel.
J.T. It throws a wonderful light on God's ways with men. Stephen reviews, as it were, the witnesses on God's side. God had intervened on account of His glory, and His ways with Israel were all founded on that. The prophets bring out how wonderfully patient God had been with them, and finally the Holy Spirit is given on the intercession of Christ, whom they had murdered. The last great witness was Christ; and the activities of the Spirit having been resisted, God's case is closed; He is justified.
R.S.S. Stephen brings in two great characters, Joseph and Moses. There is great glory connected with those men, and both were refused.
J.T. All such men and such gracious dealings on the part of God are simply His witnesses. Now Stephen is refused, they bring all the evidence together, God is justified in hiding Himself from the house of Jacob.
B.T.F. Would you take Stephen as an example
{265}
of what you commenced with as spirituality, or would you go further and take Paul?
J.T. Stephen's honour is that God was pleased to charge him with this great service, and then he dies for the testimony, in complete accord with the spirit of all the other witnesses, even of the Lord Himself. He dies as a priest as he interceded for his murderers.
B.T.F. Would you add that he died in the full light of the revelation of God at that moment?
J.T. Yes. He died in the spirit of Christ; he died gloriously.
A.N.W. In what relation does the testimony of what he saw in heaven stand to his own testimony?
J.T. The Son of man standing is in relation to previous witnesses. That is, He is still waiting on Israel; but their answer to that is stones. Stephen was not crucified; Israel *committed themselves* to his death; that is an idea in stoning.
E.J.McB. Up to that moment Israel was the great thought before God; and now there is this testimony as to the kind of man God is occupied with; He is standing in heaven.
F.L. The Man in the glory becomes a new and distinctive point; it was at that expression that they turned upon Stephen. That, of course, gives character to Christianity.
P.J. It is remarkable that Saul was found here.
J.T. I have no doubt but that Saul's spiritual history dates from here; "Saul was consenting unto his death", but then he had witnessed nothing like that before; the Spirit of Christ was in Stephen.
F.L. So in the ways of God he undoubtedly was brought there on purpose.
J.T. I thought, that the "kicking against the pricks" had reference to that; his conscience was affected.
{266}
P.J. The apostle reminds one, bringing it down to the present day, of an unconverted man: he may do certain things against a child of God, but when converted he will never forget what he has done.
E.J.McB. I thought, in relation to your remark that he was a witness of these things that when the Lord laid hold of Paul he got a spiritual conception of that sight; after he got the Spirit he came to the import of the incident in a remarkable way.
J.T. The Lord's word to him out of heaven had reference to what was going on in his soul. If the Lord speaks to us He takes account of what may be going on in our souls.
F.L. Undoubtedly the kicking against the pricks would be the constant striving against his own conscience. The sound of that voice, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge", must have been ringing in his ears.
A.F.M. I suppose Saul is raised up to continue the testimony that was begun in Stephen.
J.T. The conscience was touched there, no doubt, but then he has to learn grace, and one of the most touching things in the narrative is that the Lord spoke to him in the *Hebrew* language; as much as to say, 'Saul, I know you are an Israelite, you are Hebrew of the Hebrews, and you have great veneration for what is Hebrew'. It seemed to be especially in order that Saul might have every possible advantage, that his heart might be subdued by grace. And then He says, "It is hard *for thee*". What consideration on the part of Christ for that man!
J.S. There was a witness to Saul that glory had been transferred from earth to heaven.
R.S.S. Do you think the work of God in Paul's soul began at this point?
J.T. I think the Lord's communications to him
{267}
had reference to Stephen's death. In the second chapter it is simply a "*sound* out of heaven"; whereas here there are distinct articulations in a known language. Christ, as Man, is in heaven, and He speaks directly from thence.
J.S. What is the idea?
J.T. In chapter 2 there is the assertion of heaven's *right* to speak; but in chapter 9 you have distinct words, and these words express divine sympathy and grace in a remarkable way.
F.L. I suppose in that there is a suggestion, that while it could be understood by one to whom it was spoken, it was simply a "sound" to those to whom it was not addressed. It establishes a point of sovereignty in heaven to single out and speak to whom it will.
Rem. I would like you to say something in regard to the greatness of Christ in supporting Stephen as a vessel of the testimony.
J.T. Of course, it is a testimony to the greatness of Christ, but see what a man Stephen was. Extraordinary spiritual power is evidenced in the fact that he could rise above such fearful pressure of opposition and manifest the spirit of Christ in it. In dwelling upon the Ark we must not overlook the *boards* of the tabernacle.
E.J.McB. I think what you have been saying is beautiful; in regard to the material structure, boards were there, but here is spiritual material for the superstructure. It is to sustain that which is heavenly.
R.S.S. So in that way Stephen was a sample board, or sample Christian.
E.J.McB. I suppose we might say that the mark of a spiritual man would be that God's thoughts
{268}
would be maintained. This would involve separation from everything that is contaminating.
J.T. Stephen covers everything from the appearance of the God of glory in Mesopotamia to this point. Stephen dies, but the testimony lives; that is the idea of a board; it is to sustain the testimony.
Stephen sustained the testimony in dying.
A.M. Would you say that Stephen practically sets forth the power of resurrection?
J.T. He is an example of practical endurance. There was power to sustain the testimony before the fiercest opposition. It is that side of the spiritual man we see in him specially.
A.F.M. Is it open to us all to be boards?
J.T. Oh, quite. I have often thought that the beginning of a board is seen in a child who answers to the injunction, "Obey your parents in the Lord". As to us, if our days are long, it is assuredly to support the testimony, and you begin by obeying one that loves you; namely, your parents. It is God's consideration for a child to put authority in a parent; it is easy to obey one that loves you. You show yourself to be a board because the idea of a board is that God's will is carried out, not mine.
Ques. What do the sockets of the boards represent?
J.T. It is that things are set up on the ground of redemption. Silver refers to redemption.
F.L. If a child is to have prolonged days in view of the testimony, it becomes a question with the parents as to the shaping of the board, to bring them up in the discipline and admonition of the Lord. We should all have the testimony in view in that way.
W.L.P. I was going to ask you to say a word in connection with "living stones".
E.J.McB. In the tabernacle you have a system in your mind connected with a wilderness position, having reference to God possessing "all things".
{269}
When you come to a temple or fixed building, you have a different thought. You can understand that any genuine Jew would have the idea of the temple being the embodiment of the light of God for His people at that time. Now the temple is a living idea, and saints are connected with the living system of things in which the light of God for His people is at this moment. Peter refers to a "spiritual house", and we living stones in it.
{270}
THE HEAVENLY COMPANY
@John 20:1 - 31
J.T. A principle in Scripture is that God accredits to all of any given company what He may find in one.
E.J.McB. Do you take Mary to be the characteristic person?
J.T. Yes; that is what I thought.
A.F.M. And that He credits the company with the characteristics of this person.
J.T. So far as she has gone she is equal to the light, and so the Lord is enabled in that way to speak of the brethren.
A.N.W. Do you mean they are indebted to her?
J.T. Well, her spiritual measure is accredited to all.
E.J.McB. Do I understand you that the expression, "Go tell my brethren" is that the Lord accredits them with what He saw in Mary, and that *brethren characteristically* are seen in Mary; she being a sample?
J.T. Yes; just as I was endeavouring to show in regard to Judah in @Genesis 44. What came out in him affected Joseph, who could not refrain himself; brethren were there characteristically, and he made himself known to them.
E.J.McB. Was the thought that Mary set forth the spiritual instincts that are in accord with Christ in this world?
J.T. I thought you have in the expression, "they have taken away *my Lord*", what the first epistle of Corinthians develops.
E.J.McB. I thought it was exceedingly important to see the principle upon which Joseph was free to disclose himself. There could be no disclosure of spiritual relationships to a condition that is merely
{271}
natural; and I take it that the beautiful operations of the Spirit of God in this woman are worthy of the greatest consideration.
J.T. If we are not in fellowship it is quite out of the question to introduce the idea of brethren. In that expression by Mary you have, I think, the principle unfolded in 1 Corinthians; "they have taken away my Lord;" she referred to those who had acted against Christ.
E.J.McB. Do you not think Mary's *position* speaks much? The others went away, but she remained where the body of Jesus had lain; the impress of the death of this Person characterised the whole scene.
F.L. There is significance in the way the Lord puts the message. He does not say to Mary, 'Go tell My brethren I ascend to My Father and their Father', but it is "to my Father and *your* Father". She was necessarily included in the message the Lord sent.
E.J.McB. She was a characteristic person.
F.L. She would have been a messenger *merely* if the Lord had put it the other way; but she is one of the company.
J.T. The question of fellowship is most important. The spiritual company is designated here "my brethren", but fellowship really precedes it. There was the tomb where the body had lain; Mary was *there*, so that in this way she was in the fellowship of His death. Then, the One who had died was *her Lord*.
F.L. Is there the thought of the fellowship of His death in the door being shut for fear of the Jews?
J.T. There was the opposition that had been expressed towards Christ still there in the Jews; and it is still in the world.
E.J.McB. Do you not think there is an important spiritual principle in the door being shut? We get
{272}
a figure of it in Joseph; there could be no disclosure without enclosure.
J.T. He put the Egyptians all out. The Lord's disclosure of Himself to His brethren is too private to have the Egyptians or the Jews either.
E.J.McB. Exactly; and when you touch upon a thing so sensitive in character it is important that we should urge the question of fellowship.
P.J. Did Mary get the light the Lord gave, as a result of devotedness?
J.T. Yes, she did. It is really devotedness that leads us into fellowship. "Where the body of Jesus had lain"; that is public. The Lord went out of the world publicly; He did not go into heaven publicly. Now, fellowship is in connection with the first; it is in connection with the Lord going out of the world; privilege is in connection with the Lord going to heaven, which is private.
R.S.S., So that fellowship is in view of something adverse or in contrast.
J.T. Quite so. Fellowship was set up where the Lord went out of the world; that is to say, it was set up at Jerusalem. The apostles¬ fellowship was there. Mary's position sets forth the idea of fellowship; she was "where the body of Jesus had lain"; that was public, and there she says, "they have taken away my Lord". Who are the "they"? She is not of them; they are different from her.
E.J.McB. She distinguishes in her mind between the company that appreciated Christ and the company that refused Him.
J.T. Exactly; she did not refer to Peter, John or James, but to those who had put the Lord to death.
E.J.McB. I think it is a very important point that we should clearly distinguish the question raised as to the company being in responsibility. If you are going to enjoy spiritual privileges you cannot pass
{273}
over responsibility that is legitimately yours; and hence in the pattern you find Mary at the spot where every question of responsibility is solved -- "Where the body of Jesus had lain".
Rem. When Mary runs to the disciples, she says, "They have taken away *the* Lord"; she connects herself with the other disciples; but to the angels she said, "they have taken away *my* Lord".
Ques. How do you get the thought of fellowship at the tomb?
E.J.McB. I think it is not very difficult to see. In @1 Corinthians 10 you have the question of fellowship, and it is fellowship of the *death* of Christ.
J.T. Yes. On the mount of transfiguration Moses and Elias spoke of His departure, which He should accomplish at Jerusalem; that is where fellowship is set up; so it is said, Christ "suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him ... bearing his reproach". That is public, and that is where responsibility lies.
W.L.P. Every question of responsibility was solved where Mary was, so that at the cross they appreciate His death.
E.J.McB. It was at the cross. If you trace the pathway of the Lord Jesus Christ in Luke's gospel to the mount of transfiguration, you will find the pathway of a man who faced every legitimate obligation that could rest upon man as under the eye of God, and *that* Man finishes the pathway at the summit of the mount. When He gets there He speaks of His decease, not that He would *have* to do, but that He was going to do; death had no claim, but He was going to accomplish a decease, or departure, and at the doorway of His death the question of responsibility is solved.
A.F.M. Will you distinguish where responsibility closes and privilege begins, in relation to our chapter?
J.T. It is in Mary's expression, "they have taken
{274}
away my Lord". She clearly intimates that there are those who are different from her, different from those that loved the Lord; and the question is with which company are you identified -- "they" or "Mary".
E.J.McB. Our brother's remark is helpful, because when Mary comes to the company she knew and appreciated Christ; she speaks about "the Lord". She recognised they had a common portion in this blessed Person.
A.F.M. Was there not a point where Mary passes over from the wilderness to the land, as representing the whole company?
F.L. Was not that inside the closed doors?
J.T. I think that is correct. Going into Canaan is a private matter; there are no spectators at Jordan; the world is not there; it is at the Red Sea that you see them. "Israel went out with a high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians". I think that what has been alluded to is perhaps of more importance than we may have noticed; it is the point emphasised in the opening of the epistle to Corinthians, in the words, "the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours".
E.J.McB. The basis upon which the apostle can write is that they recognise the Lord. Is not this the simplest way of understanding fellowship? Outside it is "my Lord", inside it is "the Lord".
J.T. Yes; because He is no more mine than yours.
Ques. What is the bearing of "Christ Jesus, my Lord", in Philippians in regard to what you were saying?
J.T. I think in Philippians it is a question of what the Lord was to the apostle. Philippians is really the experience of the spiritual man, so that you have his estimate of Christ. To him Christ was all. The chapter sets before us different measures
{275}
of spirituality, and clearly in Mary you have excess as compared with Peter and John.
A.F.M. Also in contrast with Thomas.
J.T. They were truly believers, but they went to their own homes.
A.N.W. What is the practical advantage to the company of being accredited with the measure of Mary, or some one really higher than the company?
J.T. The practical advantage here was that they are all regarded by the Lord in the light of brethren; Mary represents the state suited to those in this relationship. The communications to Mary are according to her level or measure.
T.R. The message that the Lord sent by Mary had a gathering effect.
E.J.McB. When the wonderful fact laid hold of them that they were brethren they instinctively drew together.
J.S. As together He could disclose Himself to them.
J.T. The message brought about conditions suitable for the visit described.
T.R. One person qualified to carry the message has a wonderful gathering effect upon the saints; that is, it puts the saints in a position where the Lord can meet them, and they can be brought on to the ground of privilege.
J.T. If one person is equal to the light, the light is not limited to that person, it is for all.
E.J.McB. I think if we might be allowed to refer for a moment to the figure you used last night, it would greatly help. There could be no doubt that the very first time his brethren came to Joseph he had in view the thought of disclosure, but the continuous visits went on until one of them reached the point that made it possible for the whole.
J.T. That is the idea; so that if one person is equal to the light you get the light, but it is for all. It is to bring about exercise. Judah had reached the
{276}
state becoming brethren, but all Joseph's brethren came in for the disclosure made.
E.J.McB. In Mary you get a picture of spiritual affections, and then under the Lord's tuition she becomes spiritually intelligent.
J.T. What we are speaking of is very encouraging in the smallness and weakness of things at the present time; if you get one person right spiritually the Lord will clothe all the company with His own thoughts.
R.S.S. Do you not think often that the person is the one who, like Judah, takes the very lowest place? He was willing to become a bondman and give his life.
J.T. There were distinct marks of a brother in Judah.
R.S.S. We do not hear much about the individual history of the sons of Jacob, except Joseph, but we have the way in which God wrought in Judah's soul; he took the self-sacrificing place, and he is honoured; the Lord came from Judah, and the glory is connected with that.
J.T. He acquired evidently the first place in Israel. It had been transferred from Reuben to Joseph, but finally it came to Judah. Judah represents the counsels of God, and the character of the brother is seen there.
An illustration of what we have been saying is seen in @Revelation 12. The "woman" was clothed with the sun, the moon was under her feet, and she has a crown of twelve stars; she is about to bring forth a Man-child. It is what you have historically in the first chapter of Matthew. God clothes the circumstances with all His thoughts in regard to Israel. We find all the divine thoughts in regard to Israel in the circumstances of the birth of Christ.
E.J.McB. The thought in a way appears at the Lord's birth in Luke: "Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good pleasure in men".
{277}
F.L. "If a man love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him". The individual who loves Christ and keeps His commandments is in the full height of privilege primarily enjoyed by the assembly.
. Ques. How do you understand the first part of verse 17?
E.J.McB. Mary had most extraordinary affection, but she was astray as to the peculiar character of Christ's position at that moment. To touch the Lord requires the greatest spiritual intelligence. She had to come into the full light of the ascended and glorified Man.
F.L. We are helped in this by seeing the contrast with @Matthew 28; there they hold Him by the feet, and He says, "Go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee and there shall they see me"; the ground was totally different, it is Galilee, but here it is ascension. The contrast, I think, greatly helps.
E.J.McB. When you come to the question of spiritual intelligence, it involves two things: it involves what you might touch and it involves the light in which you are set. There can be little doubt that there is great deal of lack of spiritual intelligence as to touching things that are not the present thought of God; they may be good enough in their place.
Ques. Why is Thomas invited to touch the Lord
J.T. You can touch Him inside; there are no restrictions there. The emphasis is on ascension here.
A.N.W. "Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my side; and be not faithless, but believing", verse 27.
F.L. In @Luke 24 they were inside. He says, "Handle me and see"; it was to the whole company.
{278}
P.H.P. According to the principles pointed out this afternoon we cannot be of any better service to each other than to be spiritual.
J.T. Spiritual stature is sure to be owned of God; God has respect for it, and He signalises it.
W.L.P. Did the Lord wish to give the thought to Mary, that she could have nothing to do with Him in the old condition of things?
E.J.McB. I do not think for a moment the Lord would ever repel the slightest movement towards Himself on the part of any of His own, but what the Lord has in view is the spiritual intelligence of this woman, He is assured of her affections, so He gently and firmly puts her aside in order that she may understand the blessedness of the new position He was taking.
F.L. That was a characteristic way with the Lord. On another occasion, under different circumstances, He says to His mother, "Woman, what have I to do with thee?" She was not discouraged; she gives instructions to the servants.
R.S.S. You were speaking in regard to things we should not touch and things we should touch.
E.J.McB. What I feel is this, what saps away the spiritual vigour and life of the saints is that they are dealing with things about the blessed Lord that are not connected with the present movement of the Spirit. They may be perfectly true, but they are not the Spirit's mind for the moment.
A large number of saints are occupied with what will happen when Christ comes back to the earth; then the desert will blossom as a rose, beautiful in its way, but not the present mind of the Spirit; He is occupied with the place that blessed Man has as ascended.
J.T. The Lord considers for us; if we are not
{279}
to touch things it is that we might have something better. He was going to lead Mary into heavenly relationships.
P.J. The great thing is to be in the mind of the Spirit.
E.J.McB. I think one of the most successful moves on the part of the enemy to defeat the saints is to bring forward something that is true but not the truth for the moment.
J.T. The relations were to be formed with Christ as ascended, a new heavenly ground.
F.L. When the Lord comes it is as ascended to the Father; therefore, morally, when He came amongst them He came as the ascended Man to the company; which is, brought into the value of an ascended position.
J.T. So that all communications from His side henceforth, and all communications from our side, are in the light of that.
E.J.McB. The whole position is viewed in the light of the ascended Man; and Mary's message gathers the brethren in the light of being brethren of the Man ascended.
J.T. His coming in is on the principle of having ascended.
A.F.M. Hence what He brings in is heavenly. Ques. Is that the spiritual intelligence that is to mark the company today?
J.T. It involves true assembly privilege.
E.J.McB. May we not say, to make it practical, that our exercise as to spirituality should be that there might be in a place one or more to whom the Lord may accredit this for the gain of all.
F.L. The point we are on is an exceedingly important one; it is a question of ascension, "risen together with him",; taking account of ourselves as a company in association with the ascended Man; it is totally new ground, never known before.
{280}
R.S.S. The brethren in @Matthew 28 are told by a message from the Lord to go before Him into Galilee; there it is the same individuals, but not brethren in the same light.
F.L. They are looked at as the remnant of Israel; it indicates what the Lord will be after the rapture in a day to come; but those in @John 20 are wholly connected with the new light of a heavenly Man in a heavenly position.
J.T. In Matthew it is administration on the earth. He would meet them in Galilee, and He did meet them there, to send them out to make disciples of all nations, to baptise to the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Here in @John 20 what is in view is privilege, the distinct privilege attaching to the assembly, so that instead of going to Galilee, He goes to the Father; hence, if He meets them again, as He did, it is as having come from heaven; and what follows qualifies them for the great position.
He breathed into them, so that they should become spiritually according to what He was.
F.L. That is the point in @Ephesians 2, "raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places". It is association in heaven.
J.T. It is one thing to be in fellowship as Mary was, and to have light as to the position contained in the message; but then it is another thing to have the Spirit of the Man that goes up; He breathed into them of His Spirit. If they are to go up, they are to have the Spirit suited to heaven.
Ques. Would you say you get the Spirit of that Man exemplified in Stephen?
J.T. Unquestionably. Think of what is secured for heaven!
E.J.McB. It is a very beautiful word: "as my Father hath sent me". After the breathing into them they would be perfectly at home in the scene of His Father.
{281}
J.T. You have in Scripture mention made of "the spirits of just men made perfect", but the Spirit of the heavenly Man goes beyond that. You have "just men" in the millennium, but think what is required for heaven. If these people had gone up they would have had a spirit suited to heaven. Of course all is pattern here.
L.T.F. What are "the spirits of just men made perfect"?
J.T. The spirit of a man is the greatest part of him; what you appreciate is a man's spirit.
L.T.F. How are just men made perfect?
J.T. Under the Old Testament conditions men's spirits were not perfected; it required redemption. If one is not hampered in any way, you have a complete man morally. But when you come to the spirits of heavenly men you have something greater. They are like Christ viewed as heavenly. We shall hold holy converse with each other in heaven.
F.L. I wanted to emphasise that, "I go to prepare a place for you". When He breathed upon them the place was prepared, and they were competent for it.
J.T. He had *in principle* gone in; not literally, but the message involved that.
E.J.McB. Do you not think the earthly contrast helps you? When God made man at the outset He made him in His image and likeness, and then He breathed into him. You have now a spiritual being formed, and thus the Spirit is breathed into him with the life of a heavenly Man; he is capable of treading in heavenly places.
P.H.P. Is the breathing into the disciples the same thing as the gift of the Spirit now?
J.T. It is involved in the gift of the Spirit; but I think we have to take account of the intimacy of the transaction, and the fact that it was His breath, not merely the Spirit of God.
{282}
F.L. "The last Adam".
J.T. Yes.
B.T.F. Do you look upon this company as a pattern company, brought about when the Spirit actually descended?
J.T. All this came to pass actually on the day of Pentecost. Luke presents an external view; John gives you the inside. In Luke it is *upon*; in John *within*.
Rem. In Genesis we are told that Eve was taken out of Adam's side. Here the Lord speaks of His side.
E.J.McB. I think there is no doubt but that this company are morally the product of the love of Christ.
J.T. What strikes you here is the spiritual character of everything; the doors were shut; it is said incidentally, "for fear of the Jews", but I think doors were shut so that it might be seen that what occurred was spiritual. The closed doors could not prevent the Lord's entrance.
A.R.P. To whom did Mary take the message literally?
J.T. The Lord had clearly intimated previously whom He regarded as His brethren.
E.J.McB. I think the most important point we have had this afternoon is the relation of Mary to spiritual disclosures.
J.T. If the Lord were to give a message for the brethren I would look for the people who did the will of God. Those are the ones that the Lord regards as brethren in the other gospels. Mary would have had sufficient knowledge of who they were. There are many who take the name now who have no title to it, because the only title you can have is what the Lord indicates in @Matthew 12; they are those who do the will of the Father. In @Luke 8 brethren are those that hear the word of
{283}
God and do it; and in this chapter they are those who believe in the resurrection. You look for this kind of people. One often observes that a certain virtue is attached to the name of brethren; there are so many companies now and they all say they are brethren, but are they? If you apply the Lord's tests what would you find?
F.L. It depends on the condition of soul.
J.T. First of all, doing the will of the Father.
If I take it into my mind to start a school of doctrine and draw people after me, that is not the will of the Father, but is the very opposite.
R.S.S. In @Luke 24 we have very much the same circumstances mentioned; at least there are certain features that are like the ones we have been reading of in @John 20. Would you say the bearing of the Lord's appearance in the midst of the disciples in Luke is in contrast with what we have been contemplating?
J.T. I think that Luke is the *relief* side.
E.J.McB. In Luke He asked for meat; it is consideration for man and the need of man in relation to the pleasure of God, but in John it is wholly spiritual.
J.T. In Luke you get terror; the disciples are frightened by His presence, and they need to be relieved; they are not in a right state, so there is need of adjustment. They were to be assured that it was Himself, a real man. But that is not the thought in John. John is dealing with the truth from a purely spiritual standpoint.
R.S.S. I suppose the character of the two gospels would also help; Luke presents the grace of God; therefore the meeting of man's need comes into prominence; John presents the love of God; therefore the point is satisfaction for the heart of God and Christ in His brethren.
J.T. Where you get the love of God touched
{284}
upon you may always look for some great answer. @John 3: 16; "God so loved the world"; the answer is life. You may look for the greatest answer when you come to the climax.
T.R. Love works in view of finding its own satisfaction.
J.T. "God is a Spirit", and hence the company brought in as a result of Christ's ministry in John is spiritual.
F.L. I think perhaps we can see that Matthew is administrative in view of the earth; Luke is taking account of the Lord as a Man amongst men for man's relief and blessing; and therefore the Lord expressly says, "a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have". He takes the human side, and meets the need of man in the grace of God. John's gospel is wholly the spiritual and heavenly side.
J.S. Would you give us an outline of how the individual reaches the spiritual company as presented in John?
J.T. In chapter 3 there is a spiritual foundation laid in the believer, as born again; then there is the death of Christ which would meet the conscience, the uplifting of the Son of man. In chapter 4 you have the Spirit given formally as a power, as living water in the believer, in order that he might be delivered from what is here. Chapter 5 is that he is introduced into something; he is passed out of death into life. In chapter 6 he is supported by spiritual food; that is to say, Christ come down from heaven, he is supported by that food here. All this is on the deliverance side. I refer to these chapters only as showing how our need is met individually. Passing over the other chapters, you come to the twentieth there the believer is in the faith of the resurrection, and so he is prepared, according to the affections seen in Mary, for the full mind of God. God being a Spirit; He is to have a spiritual and heavenly
{285}
company. The light communicated to the believer in Mary's message gives him his position; then the breath of Christ involves the subjective state suitable for that position; he is a spiritual and heavenly man, and now is prepared for his house from heaven, our house is a building of God, which is spiritual. He will then be in every way suited to God -- spiritual, not only inwardly, but outwardly. What God has in man is thus altogether spiritual.
Ques. What is the spiritual thought in connection with "my brethren" in @John 20?
E.J.McB. I think it is not difficult to see that the Lord Jesus Christ as coming on the line of Israel had brethren on that line; but the idea of a heavenly Man having brethren was a totally new idea, and it was the most wonderful light as to privilege that ever came out from the heart of God.
{286}
HEAVEN, THE GOOD LAND THAT IS BEYOND THE JORDAN
@Romans 8: 28, 29; @1 Corinthians 15: 48, 49; @2 Corinthians 5: 1 - 5
My thought is, by the Lord's help, to throw a little light on the conditions that obtain in heaven. If we are destined for heaven, and if heaven is prepared for us, it should become of supreme interest to us and what lends it peculiar attractiveness is the fact that not only is Jesus there, but He has gone there to prepare a place for us. We shall trace the interest of His love in the conditions that we shall find there.
God, by His Spirit, garnished the heavens; the work of the Spirit is thus seen in the physical heavens, but inside we shall find the touch of the Lord Jesus. "I go", He says, "to prepare a place for you". Neither is our going to Him there left to the Spirit, for He comes Himself for us. The Holy Spirit is here as "another Comforter", so that there should be nothing lacking to us, but then the Lord impresses upon us the interest of His affections, in that He actually comes back for us, and, coming back, He conducts us into the spot which He has prepared for us. We shall find traces of the Lord's work there.
Now, as I said, it is obvious that that place should become of supreme interest to every believer. It is not that one would undertake to say much about it, for one has to own how little one knows; but, nevertheless, God would say to us, "Lift up now thine eyes and look from the place where thou art", @Genesis 13: 14. If God directs you to lift up your eyes, He will support your eyes. We are told that Stephen looked up steadfastly; that look was supported. There are looks which are not divinely supported. We are told of Lot, that he lifted up his eyes, but he was not told to do so. He lifted up his eyes towards
{287}
the well-watered plain of Sodom. God did not tell him to do that, and, not telling him to do it, Lot had to look on the well watered plain in his own strength. If you look without divine support you will be deceived, but if the Lord directs you to lift up your eyes He will support your eyes; and therefore one is encouraged to ask the saints to look into heaven.
The word is, "look from the place where thou art". You may ask, "Where am I now?" If you are in Christian fellowship, you have had to suffer loss; it was when Lot separated from him that God directed Abraham to lift up his eyes from where he was. He was in the right position; he was governed by divine principles, and from that point he could lift up his eyes.
Now, although one is conscious of how little we know of heaven, yet there is a means of looking into it, and so one may, as it were, travel with the Lord up to mount Nebo. @Romans 8 is, as I understand it, mount Nebo; it is not exactly the land, but it is a point of eminence where you can survey, by the help of God, the land of promise. I would like by the aid of the Spirit to lead your minds and hearts to that point of eminence. You will remember how Aaron was conducted up to mount Hor to die; that is one evidence of grace in the book of Numbers, the believer goes up to die. Christ went down to die. In Moses you have an addition to that; he was conducted up to look at Canaan. Moses saw the land; it had been in his heart, and God showed it to him. Is it in your heart, or are the well watered plains of Sodom in your heart? If the latter, you will not be interested; but, if on the other hand, that "good land", as Moses calls it, is in your heart, you will want to hear about it.
Now I want to trace as briefly as I can from the book of Genesis how the idea of heaven is developed
{288}
in the Scriptures; the idea is so prominent in the mind of God that He introduces it on the second day of the creation. It was to be marked off specifically from what was called earth. In the New Testament we read that as God caused the light to shine out of darkness, so He has shone in the heart of man. Heaven gradually came into evidence and on the second day there was a line of demarcation between heaven and earth. On the fourth day you come to recognise that the heaven has the pre-eminence of the two. Most believers have not progressed beyond the first day; every day has light, as you are aware, and each day begins with an evening. Succession of days suggests continual movement.
I want to move on to the second day; there the heaven is distinct from the earth. Then, on the fourth day, you have the great truth that heaven has pre-eminence; and not only has it pre-eminence, but it is intended to entirely predominate the earth. The earth is seen to be absolutely dependent upon it. There are seen in it a great source of light and dependent luminaries. The disregard of the fourth day of the creation is the cause of all the disorder which exists on the earth at the present time. All the moral derangement that is apparent everywhere is the result of the disregard of the light of the fourth day of creation; that is to say, you must respect the authority that God has placed in heaven. You must come to that. There is derangement, dislocation and independence until that is recognised. The sun is a type of Christ in His glory in the heavens; if you understand the fourth day, you will see that glory and speak of it. Any one who has seen the glory of Christ is sure to speak of it. It says of Isaiah, "These things Esaias said, when he saw his glory and spake of him". It is a wonderful thing to hear a man speak about Christ who has seen His glory; what a character it gives to the speaking! The glory
{289}
that Isaiah saw was like the sun in the heavens, the whole earth was filled with it. Where is there a, luminary in that vast expanse to compare with the sun? He is the lord in that way. That is what Christ is to the spiritual man.
"Let us build us a city and a tower whose top may reach unto heaven, and let us make us a name", @Genesis 11: 4. Now that is what goes on at the present time! The earth is filled with the glory of man now, but for faith the earth is filled with the glory of Christ. In @Genesis 12 we find Abraham called out. Who called him out? The God of glory. The world of man's glory was abandoned. What has God in His mind? There is to be a family in heaven; in Abraham we get the idea of a family in heaven. The glory of God is bound up in Man, in Christ, and the glory of God has reference to what He is. He has affections, and He is to have heaven filled with men responsive to His heart. On earth there are to be men responsive to the heart of God. He takes up one man, and out of that man He evolves a wonderful system of glory. There is to spring from that man an innumerable company of men for heaven, and an innumerable company of men for earth. Think of that!
Now that was to be in Abraham's seed, and that brings me to the second point I have in my mind, which is in connection with Isaac. I know of no man, in a way, more interesting in the Scriptures than Isaac, and the interest lies in the fact that he is a type of Christ as the *heavenly Man*. After his birth you find the first speaking out of heaven. I want you to take note of that. The first direct speaking out of heaven is after Isaac's birth; and, mark you, the speaking has reference to a persecutor of Isaac. As born here upon earth, the heart of Christ was filled with sympathy, even for His
{290}
enemies, and heaven was sympathetic with that. In @Genesis 21, it says that Isaac was born, and when he was weaned Abraham made a great feast for him; Abraham saw Christ in Isaac, in a way, when the child was weaned.
What I want to point out is that Ishmael mocked Isaac, which is called persecution in the New Testament. Whom did he mock? A little child as Isaac was then could do no one any harm. That is the type of Christ. The Lord Jesus did no one any harm, yet He had to say, "they have both seen and hated both me and my Father". I want to point out, that the voice of the boy who persecuted Isaac is heard in heaven. It had reference to the fact that Isaac, Christ in type, had come in and was recognised. Now chapter 21, in that way, shows you what Christ is in the mind of heaven. Ishmael came in, but very little testimony followed; his mother took for him a wife out of Egypt; there was no sympathy for God's mind or heaven, but man cannot change heaven by his conduct. Thank God for that! You cannot change heaven from earth, earth will be changed from heaven.
When we come to @Genesis 22, what we find is that heaven is directly occupied with Isaac; the angel of the Lord spake out of heaven as to Isaac. Then the angel called out of heaven to Abraham the second time. I do not know a passage in Scripture that has more interest to me than that; the interest in heaven for Christ Himself here upon earth. Now, that Man has a companion. He is of such supreme interest to heaven that He must have a companion there equal to Him as to lineage; hence the genealogy of Rebecca is given in the end of chapter 22. Isaac is not spoken of in Scripture as having brethren; he had brothers, as we know, but not brethren in the scriptural sense; in connection with Joseph we have brethren.
{291}
When you come to Joseph you come to a brother, and a brother who is "born for adversity"; therefore Joseph becomes a wonderful type of Christ. He goes through the most terrible adversity at first, but he is a brother "born for adversity". You all remember the touching scene in @Genesis 45, when he made himself known to his brethren. I want you to raise the question in your hearts as to whether Christ has made Himself known to you. He will make Himself known to you as in relation with you in this sense when you are equal to it.
Now I want to refer to @Genesis 44. Here we have the record of Judah's exercises, and there is a clear evidence of a brotherly spirit in them. The subject could be much enlarged upon, but I refer to it only briefly. He sympathised with his father, he sympathised with his brother Benjamin, and he undoubtedly felt in his soul the betrayal of Joseph. God had dealt with Jacob's sons until they were brought back to their brother, and in Judah there was at the end the spirit of a brother. Have you come to that? Have you in your heart the spirit of a brother? Title to Christian fellowship and a place among the saints suppose that. Judah said he was prepared to be a slave for Benjamin; he has come to it now. God is working with us to bring us to the spirit of a brother, because really you cannot go to heaven without it. Who are going to be in heaven? Brethren. What kind of brethren are they going to be? Heavenly brethren; brethren of the heavenly Man. Thus when the time came for it, Joseph could not refrain himself. You may depend upon it that Christ will cause us to know in a very real way our relationship to Him as we possess the affections and sympathy suited to brethren. Joseph caused every man to go out from him, and he said, "I am Joseph, your brother". What a marvellous revelation for them! He says, "Come near to me,
{292}
I pray you"; not only Judah, but every one of the eleven sons of Jacob now knew their near relationship to this great man.
In @1 Corinthians 15: 48, 49, we get the divine thought, that as brethren of Christ we are heavenly; "as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly". Adam had no children in innocence; all his children were born in sin, and they bear the image of the earthy as sinful. We have borne the image of the earthy, but we shall bear the image of the heavenly. Think of that! We shall bear the image of the heavenly. What an effect that should have on the walk and ways of the believer. The divine thought is that heaven is to be inhabited by a race of men suited to it, all bearing the image of Him who is the heavenly Man.
In the passage I have read in @2 Corinthians 5: 1 - 5, we have the exercise of a man who not only saw what was in the mind of God, but *desired* it. "Not", he says, "that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon"; clothed with our house from heaven. "Our house which is from heaven". What a wonderful expression! I want especially to call attention to it. Think of the material of that house!
In the first epistle the body is said to be raised, but in the second epistle we come to the heavenly side; the house is from heaven. It is "a building of God ... eternal in the heavens". It is not for earth, it is heavenly and for heaven; it is formed after the pattern of Christ. Think of what it will be to dwell there, each having his own heavenly house!
You will understand the apostle's use of the word house; it refers to the body.
Then he goes on to say, "he that path wrought us for the selfsame thing is God"; it is then that the inner and outer will be equal. God builds the house and forms us for it, so that there is no disparity
{293}
between the house and him who dwells in it. God is working in us now in order that we should come out then equal to the house that has been built for us; heaven is thus to be occupied with persons who are all formed after the pattern of the heavenly Man. The bodies we have here are not equal to the spiritual formation within; in them we groan; they are "tabernacle" houses; they may be taken down through death at any time, but the building from God is "eternal in the heavens".
Now, when you come to @Romans 8 you have the family side touched on. The apostle says, "we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his son, that he might be the first-born among many brethren". That leads me to the thought I had in my mind to leave with you. You get in that verse in @Romans 8, a look in, as it were, from mount Nebo. From mount Nebo Moses saw all the land, but he did not see the people there. In @Deuteronomy 33 he had been occupied with the people; there he views the people as formed typically by the Spirit; they are fit for the land, and now in chapter 34 he sees the land which they are to occupy. He views the people according to the love he had for them, and he was also enabled to view the land in its entire extent. How wonderful that we are privileged to look, like Moses, into that land! It is only by the aid of the Spirit of God that we can do so. Christ was not there as Man when Moses looked in, but He is there now. Stephen saw Him there. We, too, may look in and see Him in heaven; He is there as the First-born among many brethren; by faith we may see the brethren there with Him. There is that vast spiritual domain filled with Christ and His brethren.
{294}
We acquire a knowledge of heavenly conditions now as we know and love Christ and the brethren. Our joy will be to be with Him and them there. Stephen "looked up steadfastly into heaven" and if we do this we shall see Christ there. May He enable us to do it!
{295}
NOTES OF READINGS ON REVELATION
@Revelation 3 and 4
The presentation of Christ personally to Philadelphia is unspeakably full and blessed. The Lord's word shows that it shall be demonstrated to all that "I have loved thee". All this connects especially with the attitude of Christ in chapter 22: 16: "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches".
The promise to the overcomer here is very full and touches one of the few points which reach on to the eternal state with its glorious light, akin to chapter 21: 2; there is the name of God written on the overcomer, "and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God and my new name".
The pillar of which the Lord speaks gives the thought of strength, adornment and testimony. These thoughts are seen in @1 Kings 7: 21, 22, and these qualities really found expression in Christ.
Laodicea follows Thyatira and Sardis morally, especially the latter, as producing the inflation of pride in knowledge and human self-sufficiency. Really it is the spirit of the world which thrusts Christ out and hence He speaks from without. Light given to Philadelphia ceasing to be valued becomes merged into the moral blindness of Laodicea in its most forbidding form. It is repugnant to Christ.
The voice of the Lord to the individual and the response is very suggestive of what is found in Malachi, and the perverted tone of the people rebuked in Malachi is strikingly like that which the Lord judges in Laodicea.
The Lord at the end makes much of the individual who is faithful, "if any *one* hear my voice", the character of things is akin to @2 Timothy 2, "Let every *one* who names the name of the Lord withdraw
{296}
from iniquity", and "if therefore *one* shall have purified himself".
The Lord is at the door of the heart appealing to the individual affection. Gold, white raiment and a seat in His throne are promised. The next moment, in chapter 4, those things are seen actually adorning them and they have the throne. The white garments and the golden crowns are a striking fulfilment of what, at this moment, the Lord holds out to those who struggle, overcoming Laodicean conditions. We are separated but by a step, a moment of time, and we soon shall pass through the door into heaven. May we be in the power of it in our spirits!
The door opened in heaven indicates a change in the development of God's dealings. The prophet's position was changed. The previous chapters treat of the assembly period; administration had been connected with it but now all was connected with the throne in heaven. Henceforth things are directed from heaven. The communications received by the apostle on earth had reference to the assembly; communications in regard to God's public dealings are received in heaven. "Come up hither". All that follows is after the assembly period. The history of the assembly on earth is now regarded as at an end. One series of events in the divine ways is ended and another is begun; that is, "the things that are about to be after these". The scene is in heaven, but it has reference to the earth; God is now reverting to the covenant that He made with Noah. The government of God on the earth had been carried on in a providential or indirect way, but this chapter shows *direct* relations with creation.
These two chapters, 4 and 5, show the groundwork of what follows. Chapter 4 sets forth God's creation rights, chapter 5 His redemption rights. The prominent thought is that God is resuming direct relations
{297}
with the earth. These two chapters form the basis of what follows. The rainbow reminds us of @Genesis 9. It is God reverting to the covenant He made with the whole creation. That covenant was unconditional, but the covenant made with Adam was conditional. The covenant with Noah was on the ground of the burnt-offering. It was an unconditional covenant made with Noah, his sons, every living creature and the, earth itself. Permanency marked the order of things set up under Noah. This is shown in @Genesis 8: 22. Noah had carried through in the ark the creation, representatively. The rainbow was the token of the covenant God made with creation, hence its appearance here is a sign of God's faithfulness. The *throne* here signifies that God has the means of carrying out His will. Under Noah the creation was taken up in a new way. On the ground of the burnt-offering there is a permanent order of things inaugurated.
The rapture is implied here in the word which the Lord speaks to Philadelphia; "I will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". That necessitates the rapture, and in the first verse of chapter 4 John also is bidden to "Come up hither". The *elders* being in heaven also shows that the rapture is taken account of as accomplished.
In @Romans 8 we read that "the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now", but it is awaiting deliverance. These chapters have the creature deliverance in view. "The living creatures", being four, represent the *whole* of creation. Death had been on the creation; but these creatures are *living*, a token that death will be set aside, at the time indicated in the vision.
The four-and-twenty elders allude to @1 Chronicles 24. You will find in that book that the order is on the basis of twenty-four rather than twelve. This
{298}
helps us to understand the economy set up by David. Under Moses twelve was more the number. David had the priests divided into twenty-four courses, also the Levites. The people, too, were set apart for service, twenty-four thousand for each month. We are not told that David was instructed by the Lord to do this. David is seen acting in wisdom as head; he did it by divine wisdom. All this suggests the merging of two dispensations.
The *elders* represent saints of two dispensations; the *double* idea is seen. The Christian dispensation involves greater responsibility than any previous one. The Spirit of God tells us, that "all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come", @1 Corinthians 10: 11. It has been said that the New Testament gives us the science of navigation, and the Old Testament is the log-book. If we understand this, the Old Testament would be regarded in a different light. The mariner steers his ship according to the *science*, but he records his experience in the log-book. If the sky is dark, the mariner has to have recourse to dead-reckoning, and in this the findings of those who have gone that way before us are of immense help. So that the experiences of those that have gone before are recorded for our learning. All is recorded in view of the New Testament. The Lord says that the instructed scribe brings out of his treasure "things new and old". The new things come first morally. The idea in eldership is *experience*. The crowns point to royal dignity. There is not any disparity between the elders and their crowns. The elders are marked by experience and intelligence. They are in the mind of God in regard to things. In chapter 7 you will find that they can give an account of the saints. The elders lend a peculiar character to the throne, There are lightnings and thunderings and lamps of
{299}
fire; the presence of the elders has a modifying effect on the mind. A government connected with them has a peculiar character. They have been down here and have gone through things themselves, and this enables them to be sympathetic with others, and with the creation. They know what evil is, having had to deal with it experimentally; and they know what God is, and in this way they are in full intelligent accord with the throne. Noah, Abraham, and Moses, will be among the elders no doubt.
The lightnings, thunderings, voices and lamps of fire, which later are said to be the seven spirits of God, indicate the power of God in regard to the accomplishment of His purpose. At mount Sinai, where experience in man is wanting, there are the lightnings and thunderings, which announce the power of the throne to deal with evil, but the presence of the elders and the living creatures is in striking contrast to Sinai. It is the throne of God. Christ is the Person who sits on it, but it is the throne of God. The sea of glass is *fixed* purity. As to the scene in heaven, water is no longer needed. It refers to a state of things which God will bring to pass.
The "living creatures" suggest discernment. They do not give a reason for their praise, but the elders do. Everything that has breath shall praise God. The living creatures say, "Holy, holy, holy", but the elders worship and give a reason for what they do. The living creatures represent the whole of creation, inasmuch as there is the number *four*, which conveys the universal idea.
The lion is strength; intelligence is in the man the calf (or ox) is referred to as that which has a firm tread, and the eagle shows rapidity of movement. In result the different heads of creation appear and represent the attributes of God in the execution of His government. It is the intelligence with which things are done.
{300}
Chapter 18
God's reckoning as to time for judgment is short. It is "one hour" here, verse 17. It seems strange to find any who are true mixed in this state of things, but you find Obadiah, a prophet, in the household of Ahab: he was out of place. When Elijah appears, he excuses himself, because he is in the wrong position, but he was the Lord's for all that. There are those of the Lord's in this system. They are like Lot in Sodom.
There is no reason why Antichrist may not already be living upon the earth, and also the beast, who may take imperial power. The old Roman Empire, which embraced the south and west of Europe and north of Africa, is virtually revived as to territory already.
What we see here in @Revelation 18 is the final end to the threads which began to be spun in the garden of Eden. Lawlessness came in there, and there began the spinning of the threads which are all gathered up at this point. In the beginning, Satan endeavoured to get sway through Adam, then through Nimrod. God's answer to the latter was Abraham's separation, and from that time on Babylon has been in evidence. Verse 21 shows the manner of the end. "And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all". God reverts to the beginning of His ordering of the nations in @Genesis 11; it is there that we get the confederation of peoples that they might maintain themselves in unity; they say, "Let us make us a name". God's answer was dispersion by breaking men up into nations. Babylon takes spiritual form, and in the end the "great millstone" goes into the sea. Men assembled in @Genesis 11, but in the divine ways they were dispersed.
{301}
Now that confederation of peoples reassemble to be independent of God, and finally become self-destructive. It is the nations that destroy Babylon. Casting a great stone into the sea from a height produces violent agitation. It is a very significant and impressive closing. There was an end in the Lord's day of what existed up till then; the Lord takes note of the guilt of those who killed the martyrs from Abel to Zechariah, and puts it upon the generation then existent. That generation were about to put Him to death. Now this chapter 18 records the end before the introduction of "the world to come", and the Spirit of God takes account of the guilt of that wicked generation from Cain who slew Abel, through to the Lord's death, and to the complete end, putting upon Babylon the blood of all that has been shed upon the earth. "And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth", verse 24. It suggests that unless you distinctly and positively separate yourself and come under Christ you are regarded as one of those who are responsible for all that has happened against God and Christ in this blood guilty world.
What one sees all through is that if the Lord must give us a book of judgment He will cause that the same will be full of bright points of light where He shows His own pleasure or brings out the moral import of what is happening. He sets up landmarks of clear guidance and moral attraction all through the book; so that we are not called upon to read through an unbroken record of judgment, which would be very depressing by itself.
{302}
Chapter 19
The word as to the heavenly company rejoicing in the overthrow of Babylon is quite striking. Peace is about to be introduced on earth, and ii had already been established in heaven. The birth of the Lord brought out the announcement that there should be "peace on earth, good pleasure in men", but the rejection of Christ transferred the thought of peace to heaven -- "peace in heaven". This book shows that peace is first established in heaven; all is brought into accord with God there, so that there is sympathy with what is going on on earth. Heaven is sympathetic with what God is doing on earth. The thought is to bring the earth into accord with heaven. The entrance of the Man-child into heaven involved peace there. Heaven, therefore Js sympathetic with what God is doing, and that is to bring about a state of things where there shall be peace. That is what this chapter, among other things, shows. The heavenly company is in sympathy with what God does, and rejoices in the judgment of what is corrupt.
The ark ought to be on earth, but instead of being there it is seen in heaven in chapter 11: 19. Things are all secured in heaven, and earth is to be brought into accord with that; indeed, that is the point of the prayer the Lord taught the disciple, that God's will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
To consider the subject of Babylon here it is important to bear in mind that the book of Revelation from chapter 6 is divided into two main parts. In the first part the "powers that be", the imperial powers, are used as instruments of discipline in the government of God. For instance, in chapter 6 the imperial power is seen as going forth "conquering, and to conquer". They come under he "seals", and are used governmentally. In chapter 12 the same powers are viewed as direct instruments of Satan; that chapter brings in the imperial thought
{303}
in Christ, and when it is presented in Christ we see at once the opposition of Satan. The true attitude is exposed; the dragon is ready to swallow the Man-child who is to rule the nations with a rod of iron: Then you have a course of instruction which shows that the world-power is at the disposal of Satan. The world-power is seen in the beast and false prophet in chapter 13. In chapter 17 the same beast is seen under the influence of this corrupt woman; it is the religious system. All is under Satan in opposition to the imperial idea in Christ. God takes up the imperial idea in Christ; He is the Man-child; He is to rule the nations with a rod of iron. You have then a course of instruction which shows the world-power opposed to that, and chapter 19 celebrates the overthrow of what opposes.
The idea of imperialism originated with man, but God meets it in Christ. Nimrod was the originator of imperialism: it began where God separated man kind into nations. God divided them, and imperialism means that the division barriers are overthrown; the nations are united under one head. That is contrary to God's thought until Christ comes. God is hindering it now for the good of the saints. Christ is King of Israel, and also Ruler of all the nations.
He is King of kings and Lord of lords. Babylon's fall is in a sense really past, for God has intervened to break its power, and Babylon is not what it was. The system is seen here in its entirety. At that particular time one of the heads of the beast existed; the history of the ecclesiastical power is outlined here from its inception to the end.
The idea of Babylon is not limited to the Romish church. It encourages commercial and political prosperity. The high-tide of Catholicism covered the centuries immediately preceding the Reformation. The point to see is that God introduces imperialism in Christ, and that being established you have
{304}
brought into view the powers of evil against it. That is seen in chapters 12 - 19. Babylon is the world-power which took the place of Israel historically, and what marks it is corruption, and by this it captivates what is of God and brings it under its influence.
The whole power of the world is linked together here, but Babylon is strictly the religious side, so that you have the word "harlot". It is a great thing to get the thought of how God meets man's lawless effort. God meets this world's imperialism in Christ. Christ comes out and God is vindicated. It is encouraging to hear the call "Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her". In the light of that we should form a right judgment of this corrupt system now. "Come out of her, my people". All this has a *present* voice. These things are written to the churches and not to the remnant, and the voice is to us: "Come out of her". Christians are to be free of her influence. We have to distinguish between the commercial system and articles of commerce; articles of commerce are creatures of God, and you can use them in righteousness. There is nothing in Babylon, as a system, that is righteous. It is a system evolved out of evil.
These things have a present application, for it is here on earth, that we have an idea of right and wrong, and we are being educated now to the end that we may see God's judgments are true and right. Men have taken advantage of God's gracious dealings, and they do not learn righteousness. God will come in in judgment, direct judgment. His direct dealings now are in the assembly. Christians learn righteousness as under the direct dealings of God. We are enabled to pursue a calling righteously. Articles of commerce are God's creatures, but the point is to handle them righteously.
{305}
From the introduction of Paul's ministry we have heavenly principles brought in, and the assembly is regulated by those principles. The book of Revelation contemplates a heavenly people; the earth-dweller is left for judgment. We should handle articles of commerce so that we might have food and raiment, that you might live righteously before God and men. Piety implies that the articles of commerce are God's creatures, and therefore sanctified by the word of God and prayer. It is a triumph of Christianity that we are enabled to touch these things without being defiled.
Chapters 19 and 20
Chapter 19 is a triumphant chapter. For faith, chapter 12 is the beginning of the end. If the Man-child is received up, and heaven is cleared of evil, this is the guarantee that the earth shall be cleared. The twenty-four elders are in view here, referring to God's dealings with man in the Old Testament as well as in the New. They have experience in the dealings of God; that is the idea of eldership. The living creatures are representative of creation made to live by the power of God through redemption. It is when God's judgments are on the earth that the inhabitants learn righteousness. God is over-ruling things in the world, but in the assembly He lets nothing pass, everything is judged there. A Christian rules his house on that principle. Judgment begins at the house of God. Allowing things to pass brings in corruption. If the sin of Ananias and Sapphira had been allowed to pass, Satan would have succeeded in bringing in evil. If an individual lets things pass in himself it brings trouble. Revelation shows God intervening on earth to bring to pass His thoughts. These are wonderful chapters: you get remarkable expressions which show their extensive bearing. The
{306}
opening part of this chapter shows how completely heaven is in accord with what God is doing on earth. "Alleluia! Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God".
What brings out this ascription of praise is the knowledge and understanding, that "true and righteous are his judgments". That is a great principle. If difficulties arise amongst us, "the just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not do iniquity every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not", @Zephaniah 3: 5. You are encouraged to leave things with God in that way. The true way is to commit a thing to the Lord, He brings judgments to light morning by morning. I have often thought of a court in session in this respect: every case is tried in turn, and if you have a case, it will come up. He bringeth judgments to light morning by morning; yours is sure to come; you will get right judgment. The smoke going up for ever and ever is to show how thoroughly things are judged. There is a standing testimony to God's abhorrence of the evil of the system. The twenty-four elders fall and do homage, and say, "Amen, Alleluia!" The "Amen" shows a hearty assent to what God is doing; the "Alleluia" is praise. These things are now seen in the assembly.
In the conversion of a soul there is the breaking of the power of Satan: "Amen" is confirmatory of that, "Alleluia" is positive praise. We should ever be able to say "Amen" to what God does, and to praise Him for it. The marriage supper is now introduced, and "blessed are they who are called" to it. The Lord's supper was instituted with evil outside it supposes a scene of evil outside. The marriage supper supposes the scene outside cleared of evil.
The Lord had taken things in hand, and now the scene is cleared for the marriage supper. The Lamb's wife is there, and she has made herself ready. In
{307}
@Matthew 22 a certain man makes a marriage supper for his son; the son is in view and not the wife.
Here the wife is in evidence. She has made herself ready. It brings the assembly into evidence in appreciation of the Bridegroom. Righteousness is connected with that. It is given to her to be clothed in linen, pure and white. The fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints. Any one going on with the world is not in righteousness. God has given assurance that He will judge the world in righteousness. We should judge *ourselves* now. Righteousness is the fruit of the Spirit. The Lord brought in righteousness, He *loved* righteousness; the Holy Spirit brings that to pass in us. John says in his epistle, that if you practise righteousness, you are born of God. Nothing can be more important than the learning of righteousness. We have been brought into the school where righteousness is learned. Romans teaches righteousness.
The Lamb's wife is clothed in "fine linen". It is not flag or yarn, it is woven. The passage of the Red Sea refers to the death and resurrection of Christ, through which we are accounted righteous through faith in God, who raised Christ from the dead; but we have to *learn* righteousness, to practise it. We practise righteousness in the wilderness. We learn it there: the beginning of it is the water of Marah. God begins to teach righteousness there, and the first principle is that the flesh should not be ministered to, bitter waters typify that. If God had to judge it in Christ on the cross, He will not allow it in us. The end of that is that we see how bad the man is. The people spake against God, the God who had fed them and nourished them, and they spake against Moses, Christ in type. "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy". This shows what prophecy is; it is not a thing to be despised or belittled; it is the testimony of that Man in contrast
{308}
to all the so-called heroes that have prevailed in the world. The history of the world has manifested men with no regard for God; Jesus as Man is in contrast to them, and the spirit of prophecy is engaged with what Christ is.
What a Person Jesus is! That is the point to get into the soul. In principle it marks all prophecy. Look up, for instance, the history of the Assyrian and compare that with Jesus; that is the way to get at prophecy. Jesus is the very opposite to all that, and so the Babylonians, Persians and Greeks, the kind of men that rule in the world; compare them with Jesus. "The spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus". The force of it is that we suffer because we have the spirit of that Man. He was of no importance in the eyes of the world and so His life was taken from the earth. That life was the light of men, and prophecy would bring it in again. Philip preached *Christ* to the Samaritans, and he preached *Jesus* to the eunuch. If your soul is in the light of the anointed One it delivers you from the political order of things in the world, but the *Man* delivers you from *men*, however great they are.
We get here expressed in a few words the bringing to finality of everything that has to do with *time*.
We get things in heaven, in earth and under the earth; they are all concentrated upon one point.
Details that lead up to this and what follows are given us elsewhere, but here every issue of light and darkness are separated, one from the other, every issue of life and death, they are brought out and then separated eternally. It is the introduction of what is called the millennium, although that is not a word used in Scripture. It is here we get the specific term "one thousand years". At the outset there is angelic power, not human, to bind Satan.
When it was a question of a key to unlock the kingdom it was committed to a man, to Peter, but when
{309}
it is a question of putting under restraint the one who has deceived the nations, the power comes from heaven. There is no evidence of resistance on the part of Satan. Supreme power is in exercise. It is encouraging to see that there is power from heaven to handle such a being. Previously Satan had been cast out from heaven, never to return. The earth becomes the scene of his operations in a concentrated form of violence.
The great point here is that what is done, and the doing of it is by direct interposition of heavenly power, which at last comes to relieve the awful pressure of this present age. Then comes a complete Sabbath -- rest and peace -- with the Lord's presence, but preliminary to that the deceiver of nations is put under restraint, at the time of the "restitution of all things". But while evil is put under restraint the question of the *nature* of man is untouched; it is as with a wild beast, it may be tamed for a time, but its nature eventually breaks out if the opportunity arises.
We get a figure of this in the incident of the Lord in the country of the Gadarenes. He casts out the evil spirit from the man, and gives him deliverance, but there was no moral work, except for the one delivered. It is, there that the nature of man comes out, for they prayed Jesus to depart out of their coasts; so here, after the period of one thousand years, when temptations of similar character to those presented in the garden of Eden are again presented, men fall again. All this is clearly foretold in our passage. It will be no surprise to heaven or the saints in the final issue; there is nothing unforeseen.
There is no symbolic language used, the final expression of all the heading up of time is in the plainest and simplest language, so that he that runs may read.
{310}
In connection with the world to come, beside the removal of the deceiving power of Satan, the new covenant is established with Israel, and there is the diffusion of the knowledge of the Lord, but where there is not a moral work in the soul in that day there is no more effect produced than in this day.
In other words, it will be as true then as now that there must be a divine work in the soul in order to appreciate Christ. In the absence of that, while the powers of evil are withdrawn and man universally enjoys the beneficence and reign of blessing, when the old temptations return the old effect is reproduced where there is no work of God.
{311}
WISDOM'S CHILDREN
@Proverbs 30: 27; @Matthew 5: 21 - 26
It is on my mind to show how we are to walk together. You will observe that the locusts referred to here are one of four species of creatures that are said to be exceeding wise. Christianity is a dispensation in which wisdom shines. The gospels present to us wisdom personified in Christ, and the effect of the ministry of Christ was to produce children of wisdom, and these children of wisdom were to carry on wisdom's activities during the period of the absence of the Lord from the earth.
Among other things, what you find in the Acts is that the children of wisdom walk together. The word *together* is very prominent in the record, at least, the idea conveyed in it is. We are told that the Lord "added to the assembly (probably it is 'added together') such as should be saved". In the light of that in the next chapter, you find two of them, Peter and John, walking up together into the temple.
It may seem a very insignificant matter that they should have walked up *together*, but they walked in wisdom to the temple, hence they walked *together*.
Now, there was a man lame from his birth lying at the temple gate, and here are two of wisdom's children walking together. It is a most remarkable incident in its bearing. There is human need at the gate of the temple, but the temple was unavailing; human need was unalleviated by the temple. Peter said to the man, "Look on us". He did not say, "Look on *me*". He said "Look on us".
Look on whom? Two of wisdom's children walking in wisdom's dignity, walking together.
Now that is a pattern of the Christian dispensation in its bearing towards the need of this world. Suppose you contrast that with what we have today.
Here are two outwardly insignificant men, they have
{312}
no silver, they have no gold, they have no learning according to man; they have no social or religious status; they have no political status, and yet they appeal to the man in need; and they say, "Look on us". Now, contrast that with what we have become accustomed to. Suppose we, as *outwardly* responsible for and connected with Christendom, say, "Look on us". What a spectacle! Is there any wisdom, any love, *outwardly*? The whole fabric is so far removed from that which Peter and John presented to that man, that it is utterly unrecognisable. We have to accept it; we cannot escape from it. Obviously it is wisdom on the part of God's people at the present time to accept it; yet, if we are to be locusts; that is, among the wise but weak things in the world, our course is to go back to *first principles*. You only require another and yourself to get the working out of first principles.
In referring to first principles, I would for a moment suggest the idea of *brethren*. We can lift up our heads in regard of that precious designation. I know of no designation that one cherishes more than *brethren*, and what one finds in Scripture is that recovery is to that. Referring back for a moment to the Old Testament, Joseph is the type of Christ as having brethren. It is true that Isaac had brethren, and it is true that Jacob had a brother; but Joseph is singled out by the Spirit as the type of Christ as having brethren. Let me call your attention in this connection to the fact that at the first meeting of Joseph with his brethren he elicited from them the truth as to first principles. What was that truth?
It was confessed in this way: "Thy servants are *twelve* brethren, the sons of one man". Not *eleven* brethren. Never omit from your mind or your heart any one of the saints. The confession made was remarkable, a forecast of the ultimate result of the meeting with Joseph. What a happy prospect for
{313}
us as having come to the acknowledgement of the truth of *brethren*. You say, They are but few. Wait a bit; we shall find them *all* presently, and there will be *many*. The moment is fast approaching when the "many, brethren" shall appear. Judah and his brethren had not very long to wait to find the twelfth. They had only eleven; they confessed that there were twelve. Presently, Joseph the twelfth appears in glory. I ask you in passing whether you have come to that. For the moment I am not raising the question as to the state becoming to brethren. I want to come to that directly, but I do ask you whether you have come to recognise the principle that there are *twelve brethren*. What I mean by that is that the complete number exists; there is not one left out.
When we proceed with the narrative in Genesis we find that Judah is brought to the state becoming to brethren. It had been a long, I may say painful, process that brought him to it; but in the final crisis the state which is found in Judah is becoming to brethren. In this respect it is no question of having them all. The point is for you and for me to see to it that we are in the state of a brother. If the state suited to a brother is found in you, you will find others. Now Judah says to Joseph in the crisis at the end, "My lord asked his servants, saying, Have you a father, or a brother?" A wonderful question to be raised! Has it ever been raised in your soul? The question as to your Father and as to your brethren? That is a family question; that is not a national question. There is far too much national sentiment among God's people. It is quite right to have national sentiment in regard to a "holy nation", but where is the holy nation? Is this country a holy nation, or any other country today? There is none. Do not put up one against another; not one of them is holy; not one of them. The patience of
{314}
God lingers over them, not on account of their holiness or their righteousness; the explanation of it is all found in the nature of God; He is long-suffering, not willing that any should perish. There is only one "holy nation", and that is God's people, who have His Spirit. But there is a family, and that family has one Father and it is composed of brethren. And so you find Judah evincing the state becoming a brother. He is prepared to be a bond-slave for ever for Benjamin. Is not that the spirit of a brother? How different when he became a party to the selling of Joseph. Now he is prepared to be a bond-slave for ever for his youngest brother Benjamin. The state becoming a brother is that which is seen in consideration for the Father and in consideration for the brethren.
Well now, having said all that about brethren, I turn to the passage in Proverbs, because in the light of Christianity it is really based on the relationship suited to brethren. The love that is becoming in brethren works out in such wise as to bring us into reproach in the world. The locusts are little but they are wise. Now wherein is their wisdom seen? It is seen in this, that they go forth by bands. In the economy set up in Paul's ministry the brethren were to go by bands. I want to show you how it came about in a simple, practical way. Because, although we can never, as a whole, hope to present anything in the way of public testimony now, we can return to first principles and maintain them in so far as we are in touch with our brethren. And I repeat, the more you find the state becoming to brethren the more brethren you will find. You never surrender in your soul the principle of the twelve. I use the number twelve as a symbol of the whole. So that you meet a Christian anywhere, and if you have evidence of his genuineness, he is one of the number. I want to show you how you are to treat
{315}
the brethren. I refer to the passage I read in @Matthew 5. Now the gospel of Matthew is distinguished from the other gospels, and among other things, by this, that it presents a *new legislation*. I have no doubt that Mark gives us a new kind of ministry, whereas Luke gives us a new order of things. Matthew gives us from the ministry of Christ a new legislation. Hence the Lord is seen in this gospel as going up into a mountain and sitting down and calmly setting forth a law for the government of His people. Now He comes to a phase of the law which has reference to brethren. How are we to regard them? How are we to speak to one another? The Lord begins by saying, "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill ... but I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment". Now the Lord intends to convey by this teaching, that we are to regard each other *not* as in the flesh. I believe that the secret of all the dissension and dissatisfaction amongst the saints lies in taking account of each other as in the flesh. First of all you are angry without a cause; then secondly you say, My brother is vain; he is a vain fellow, "Raca". He is vain if you look at him in the flesh. There is not one of us who is not vain after the flesh, and if you look at your brother in that light he is certainly vain. But what are you doing in looking at him in that light? You are uncovering his nakedness, and I leave it with you to find out from Scripture what that means. The Lord does not hesitate here to indicate to you the seriousness of it. I want you to follow what I am saying as to uncovering the nakedness of a brother. In @Genesis 3 you have the idea of covering. God brought in a covering for both Adam and Eve, but in chapter 9 Ham would set it aside, and he became witness of the nakedness of his father; he disregarded the covering.
{316}
Now it is quite possible that a brother may expose himself. Alas! we are all too conscious of this danger. Noah exposed himself, he got drunk. You might say Ham had a very good reason for speaking about his father. Very well. The Spirit of God tells us that Canaan was cursed for it. Shem and Japheth, on the other hand, went backwards with a garment and covered the nakedness of their father. I refer to that so that you may see the importance of taking account of the saints as covered by Christ. If you habituate yourself to taking account of them as in the flesh you will come into judgment governmentally, depend upon it. The Canaanitish nations came under God's curse for it. "Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be". And for what? For disregarding, for thinking and speaking lightly of the nakedness of his near relative. There is a heavy penalty attached to it, and so in the typical books you find that the uncovering of a near relative is prohibited with the curse of God. The opposite to that is that we look at each other as clothed with the glorious garment of Christ. How different a brother is now! You would not go without him now. So you come to the altar of God with your offering, @Matthew 5: 23. What about your brother now? You remember him there. Depend upon it you will have cause to remember him there. "And there rememberest that thy brother" -- thy brother -- "hath aught against thee". What about it now? He is your brother. Ah! you say he has no good reason to have anything against me; he has no reason to be angry with me. Is that the language of your lips? Well, your brother has aught against you; you must have him, he is your brother, he is one of the twelve, and God will not have a vacant space; they must all be there. You will remember how in the book of Deuteronomy, chapter 16, all the males are told to appear before God three times in the year.
{317}
You would not be there without one. Here is one man coming down from Dan, another coming up from Beersheba, another from the west of Naphtali; they are all together. You will remember again, as recorded in the book of Judges, chapter 21, how that Benjamin was missing. Rightly he had come under severe punishment, but the tribes felt the loss of their brother. It is a true sign of being with God in your soul when you feel the absence of a brother.
Well now, you have come to the altar of God, and your brother is not there. Well, you say, why is he not here? You kept him away. He has something against you, that is why. You say, he has no reason, but nevertheless he has something against you.
What are you going to do about it? God is raising the question with you. Go and get him. Depend upon it that is largely our responsibility today. We are to be set for the recovery of our brethren. God will take up their side some day, they will come to the altar; there is no hope for them if they do not. They may claim to be brethren, but if they do not come to the altar of God they have no claim to the title. But some day they will come; they will all come and then you may depend upon it that God will raise the question with them. But never mind, for the moment your brother is not there. The twelve are not together. Now the Lord says, "Leave there thy gift before the altar ... first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift". You do not bring him there, but you go and remove what hinders him coming. That is according to the Christian dispensation; and it is now a time of recovery, recovery to first principles.
Now the Lord proceeds to a stronger and more serious view of the situation. It is not now simply that the brother has something against you. There is an adversary. He has anger in his heart; he is against you. What about him now. Agree with
{318}
him. Get into agreement with him. What agreement? Agreement to differ? No; that is the most abominable theory of the moment. To agree to differ with a man is a most abominable theory in the light of Christianity. How then are you to agree with him? You must bring him in the state of his soul to the truth as it is in Jesus. In Jesus the truth of a brother is seen. He is the real Joseph, the brother born for adversity. He had ten enemies, but he recovers them; ten of his brethren were his enemies, and he recovered them all. No one was left out. So the present time is the time of recovery.
But it comes about in one arriving in his soul at the true state becoming to brethren, and if he arrives at that state he must have them all.
Now it is in that way we come back to the idea presented in @Proverbs 30: 27. We come back to the idea of a people who have no outward leader, no king. The locusts, it is said, have no king, yet they go together; they go in bands, and that is said to be their characteristic wisdom. The conies have wisdom, and the ants have wisdom, and the locusts have wisdom, and their wisdom is seen in the fact that they go together. They are together in heart.
It is a most painful thing to be agreeing to differ, or for the sake of outward appearances; to present a good front to others. The thought of God is that we should be free in our affections, Christ being the commanding object of each of us; as it is said, He is the Firstborn among many brethren.
The best way I know of to arrive at the truth of conditions in heaven is to apprehend what Christ is to His brethren, because that is a great feature in heaven, Christ with His brethren in the enjoyment of the Father's affections.
May the Lord give us in these last days to cultivate the brotherly spirit!
{319}
*Pages 319 - 407 -- "The Body, Holding the Head, and Union", London, 1914 (Volume 23)*.
THE SPIRIT AS LIFE
@Romans 8:1 - 17; @Romans 12:1 - 5
T.H.R. I think it is important that we should see that in the end of chapter 7 it is learnt that man after the flesh is done with, and then the Spirit brings God in in chapter 8. The things of man are done with, for all ends in "O wretched man that I am!" and now the Spirit brings God in in chapter 8.
J.T. And in a sense, in the power of the Spirit, you have man adjusted in chapter 8. In chapter 5 you have the love of God shed abroad in the heart by the Spirit, from the divine side, but in chapter 8 the man is adjusted according to God.
D.L.H. That is to say, God has not given up His glory in relation to man, but all is maintained.
T.H.R. Now man's resource is in God; that is, the administration of all that God is in Christ sets one free by the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus.
J.T. I was thinking of the necessity for man to be adjusted here in righteousness, in the light of what we see in this epistle. God has come out in order to clear everything away from His side, but then man has to be adjusted here in regard to God, so that, before we could touch anything in regard to the body, we must be adjusted; that is, the relation between God and us must be adjusted, and this is brought about by the Spirit.
D.L.H. Is that brought about by the presentation of God?
J.T. I thought perhaps that is more in the earlier part of the epistle. The Spirit in chapter 5 is from God's side.
T.H.R. I think it is; the Spirit of God brings in the things of God in this chapter.
{320}
J.S.G. Do I understand that necessarily there must be what we may call two sides? First of all God Himself is brought in as a commanding object; that is chapter 5. Now in chapter 8 we have a people who are of God, and who find everything in God. The point in chapter 5 is God coming in to fill the scene, and in chapter 8 it is the people who live in the Spirit in and by the revelation of God.
T.H.R. In chapter 8 you get the real answer to the question "who shall deliver me?"
W.J. In the earlier part of the epistle it is what God is for us; here, how we can be for God.
J.T. That is, a man who has the Spirit can consider for God. God commends Himself to us, that is His side; now what can you be for God? So you take up the covenant, the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in you; you begin at the bottom.
D.L.H. God has His own way to effect that, and that is by the Spirit.
E.J.McB. You could scarcely realise what the "wretched man" is save in the light of what God is.
F.H.B. I thought the effect of having the Spirit of God is that what has been revealed of God may be made effectual in us.
J.T. Is not that a very important point in the development of the testimony, that divine thoughts should take form in man down here?
D.L.H. We cannot separate between these different parts of Romans; we can distinguish them, but we should never get chapter 8 if we had not chapter 5.
J.T. You have a deliverer, "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord". Christ in that way secures a place in the heart.
Rem. In Exodus God says "I am come down to deliver", and here it is as if God, having finished with Israel, opens everything in Christ in a new and complete way.
{321}
W.J. I think it is important to see that everything has to be established here in order to enter into other things.
J.T. In order to touch the body you must be adjusted in regard to things here. How could you come out in the truth of the body unless you have paid your debts here?
T.H.R. Like a general, he cannot advance into a new country if his communications are not clear. You must be adjusted here before you can enter into the heavenly country.
J.T. Many have the Spirit and are in the body from the divine side, but practical obligations here are not met, and therefore the thing is null and void to such.
F.H.B. It is one thing to have the Spirit, and another thing to walk in the Spirit.
J.T. And to make *use* of the Spirit, so that we should be enabled to discharge every moral obligation.
W.J. We have in @Romans 8 the Spirit in order to fulfil those obligations. Our state is in the Spirit, and so we have ability to enter into what is divine.
What you mean as to paying debts is that there is love Godward and love manward?
J.T. Quite so. Many a man has capital but he does not use it, therefore he does not get rich. Using the Spirit is minding the things of the Spirit. You disallow the flesh and regard the Spirit; you sell the oil. If we have the Spirit the thing is to *use* the Spirit and not simply to rest in *having* the Spirit.
J.S.G. The point in @Romans 8 is not only having the Spirit but having a new state in the Spirit.
J.T. I think from this point of view the affections developed by the Spirit are covenant affections. We have to distinguish between covenant affections and family affections. I think covenant relationships
{322}
involve that we are equal to the obligations of the contract entered into.
W.J. You must be in righteousness to enjoy relationship.
T.H.R. You live in the Spirit; the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. That is a resurrection life which He has as coming out of death, that entirely supersedes the old thing, it delivers you from the governing principle of the old thing. The governing principle for you now is the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, and that displaces the other principle which belongs to nature, that is the law of sin and death. You must get that displaced before you can goon.
F.H.B. Before we can make use of the Spirit we must know the object for which the Spirit is given.
T.H.R. We have the Spirit as the life of another Man.
J.T. It is remarkable how it is put here, "that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us ... who walk ... after the Spirit", as if it would emphasise the place the Spirit has.
T.H.R. It is the Spirit as life. It springs up and has Christ as its source. You have the breathing of the life of Christ, and then you have the Spirit, that that life may develop in all its proper relationships.
J.T. It is well to take things as they stand. "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death" is a statement by itself, which refers back to chapter 7; then it goes on to say, that what the "law could not do", God did in sending His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, "that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". I think we ought to keep clear the importance of the Spirit.
J.S.G. "If Christ be in you, the Spirit is life on
{323}
account of righteousness", but does it say anywhere that we have life, or that we are in life? I think it is a very important distinction, and I do not see how we could be spoken of as being in life from the point of view of @Romans 8.
Rem. What about chapter 6?
J.S.G. But chapter 6 is reckoning.
Rem. In chapter 5 you have justification of life.
J.S.G. Yes; towards all, because of the new Head. How I understand it is that in chapter 5 God is revealed, so that He is the absorbing object.
In chapter 6 it is the mind, so that a person reckons with God; then when you come to chapter 8 you have a people here on earth set up in the power of the Spirit of God, so that they are marked by righteousness, love, and the different characteristics mentioned in the chapter.
J.T. @Romans 8 gives us the spirit of things. It would be going too far to say that it introduces the things themselves; it is the Spirit of life, the Spirit of sonship, so that the point is to emphasise the Spirit.
T.H.R. I quite agree with that. I think it is the Spirit giving the character of Christ in the soul.
It is not the Spirit alone, but the Spirit as characterising us.
J.T. You would not bring Canaan into @Romans 8.
You have the spirit of things in the wilderness, and in virtue of that you have what answers to God in the wilderness.
P.R.M. What is the force of "ye shall live" in verse 13?
J.T. I think that is life as power. Not eternal life exactly; eternal life is in Christ, and belongs to Canaan, whereas here, and in virtue of the Spirit, it is "ye shall live". The emphasis is on the Spirit, that by the Spirit a state of things is brought about in the soul which is life as power.
{324}
T.H.R. If we have not the life of the heavenly Man, we shall not want to go to heaven.
J.T. We want to have all the things behind us settled before we can go on.
T.H.R. It is life in resurrection; the life which He breathed into His disciples.
D.L.H. I do not think it is our resurrection.
J.T. That is an important distinction. It is an abstract statement; "life in Christ Jesus" is Canaan, but it is not developed in the passage. The point is to show what the Spirit is in the wilderness, so that he begins with the practical results, that the righteous requirements of the law should be fulfilled in us.
J.S.G. Does not the verse quoted help, "ye *shall* live"? The result is that you go over Jordan, but does Romans reach as far as that.
J.T. No. The point in Romans is to emphasise what the Spirit is to us.
D.L.H. We get Christ risen, but not that we are risen.
H.D'A.C. There is something in the fact that it is "ye *shall* live", not ye live.
J.T. I should think there is a very great deal in that.
H.D'A.C. You get the elements that lead to new creation here.
J.T. It is a result, but the result is not developed.
There is a basis laid here for all that follows.
D.L.H. The great point in Romans is, that man has utterly broken down in his responsibility, to God, and God comes out, reveals Himself and finds a Head for man, and then man receives the Spirit of the Head, and this is in view of his maintaining the responsibility which the creature ought to maintain.
Is not that the great point in Romans?
J.T. I think so; it is the adjustment of the relations between God and man. God and man are
{325}
brought together in righteousness, so that a good Roman is prepared for the assembly. I have often thought that before you introduce the idea of heaven the earthly side must be adjusted.
J.V. Would the type be from the brazen serpent to the Jordan?
J.T. Yes, so that it is Deuteronomy ground.
J.S.G. I suppose that the great principles will apply to others besides the assembly.
J.T. But no matter what is touched by the assembly, there is a colour given to it which is not found with other families.
A.S.L. You say eternal life belongs to the land?
J.T. Yes, eternal life is in Christ Jesus. In chapter 5 it is "through", in chapter 8 it is "in Christ Jesus", and "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus".
A.S.L. But you do not get eternal life in Colossians or Ephesians.
J.T. Because, as has been said, generally eternal life is for the earth.
Ques. Is it life potentially in @Romans 8?
J.T. Yes. It is a question of power in the soul. Eternal life is God's great thought for man. Hence it is wonderful how it is presented in @John 3.
J.S.G. In @Romans 8 is it what we may call the elements of the person's spiritual being who will enter into the land?
J.T. Yes, in the Spirit: you have in principle every phase of the constitution of the person who enters into Canaan.
J.S.G. The person is viewed as on Deuteronomy ground, or in the state that is necessary to pass over Jordan.
J.T. Yes, in the recognition of the Spirit you are prepared for headship.
{326}
Ques. Does it come to light as led of the Spirit?
J.T. Those who enter in come to light as disallowing the flesh. They come to light down here so that God is justified in having them in heaven.
J.S.G. Am I right in saying that if we see with God, we can take account of ourselves as those whom God has made to live, having a being with these characteristics?
J.T. You want the consciousness of the Spirit, the Spirit of life, the Spirit of sonship; you may have the consciousness of all that.
J.S.G. Having learnt what I am as a sinner, I want to learn what I am in connection with God and Christ, as having been formed and set up in the Spirit.
J.T. I think we ought to be very simple about righteousness. The Spirit enables us to fulfil every moral obligation. There is no progress made in our souls unless the obligations are fulfilled.
W.J. There lies the difficulty. We have no ability to enter into assembly truth unless we are established in righteousness.
J.T. In @2 Kings 4 you have the widow; she has the oil but she is a debtor; she sells the oil and pays her debts. And then what follows is in regard to a "great woman". Who is great but one who is superior to what is down here? You are great by what you sell and make use of. God can recognise a people here, but they have to come up to the covenant. It is most interesting in @Exodus 19 to see the pains Jehovah takes to commend Himself to His people. "You have seen how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings", etc. Now, what about you?
'Is it worth your while to enter into covenant relations with Me?' Then in putting out our hand and committing ourselves to God the obligations arise, and in the power of the Spirit we love God and our brethren.
{327}
Rem. It is an important truth, not only to have the Spirit, but to use the Spirit; how does it work out?
J.T. You recognise the Spirit as the subjective power instead of the flesh. In everyday life you recognise the Spirit. It comes to this, there is constant self-judgment. Hence in the feasts; the feast of unleavened bread is to be kept seven days, but in regard to Pentecost there is no time stated. If you maintain self-judgment there is no limit to what you may have in the Spirit.
Geo.C. Is it not important to keep together that having Christ as my object, the Spirit is free to act?
"They ministered to the Lord and fasted"; then the Spirit said: "Separate me Barnabas and Saul".
J.T. So in chapter 13 there is a very important addition. In Jerusalem in the earlier chapters the Spirit was free. "He hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear". There was the day of Pentecost, the most wonderful day in a sense that ever dawned.
"He hath shed forth this", and in the power of that Spirit they were speaking of the wonderful works of God. As things proceeded in Jerusalem the Spirit became hampered, and hence in chapter 13, which you have quoted, you come to a fresh start. You get "The Spirit said" -- the Spirit is free now some where else (in Antioch). So the great thing for us is to make room for the Spirit, then we shall have refreshing ministry.
Geo.C. Is there not a danger of being more dependent on the Spirit than on the Lord?
J.T. I think there has been more sin against the Spirit than against Christ. Where would the Spirit lead a soul to but to Christ? But then the Lord formally points out how terrible the sin against the Holy Spirit is. The sin against the Son of man can be forgiven, but not the sin against the Holy Spirit.
In the history of Christendom that is so; all the
{328}
great bodies recognise Christ, but what about the Spirit?
J.S.G. Is it not a disgrace to us to be so small?
W.J. It is as though we had &pound;20,000 a year income and were just living on a &pound;5 note. You are made to feel that in @Romans 8.
J.T. I think in the evangelical world there are a great number of people who are satisfied with having the Spirit, who do not acquire the use of the Spirit, they do not sell the oil, they have not proceeded to pay the debts. It means the moving out of one thing into another. I think I can tell you what the result will be if we honestly desire to pay the debts.
I believe we shall find our brethren. There is something very honest about a man who hunts up someone to whom he owes something -- I mean the brother.
Joseph's brethren came to him; they did not say they were eleven brethren, they said, "Thy servants are *twelve* brethren, the sons of one man", and if you are a righteous man you owe every one of them something.
D.L.H. In Romans you are to owe no man any thing save to love one another.
J.T. "Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may show the kindness of God?" that is the idea of righteousness; David was looking for the man. Judah thought for his father and for his brethren, and then the disclosure was made. So we may depend upon it that if the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in us we shall find the brethren.
H.D'A.C. Hezekiah invited all his brethren throughout Israel.
D.L.H. The great point in Romans is the fulfilling of the responsibilities of the creature -- man -- towards the Creator, and the way that is produced is that God presents Himself, finds a Head for man, and one is set up in the Spirit of another Man in order
{329}
to fulfil every responsibility in which one has utterly broken down as a man after the flesh.
J.T. That is, while the recovery is in man, it is man in Christ; hence this chapter brings in the spirit of that Man.
Ques. Would you say that walking in righteousness leaves room for the Spirit?
J.T. Of course it does.
J.V. It is a remarkable thing that after @Numbers 21, wherever the children of Israel rested, it was by water courses.
J.T. In the earlier part of the book of Exodus the water was outside of them, "they drank of the rock which followed them"; it is very touching in that way the water always goes with them. But then in @Romans 8 it is the water in you.
J.S.G. Why, in verse 2, does the apostle only speak of himself, whilst in verse 4 he speaks generally?
J.T. I think verse 2 is abstract -- he could not say it definitely of all the saints.
J.S.G. Does not that help as to what we have had? But when you come to verse 4, he introduces abruptly certain kind of persons.
F.H.B. The second verse no one could predicate of any one else.
T.H.R. The Spirit of the life of Christ must spring up in its own affections and nature, and therefore in John's epistle it is the divine nature that springs up; it does not come in the way of commandment, but nature.
J.T. If the point in the scripture is the Spirit, it is important to get what the thought of the Spirit is.
T.H.R. What is so remarkable is this, in connection with the Spirit in us as life, it produces in me all sorts of desires and affections in connection with Christ, and yet they are mine.
J.T. What I see here is that if you pursue the course of the chapter you are set in activity, you
{330}
find the brethren of Christ. The effect of recognising the Spirit is that we walk in righteousness here, but in addition to that God's sons come to light. The mind of God is known by the Spirit, and the brethren of Christ come to light, but the prominent feature here is that it is through the recognition of the Spirit.
W.J. I would like to ask, in connection with what was read in chapter 12, why in Romans you get "many members in one body", while it is the reverse in Corinthians?
D.L.H. Is not the body introduced in Romans in relation to the first circle in which the Christian's responsibility may be given effect to?
J.T. It is not the body of Christ exactly, but the saints begin to recognise their obligations to one another.
T.H.R. It is, "as God has given to every man".
J.S.G. We should bear in mind that in Romans the question is rather the *presence* of the Spirit, and not so much the *formative work* of the Spirit; but when you come to Colossians, Ephesians and John's epistles you have not only His presence, but the formative work of the Spirit. In Romans it is the presence of the Spirit, but not the formative work of the Spirit.
T.H.R. Like Israel, you have got redemption; but you begin, not with the law, but with the Spirit.
J.S.G. Take, for instance, Colossians; the saints there are viewed with "Christ in them"; that is a fuller thought than anything in Romans: Then in John's epistles the saints are viewed as formed in the divine nature.
T.H.R. In the Spirit you have everything.
J.S.G. But what do you mean by having got it?
It all lies in the Spirit, but the person may not have got what lies in the Spirit. The babe is not a young man until he has grown to a young man.
{331}
F.H.B. We have the beginning of that formative work, because it says, "If Christ be in you".
J.T. There are certain things introduced into the chapter to complete the subject, but they are not the main thought. You get "life in Christ Jesus", but it is not developed in the chapter; so "if Christ be in you", but it does not say He is in you; it is not developed, but it lays the basis for wonderful things to be developed. It opens up a wonderful thing, that "ye shall live". You are like the woman in @2 Kings 4.
J.S.G. Does it not mean, in speaking about leading, going over Jordan?
J.T. Yes.
W.J. In Colossians you get very little about the Spirit.
J.T. Because you have it here in Romans.
J.S.G. It would hardly be right to say that we have everything by the possession of the Spirit, but we have the Spirit, that we may *enter into* every thing. It is of the utmost importance, that if you take things subjectively, we have nothing but what we have grown into, and that is by the work of the Spirit.
A.S.L. On the gift side you have everything?
J.S.G. Certainly. Do you not think that this is the secret of the present state of Christendom; they ignore the work of the Spirit?
E.J.McB. I think another very important truth is that it is not the Spirit that is formed in you, but Christ. Having the Spirit is the very necessary equipment for the formation of Christ, but it does not say that you have been formed in Christ.
Ques. Could persons have the Spirit and not have Christ in them?
J.T. They could; the Corinthians had not Christ in them.
{332}
J.S.G. In Galatians the apostle travailed in birth until Christ was formed in them. It is a solemn thing that we may have the Spirit and yet be unspiritual.
Ques. Where, in connection with this subject, do the exhortations come in?
J.T. The exhortations are based on the doctrine of the epistle. In chapter 12, How do you present your bodies a living sacrifice? By the Spirit.
Ques. They express righteousness; that is love.
J.T. Quite so.
F.H.B. Is not righteousness expressed in three ways; toward God, toward Christ and toward the brethren?
J.T. So that you fully answer to the covenant; you are maintaining your side of it.
J.S.G. You would link chapter 13 with chapter 12. As I have to pass through man's kingdom my righteousness is to be subject to the powers that be, and to "owe no man anything". Chapters 12 and 13 give the expansion of what practical righteousness is.
W.J. Is it clear that the subject before us is the body?
J.T. We are as yet only looking at the basis of it.. If you find your brethren on the principle of righteousness then you are going to keep them. You do not want to let *one* of your brethren go, and you set your mind on keeping them. Judah said "we be twelve brethren". That is to say, we keep each other by love. "By love serve one another", and "the body builds itself up in love". The Spirit is the link as to principle; as to fact it is love.
Rem. The apostle was walking in righteousness in chapter 1, and so he was a debtor to all men, and was ready to preach the gospel at Rome also, that he might discover the brethren there.
{333}
J.S.G. It is remarkable that all are made to drink into one Spirit, and so in that way you have the foundation idea of the body, which is expressed by walking in love.
J.T. It comes to this; Can you spare *any* brother? You cannot get along without the brethren, but can you get along without *one* of them? "There is little Benjamin".
D.L.H. I suppose the point here is, that we are delivered from independency by the Spirit; secondly, we are dependent, we are looking about for others, and we are necessary to each other.
A.S.L. It was said that in @Romans 12 it is not the body of Christ.
J.T. "We being many are one body in Christ".
That has reference more to what we are to each other than as setting forth Christ down here.
J.S.G. The point is really to check lawlessness and everything of that kind. We have to be consistent with the fact that we are one body in Christ.
A.S.L. It is on the line of responsibility.
J.T. What is in the mind in the expression "Christ's body" is, that you see Christ, but it is more here what you are to me and what I am to you. So one has a true estimate of himself and of others.
F.H.B. I think it was brought in to correct thinking too much of ourselves.
J.T. If you have anything it belongs to all, but it does not detract from any; you find that in a meeting where persons have grown a bit you have more power. There is no cause for envy, for what we have is mutual.
A.S.L. But that supposes state.
J.T. I think it is a great thing to have a good supply of unleavened bread. I was thinking of Lot; it is a very remarkable thing that directly the angels came to Sodom the unleavened bread was there.
{334}
It is a very remarkable thing that he had it in Sodom.
Rem. Scripture speaks of him as "that righteous man".
J.T. You can understand it in the light of the New Testament. The thought of the body breaks down all national feeling and all that sort of thing; the body is one.
Rem. It seems consistent with what you get in Romans.
J.S.G. Does it not help to notice that in Romans it is saints viewed as in the kingdom of God; now when you come to Colossians the saints are viewed there as forming the body of Christ.
W.J. How necessary therefore the truth of the kingdom.
Rem. In Romans it is on earth and for the earth; does Romans carry you farther than that?
J.T. It lays the basis for greater things. It would be a great thing if we were led to seek out our brethren, to pay our debts. Take @Matthew 5: 23, "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest". You are reminded there that you must have your brother, so that whilst we must be separated from them we *feel* the separation.
J.S.G. And I allow nothing on my side that would hinder.
J.T. It is very serious to have a quarrel with your brother.
F.H.B. It may not be due to us.
J.T. But still it is a serious thing that there should be a breach, and you should feel the existence of a breach.
Rem. You would not say that an adversary is a brother.
J.T. But there it *is*, there is an adversary.
{335}
D.L.H. With regard to one having a right estimate of oneself, I suppose we ought to have a right estimate of our place in regard to the body, so as to fulfil it.
J.T. I suppose that would be implied in thinking *soberly*. In the working out of the truth of the body, whilst love is the subjective power, it is the working out of *wisdom*. So, in the epistle to the Ephesians, "the all various wisdom of God" is seen in the assembly. But how? By each member becoming wise.
Ques. How do you get the right estimate?
D.L.H. In thinking so as to be wise. God has given me the Spirit so that I may answer to every relation in which I am set, but if I do not know the relationship I cannot fulfil it.
{336}
CHRIST AS HEAD
@Colossians 1: 12 - 22; @Colossians 2: 18, 19
P.R.M. It is not in our subject, but I do not think that in Colossians there is a single quotation from the Old Testament.
J.T. There are allusions to the Old Testament.
P.R.M. But no direct quotation. Paul does not go to the Old Testament to bring forward the truth which is here. It shows what a new character of things it is altogether.
W.J. Do you think the kingdom of the Son of His love links on to what we had this morning?
J.T. I think so, but the heart is more directly engaged with the Person who is introduced. The thought makes room in the heart for all that is to follow.
D.L.H. It is the greatness and glory of the One who is the Head.
F.H.B. It sets forth the greatness and glory of the Person, and that One is the Head of the body.
J.T. It is the peculiar relation in which He is, Son to the Father, the Son of the Father's love, which makes room in the heart for the great things which are to follow. No one appreciates the greatness of the position which is filled by Christ until he loves Christ. It is one whom you love who is seen in this great position.
W.T. I suppose this is the highest thought we have of the kingdom?
J.T. I think so; there is the thought of affection in it. From that point the apostle starts off with the great things which he introduces.
Ques. Is your thought as to the kingdom of the Son of His love, that it is the place He has in the affections of the Father?
J.T. It is the kingdom of such a Person as that.
{337}
Ques. Would @Romans 8 carry us as far as the Jordan, and this epistle to the other side?
J.T. I think @Romans 8 is Deuteronomy ground. The believer is there viewed as having formally come to the recognition of the Spirit, and now there is room for Christ in the heart. Whilst we must not lay too much stress on the Old Testament in this connection, I think Deuteronomy suggests the thought of headship, because headship implies, that the one who is head has an interest in you and that he has wisdom, so that whilst in the end of Numbers you have the statement, "these are the commandments of the Lord", and "the Lord commanded Moses", in the book of Deuteronomy it is what Moses himself says to the people.
W.J. In that way you would say the Head is prefigured?
J.T. I think the suggestion is there.
D.L.H. Is your thought that, in type, He is Head in Deuteronomy rather than Mediator?
J.T. Yes. The mediatorial system is not prominent in Deuteronomy, and so the priesthood is not much in view, but the people are viewed as in direct relationship with God. In fact in one chapter they are called the sons of God. We are reminded in chapter 1 that there are only eleven days¬ journey from mount Sinai to Kadesh, whereas it really took forty years, meaning that from the divine side the distance is very short. The people are reminded that it was so; but although the distance was so short they did not avail themselves of it. I think there is great slothfulness in us, as in them, to lay hold of what is so near to us. You get the house of God in @Genesis 28, it was quite near to heaven, it was "the gate of heaven", and yet Jacob did not take advantage of it, though there was a testimony that the distance was very short. I think it is developed here that it is Christ who draws us in. There is
{338}
nothing about the ark of the covenant at Kadesh, there was no river to cross then. So the fact is we are drawn in after Christ, and I think the wonderful things stated here are in order to set our souls in motion.
W.J. I suppose the Jordan is in chapter 2?
J.T. I think so, the wilderness things are passed over.
Ques. What are the wonderful things you refer to?
J.T. What is said of Christ; He is "the image of the invisible God;" "the firstborn of every creature;" "all things created by him and for him".
These things are set before the soul to establish there the sense of the greatness of Christ.
J.S.G. I suppose in chapter 1 we have that which exists, and in chapter 2 the way by which we enter into it?
J.T. I think we pass over with Christ. Colossians is not possession, but preparation for possession.
F.H.B. Colossians takes us as far as Gilgal, not in possession of the land, but preparation to possess.
J.T. It is the motion of going over; the exercise of soul preparatory to possession.
W.J. In chapter 1 you are attracted by the Head.
J.T. Quite so. Another point in regard to Numbers is that you have there the boundaries of Canaan, a most important point to bear in mind. There are definite boundaries given us of the inheritance, and the fact that the boundaries are given suggests the thought that Canaan is not a type of what heaven will be literally hereafter, but more what the *light* of it is now, and we are called upon to learn, to trace, the boundaries. Colossians gives the state which enables us to determine the boundaries.
W.J. In what way?
J.T. "Set your mind on things above, *not* on things on the earth". "*Not*" is like a boundary.
{339}
W.J. I suppose in Romans you "change your *man*", but in Colossians you change your position, or the order of man is changed from Adam to Christ?
J.T. Yes; *the* Man becomes attractive to you. "If it be thou bid me come".
F.H.B. I thought, that in the other types you have various aspects of the death of Christ which meet the need of the soul, but in Jordan it is not what meets the need of the soul, but you are drawn over by affection.
J.T. With regard to quotations from the Old Testament, the thought of these "thrones and dominions" are found in the Old Testament, such as the position of head in Adam, Moses, David. There were certain official positions, but whatever they were, they were created by Christ and for Him; so they waited the Man who could take them up. There was one position which was not there; that is, the assembly was not there, but in Colossians the assembly is in view, and He is Head of the body, the assembly "that in all things he might have the pre-eminence".
W.J. Do we not get two headships here, as well as two ministries?
J.T. The body is viewed in its entirety. It is "the body", assuming that the thing is understood. It had become known as a definite family, and Christ is presented as Head of it, as well as of all things.
W.J. I suppose the glory of His Person shines here more than in Ephesians?
J.T. His *position* is greater in Ephesians. One can understand the *personal* greatness of Christ coming in here in order to give Him the first place. Whatever there was, He created it. The body is the last thing mentioned here, but it is the greatest, so that in *all* things He might have the pre-eminence.
F.H.B. I suppose there was a danger of the Colossians getting their minds distracted from Christ as Head, and that is why the apostle brings before
{340}
them so strikingly the greatness and glory of the Head?
J.T. I think there are two great dangers that beset the saints after they come to recognise the Spirit, the first is Moabitish; that is, the influences of natural relationships; the second is man's mental ability and culture.
F.H.B. What do you connect with that in type?
J.T. The last part of the book of Numbers. The book of Numbers after chapter 21 treats of the believer as having the Spirit and recognising the Spirit; "Sing ye unto it". The danger after that is the recognition of family relationships as making them of more importance than the circle of the Spirit. They have their place, but if we make more of them than of the circle of the Spirit, we simply live in Moab instead of in Canaan. I think the Corinthians suffered from that, but the Colossians suffered from mental ability.
F.H.B. Do you not think that is our greatest danger?
J.T. I think it is.
Ques. The Spirit is only referred to in chapter 1: 8.
J.T. In Colossians it is Christ as Head, the greatness of Christ. That shows the importance of taking Scripture in its own setting. If the Spirit has His place, He will make everything of Christ.
The Spirit goes out of sight to bring Christ into evidence. Unless you give Christ His place, the Spirit will not be satisfied.
W.J. Did you ever link this in your mind with Laodicea, and think that the neglect of Colossian truth would produce the Laodicean condition?
J.T. Yes. It was apparently neglected there.
The church at Laodicea evidently recognised man's mind.
{341}
D.L.H. Do we get any type of the recognition of man's mind in the Old Testament?
E.J.McB. What place would you give Jericho?
J.T. Jericho is in the land.
E.J.McB. Is it not the first thing you meet when you make a movement? The moment you do make a move you find the opposition is man's mind.
J.T. Perhaps that is so: The book of Numbers associates the two ideas, but I do not think Jericho is a type of man's mind. Jericho is spiritual wickedness in the heavenlies. The sort of thing that the apostle combated refers to the believer's history after he recognises the Spirit. The suggestion is, I think, that learning and culture are of importance to the natural mind.
H.D'A.C. If there is not a type of the thing, yet Moses was to take a man who had the Spirit.
Ques. Is Joshua a type of Christ or of the Spirit?
J.T. He is a type of Christ. Christ acquires a place in your heart as the source of refreshment. Directly Christ acquires that place Satan will attack you; so it is said that Satan attacked the people just where the people had drunk the water, @Exodus 17. It is a conflict that goes on in our souls that no one knows about. Moses is supported by Aaron and Hur, and as his hands are upheld the victory is with the people. I think, therefore, that Joshua is Christ known in a spiritual way, *not* as representing the authority of God in our souls; *that is Moses*, but as sustaining us inwardly. That develops so as not only to meet the power of evil in your flesh, but to put you in possession of all that is heavenly. We need Christ to put us in possession of what is spiritually hidden; *that is Joshua*.
Ques. In the early part of Joshua we get him magnified in the sight of all Israel; does that answer to this?
J.T. Somewhat.
{342}
D.L.H. There is an expression in Colossians "Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another".
Does that answer at all to the idea of Joshua?
J.T. I understand Joshua to be Christ aiding us, not exactly as Priest, nor in the way of authority, but entirely in what is spiritual. Moses is the one raised up by God to represent the authority of God, but there is another service the Lord performs for us, He delivers us from the inroads of the flesh.
Ques. Does it not say that Joshua never left the tabernacle?
J.T. That helps. He has to do with what is heavenly, what is entirely spiritual.
H.D'A.C. It is a very great safeguard against the working of the human mind to hear His word, and to get divine intelligence in Him, and only in Him.
You have to be actually in touch with a living Christ to get a living thought.
A.S.L. What would "holding the head" mean?
J.T. That you regard Christ as the One from whom all direction *flows*. It is not exactly getting commands from Him.
A.S.L. I suppose the statement refers directly to the danger to which the apostle refers.
J.T. If anything is presented to you, you test it by Christ.
F.H.B. Would holding the Head be the recognition of Christ in that position?
A.S.L. And the exclusion of man's mind as such.
F.H.B. You know Him as the One who would supply everything that the assembly needs.
J.S.G. Does it not help that in chapter 2 Christ is spoken of as Head of every principality and power, and not simply of the body?
J.T. I think holding the Head arises from the way you come to know the Lord. It does not come to you in a formal way, it comes to you gradually.
{343}
The Lord endears Himself to your heart, so that gradually you come to give Him His place; in time it dawns upon you that it is wise to do so. You find things go right that way. Wisdom is a great thought in headship.
A.S.L. What is the difference between subjection to the Lord and holding the Head?
J.T. The first has reference to authority, so that the Spirit is said to be given to all those that obey Christ; He is given on that principle; but holding the Head is more through the affections, I think.
W.J. More moral; the power of affection.
J.T. It is not a question of formal communications, it *flows* from being near to the Person, so that you get His thoughts. I think one great point in headship is wisdom.
F.K. Do you connect that with Joshua as the spiritual leader?
J.T. I think the Lord becomes endeared to the soul, and you gradually come to give Him His place, and then you find the advantage of it. I think Philadelphia had come back to the principle of Colossians, whereas Laodicea had departed from it.
You have the Son of the Father's love; that appeals to the heart. Then every great thing instituted was created for Christ and He fills it. He could not be Head to us unless He was a Man. He could not have corresponding sensibilities if He were not a Man, but then it is as clear as possible in this chapter that He is a divine Person.
J.R.K. Is not what is brought in here to magnify that Man?
J.T. You never lose sight of the fact that He is a divine Person, but there must be a point of correspondence.
J.D. But what a very different kind of Man!
H.D'A.C. We read that Joshua commanded the priests, but they were to follow the ark. You have
{344}
Him as Man, but you have the ark of the covenant before you.
J.D. Verse 15 is so important, "who is the image of the invisible God".
D.L.H. But then He must have become man for that.
J.T. There must be corresponding sensibilities you could not have headship in God *as God*. The thought of headship involves that there must be a point of correspondence between the Head and those of whom He is Head.
E.J.McB. Do you not think that is the force of the change in the word from "obey" to "holding"?
J.T. Yes, that is right. The body is composed of those who have God's Spirit, who have sensibilities produced by the Spirit of Christ. It says, "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ". The body is composed of such, and now you can understand what a wonderful organism it is. Christ is Head of *that*.
A.S.L. If you are in the truth of @Romans 8 you pass naturally over to the Head.
J.T. And then if Christ gets His place, the Spirit, in a way, passes out of sight, though the greatest possible evidence that the Spirit is there is that Christ is everything. The first chapter creates in the soul a sense of the place that belongs to Christ properly, and through this presentation He gains the place that He ought to occupy in our hearts. It is presented as light, but the apostle laboured that every man should be presented perfect in Christ; that is, that all the sensibilities are to be brought into accord with Him. The Colossians belonged to the body, but the question was, were they perfect?
J.D. The apostle laboured to that end. And also it sets before us, as servants, what the divine aim should be with each of us. God would make known Christ and the apostle laboured to that end.
{345}
J.T. I doubt if any servant is ready until he knows the Head.
H.D'A.C. The greatest conceivable Person has died for us and is Head, but you cannot separate what He is personally from His headship any more than you can from His death.
D.L.H. I would like to know what is the difference in Colossians between the thought of Head of all principality and power, and "Head of the body.".
J.T. I think there must be a great difference. In the body you have persons who have already been formed by the Spirit in sensibilities which are after Christ. Thus His headship in regard to the body must be very different in the working out of it, since it is already seen in effect. It could not be that in regard to the principalities.
D.L.H. But the element of wisdom is there?
J.T. But when you come to the body how different. Take the disciples, how they gathered up things from Christ! The members of the body are moved by an unseen intelligence, the working out of wonderful things as set in relation one to the other, wise things which could not be added to by any contrivance of the human intellect.
D.L.H. Human intellect would spoil it.
J.T. Quite so. Look at the Lord in @John 13 and introduce a great philosopher there, what could *he* add? The thing would be absurd. What would the apostle John think of it?
A.S.L. Yet that is entirely forgotten with the majority of Christians.
J.T. Where there are a few who recognise that, there is the working out of what is wisdom. The idea in headship is that wisdom is there. The idea of wisdom is that you cannot improve on it. The book of Proverbs insists on that, therefore it says; "wisdom is the principal thing". Therefore in Ephesians the working out of the truth of the
{346}
assembly manifests "the all various wisdom of God". Ques. Would you say that the mind of God is there, as to all that over which Christ is Head?
J.T. Yes, it is the mind of God brought into relation to our sensibilities. You have not the sensibilities of Christ in principalities and powers, but there is a point of correspondence between the body and Christ. He is a Man, so that you can be formed after Christ. The Jew will not understand that in the future as you do and will.
E.J.McB. Is it not an important point that you cannot really serve unless you know the truth of the Head?
J.T. That is what I was meaning this morning when I said there was more sin against the Spirit than against Christ. Really in principle the door is closed upon the Spirit, and if the door is closed upon the Spirit you may be sure there, will be very little room for Christ. I think Christianity is a system of wisdom; it is not established by precept. I would not like to say that precept is not there, but it is more precedent. It is first what Christ did, and then what the apostles did.
F.H.B. If every member moves under the impulse of the Head the effect will be that Christ will be seen in His body.
W.J. His body is the continuation of Christ here.
D.L.H. In what sense will Christ give impulse to principalities and powers?
F.H.B. Would not that apply more particularly to the assembly?
D.L.H. In the future Christ will give impulse to all principalities, for the same expression is used.
J.T. Take a republic. The president of the United States is head of the nation. He is not king, he is head, but he does not rule through affection. It is through political manipulations; there really is no correspondence. But with Christ and His body
{347}
how different it is! There are no manipulations. It is that the members of the body have the same Spirit, we have the Spirit of Christ, so that He produces His thoughts in us. It goes on silently, not exactly by command, but in a spiritual way.
B. Is that why the Colossians are spoken of as having believed in Christ Jesus?
J.T. They had "received Christ Jesus the Lord"; in that way they were in a full Christian position, and we may say in a Christian state, but there was a danger, hence they were to walk according to what they had received. They had received Christ and were now to walk in Him.
G.W. Is not that thought as to sensibilities just the difference between the two headships?
J.T. There is no Spirit of Christ in a principality.
D.L.H. In regard to principalities, I suppose Christ will give character to everything that God has set up.
J.T. Surely. When you come to a mediatorial state of things the whole aspect of things is changed; if Christ rules there is the greatest change; but Christianity is not that. There is not a thing between you and Christ, and I do not think that can be said of any other family.
D.L.H. But in Ephesians it is said He is Head over all things to the assembly, you get a careful distinction between His being "head over" and "head to", but here in Colossians He is spoken of as "head of" in both cases.
J.T. Take @Exodus 18, Moses is spoken of as king in Jeshurun; he ruled, but he ruled through others; that is not headship. That is very much like the world to come, the rule will not be direct, but when you come to the assembly it is direct, Christ influences us directly.
H.D'A.C. Surely what is of Christ will fill the whole world at that time, though not so directly;
{348}
it will then be through the assembly; but there is nothing between us and Christ.
W.J. We have to keep in mind what it says, "Ye are complete in him".
J.S.G. I thought the point was that in holding the Head a principality or power must be excluded for they are all *under* Him, but in connection with the body it is the most intimate idea that could be conceived.
F.H.B. I think that is very beautiful, the thought of the direct connection of the Head and the members.
J.S.G. But the Colossians were in great danger, and hence the Spirit of God speaks of Christ in this way to show the wonderful place that He has, so as to save them from the danger that lay before them.
D.L.H. So that headship of principalities and powers is introduced more in chapter 2 on the line of shutting them out rather than bringing them in.
J.S.G. I think so. They are introduced to show the place Christ has.
D.L.H. The point is evidently that we must look only to Christ.
P.R.M. Does it not follow in that connection that He has spoiled principalities and powers?
J.T. So that there shall be nothing between our souls and Christ. I think amongst the people of God there is a great preference for a mediatorial order of things; people like to get things second-hand instead of direct from Christ. There are a great many people who are a public charge. I have been impressed with the fact that people are content to receive things second-hand.
A.S.L. When Paul speaks of presenting every man perfect in Christ, is it that every saint should be led to receive everything from Christ?
J.T. In @Ephesians 4 the gift that is common to all is first stated, so that you may retain the sense
{349}
of your own importance to the body, that is, you are *necessary* to it. If you have that thought in your soul, you will not be entirely overwhelmed by the specific gifts. "To *every one of us* is given grace". Each saint ought to cultivate what he has; if he has only a little, it is a great thing to be thrifty. I do not think a person is any good until he arrives at independency, I mean till he has some means of his own; he has got the Spirit, he is a member of Christ, and he is in direct communication with the Head.
H.D'A.C. How would the specific gifts come in?
J.T. The Lord never intended to make much of a man by giving him a gift.
H.D'A.C. Is that gift to take the place of every thing to the saints, and is he to ignore what is given to others?
J.T. I think that is the bane of the saints. Little companies of Christians are not entirely dependent on gifts. That is how the wisdom of the Head comes out; where there is exercise the Lord gives light. You find that in many places saints do not come together because there is no distinct gift available.
But if the gift is not available, the Head is available, and every member in that locality has a little.
J.S.G. In that connection is it not important to remember that growth is in connection with holding the Head; a gift is given in view of building up, but growth is through receiving nourishment from Christ.
J.T. The gifts in a certain sense are *excess*. In the working out of things, if the saints accept that each saint has grace, then a gift coming to them is excess; the gifted one is not *all*, he is *excess*.
W.J. I do not believe saints get anything from the gift unless they are living spiritually on their own incomes. The gifts are not mentioned in this epistle.
{350}
F.H.B. A gift is of no value unless exercised under the direction of the Lord, and it is of greater value if in touch with the Head.
J.T. I do not think the Lord ever intended to distinguish a man by giving him a gift, because a gift is not as great as you are in God's counsels.
The man is greater than the gift, so the gift is given for others. What we are as members of Christ and in God's counsels is for ever. The grace that is given to all does not come to an end, nor does the body of Christ come to an end. Who could conceive what is of Christ coming to an end? But a gift *does* come to an end.
J.S.G. Do you look upon Colossians as taking us over Jordan and reaching as far as Gilgal?
J.T. Yes.
J.S.G. Is it not of the greatest importance to remember that the body is over Jordan so that the body consists of the formative work of the Spirit?
E.J.McB. Do you get the thought of Christ as Head in Corinthians?
J.S.G. No. In Corinthians the human body is used as a figure.
J.T. But it is formally spoken of as "body of Christ", and also as "The Christ".
J.S.G. But the saints form the head in Corinthians, whereas in Colossians it is Christ as the Head and the saints form the body.
J.T. The fact of the matter is, that headship works out in Colossians, as the mind of the body.
P.R.M. It can never get its lines of communication cut.
J.T. If you have a mediatorial system you might introduce the thought of communications being cut, but you cannot cut the communications between Christ and the saints.
D.L.H. It is an organism, not an organisation.
{351}
J.T. Quite so, nothing can get out of order. Now another thing comes in at the beginning of chapter 2, and that is the apostle's great combat that the saints might enter into the truth of the mystery and know that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are in it. You do not need to go outside, so what one would seek to press is, that if there are a few believers in the recognition of this they would get light. I think it would be a great thing that saints should recognise this, because then they would get light. I think if we had more shame about being devoid of any little spiritual means it would bring about exercise. The law ordered that the males in Israel were to appear three times a year before the Lord and no one was to appear empty.
It is a great thing that we should be in the power of these things. The Lord is at our right hand, but it is of the utmost importance that we should make use of the Spirit.
{352}
A NEW STATE BY THE FORMATION OF CHRIST
@Colossians 2
E.R. Would you mind repeating a remark you made yesterday as to the difference between "*the* body" and "*his* body"?
J.T. I thought that "the body" is a definite thing, having come in in addition to other things which had existed before, of which the Lord is stated formally to be Head. The body is a definite thing to be taken account of in the mind by itself, and then later on the apostle says "his body", which is the assembly.
It is doubtful whether we can get a right understanding of the place of the assembly as viewed in the Ephesians unless we see how it is formed now in affection and intelligence. Another practical effect of the knowledge of the assembly, as seen in Colossians, is that it enables saints locally, however few, to be independent spiritually; it teaches saints to get a direct supply from the Head, provided that the conditions stated exist. Hence the apostle's great combat in the epistle to the Colossians was in regard to those conditions. The gain of the Head depends not only on the fact that Christ is Head, but upon a certain state, so that the burden of the apostle's exercise was that the hearts of the saints locally "should be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge". I thought a little on that line might aid saints locally to derive the benefit of the Head, for the word "mystery" in that passage I suppose implies not only the Head but the body.
{353}
W.J. There is no thought of gift in Colossians?
J.T. I think the point is to show the independence of the world implied in the mystery, independence in the saints as being free of all that is in man's world, man's mind, or ceremonialism.
W.H.B. Each one individually is dependent on the Head?
J.T. Each one "holding the head", and each one standing in relation to the others according to the truth of the body. The benefit to be derived from the Head depends on that, that our hearts "should be comforted". How little we know of divine comfort, so that there is no anxious care; and then that saints have their true place in affection one for the other.
W.H.B. And that is effected as each one draws from the Head?
J.T. The organism is set to work. I mention it because one sees the importance of it locally, that saints may be absolutely dependent on Christ and independent of the elements of the world.
Ques. Would you say each local assembly is independent of what was around?
J.T. I think the thought in Colossians was in a way local; so the letter was to be read there and at Laodicea. The apostle had seen the order at Colosse; they were further on than the Corinthians, they were orderly, the formative work of the Spirit was there; but there was one danger, that philosophy, man's mind and vain deceit should affect them, or that they should even feel any need of it.
J.V. They were set up in Christ independent of all that was of man's mind as a local company?
J.T. If the apostle came of course there would be an excess; but there was an organism there, and the apostle's exercise was that they should be in the
{354}
good of it, as in it all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge were available, and if you have all, you *have all*.
Geo.C. Is it not a solemn contrast to the assembly mentioned here that in the Revelation it proved to be independent of Christ?
J.T. Yes; the danger was also here as to the Colossians of becoming independent of Christ, because if you admit the principle that man's mind is of some account, that will grow and it will gradually shut out Christ altogether, and has done so in Christendom.
Rem. Hence the condition at Laodicea was the result of their not benefiting by the epistle which was read in their midst.
Ques. Would you say the Lord gives ministry to meet present conditions?
J.T. Whatever may be the threatened danger God meets it. He meets it here by bringing in the thought of the Head, and then the conditions down here which are essential to the working of the mystery. "Knit together in love". "Hearts comforted", that is to say, if the saints are engaged with distracting things you do not get the working of the mystery, and moreover you do not get the working of affection amongst themselves. I would like to make clear that headship only becomes available when certain conditions exist among us. I do not doubt that many get some light and guidance, but I do not think the mystery is known, because the conditions which the apostle had in his heart are not there.
Ques. What are the conditions?
J.T. The conditions are that the saints should be undistracted, that their hearts should not be engrossed with the affairs of this world, and then, that the saints have their proper place in their affections; there is *knitting*, not only that you like
{355}
a brother, but there is a knitting, so that the whole becomes a unit.
D.L.H. Then how is all this to be promoted?
E.J.McB. Was it your thought that the apostle wrote the epistle to the Colossians with that in view, and that if we got the gain of the epistle, we should be able to appreciate what came out in Ephesians?
J.T. The apostle sought to bring it about by exercise and prayer.
D.L.H. I suppose, if we were in the good of what is in the chapter, we should be equal to that condition?
J.T. I think it is a good plan to act up to the light you have in your soul and to test everything by that. The had received Christ; everything was to be tested by that. The passage shows that we are brought into correspondence with Christ. An Old Testament saint could not be what is here spoken of, because there was then no possibility of being in correspondence with Christ; but now the death and resurrection of Christ have come to pass, and we can be in correspondence with Christ.
F.H.B. We cannot improve on the apostle's way of exercise and prayer; so the comparison between his exercises here and the prayer in Ephesians helps us. Here it brings them into the "treasures of wisdom and knowledge", but in Ephesians into the "hope of God's calling".
J.T. The next thing is that the conditions here enable the Lord to guide, because I think one great feature in headship is direction, and in this there is the disclosure of the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Then every item of direction abides; wisdom is seen in it. I was saying last night, in regard to the two women who anointed the Lord's feet, the one in @Luke 7 acted in love when she anointed the feet of the One who carried grace to her; in @John 12 the act is *intelligent*. The Lord alludes to the
{356}
intelligence of the act, saying "against the day of my burying hath she kept this". She had gathered this up by listening to Christ.
Geo.C. If you come across an assembly or district where the saints are positively non-plussed by the condition of things that have come in, what then?
J.T. As local troubles arise that seem to be inextricable, and the saints cannot extricate themselves, what we should bear in mind is that the truth of the mystery is the solution of them. If you can bring in the feast of unleavened bread, I think that will make room for the feast of Pentecost, and the feast of Pentecost implies the mystery, it makes room for the Spirit. It is quite impossible if the working of will is going on, but if there is room for the Spirit, there is room for the Head.
Geo.C. I see it is a practical difficulty in many districts. I have thought that the only resource was in Christ Himself, in heart submission to Him.
J.T. I think a good thing to impress the saints with is this, that the way out of every difficulty is suffering. The secret is that people will not suffer.
It very likely arises from difficulties of feeling between brethren, and the way out is to suffer. If one brother suffers, the Lord will stand by him. Self-judgment is the feast of unleavened bread; Christ is our passover, He has gone into death, He has supplied that, but we must eat the unleavened bread through self-judgment.
Rem. It is the bread of affliction?
J.T. It means that one surrenders. You see that will has been at work, and you give it up. Now, if you have the feast of unleavened bread, you will have the feast of Pentecost. There will be room for the Spirit, and if there is room for the Spirit, there will be room for the Head. If you can get a brother to see that one man has to die for the people on
{357}
every occasion, and it is his privilege to do it, that will be the solution of the difficulty.
Rem. Not that he is wrong and the other right?
J.T. Not at all. The Lord was not wrong, but He died for the people. There is not a brother who under certain circumstances, will not say, 'The Lord knows my heart'. You have to leave your justification for the future, and to be quite content with that. As a matter of fact, it says, "He bringeth forth his judgments morning by morning". The morning will come, but you wait on the Lord, for it is on the calendar. Then the one who suffers becomes a leader. God's way is to deliver through some one, and then that one is a true leader morally.
D.L.H. I have often thought that the very first elements of Christianity are utterly lost sight of on these occasions, and people have forgotten that the way to go up is to go down.
J.D. Can you give us some thoughts as to these verses in Colossians?
J.T. "The treasures of wisdom and knowledge", are all hidden in the mystery. I think the thought is, that we should be prepared now through acquiring these treasures to come out in the future, because in the future we shall become the vehicle of Christ's mind, and we shall not be that automatically. I mean acting mechanically. The Lord acts through our intelligence and our affections; that is to say, that we are educated now according to Christ, so that whatever you do in the future, you are to influence something or some one, you do it intelligently. The body is intelligent; there is not only love for Christ, but it is formed in the mind of Christ, it is wise, so that in the future, as regards the government of the world, wisdom will mark it. A wonderful political study is the government of the world to come.
{358}
E.H.C. In chapter 2 it speaks of "the mystery of God"; is that a wider thought?
J.T. I think it brings God in; the mystery, "Christ in you", is necessarily more limited. There is a treasure in the heart and that treasure is connected with glory. But when you come to the mystery of God, surely you have all the divine thoughts there. Now I would like to know what Christ will be as Head of everything, but one would also like to know how the headship of other things is administered, and that is acquired in the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, because there is nothing outside of that.
Ques. Is it your thought that we are being prepared now to act mediately in the time to come, so that the intelligence is gained now?
J.T. Quite so; and I thought it was essential that we should see this, so that we should see the suitability of the body to be Christ's fulness.
W.J. Why are "dead" and "risen" brought in here?
J.T. That we may correspond with Christ now in our mind; as to the principle of our mind we should be outside of the range of man's mind and ceremonials.
W.J. I thought that expression in John, "Come and see", is very much Colossians. You have to leave the sphere of the first man entirely.
J.D. I thought we need to travel step by step according to these verses in order to have the condition you refer to. Each verse brings out some further thought to form the conditions, and especially that remarkable statement, "Ye are complete in him", in whom "dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily".
J.T. Then you come to holding the Head. The strength developed now in these things coming to pass is under pressure. To hold Christ as Head implies that you refuse any medium to come between
{359}
Him and you. Now all this is worked out under pressure, and therefore the strength and enduring character of the formative work in us.
K. At all events this would exercise us in view of formation.
J.T. The one who has come to the mystery has in his soul the solution of everything. The world is a labyrinth of evil that no politician or statesman can find a way out of, but the mystery is the solution of everything. Hence the importance of the book of Proverbs: wisdom is the way out, and that is in the mystery; all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are there.
J.D. What a place wisdom has in this epistle!
J.T. I was going to say the simplest believer knows more than the ancients; he has much more light about things, and he knows more about real politics.
Rem. These thoughts are worked out now in a company locally. If the world is waiting for the saints to come out for the administration of the world to come, it is sad if we cannot order things locally now.
J.T. We have to begin with ourselves.
J.S.G. It is very remarkable the order in chapter 2: circumcision, baptism, risen, quickened; it is not the order you have in the Old Testament.
Rem. I was thinking in regard to the natural man: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard".
J.T. "There is a path which no fowl knoweth".
W.J. Speaking practically of these things, the way we go on together is an education.
J.T. But it is in the assembly the "all various wisdom of God" should be worked out; it is marvellous, and it is in the midst of pressure.
Rem. Does not suffering bring about enlargement? "In pressure thou halt enlarged me".
{360}
D.L.H. Of course we are very greatly hampered by the general breakdown; at the same time we have the same resource which the saints had in Colossian days, we have the Head.
J.T. And if you have one other brother you have material for the mystery.
Ques. Why does circumcision come before Jordan here?
J.T. I think the apostle wants to end with resurrection. Circumcision is negative, and so is baptism, but resurrection brings us positionally into positive correspondence with Christ who is risen; then quickening, which is immediately added, puts us into correspondence with Christ in our state. I think in baptism you disappear, then in circumcision the reproach of Egypt is rolled away, the marks of the world. In Colossians it would not be the gross things of evil.
Ques. What did you mean as to one brother?
J.T. I meant what the apostle refers to in the opening verses, the mystery is contingent on the saints. If you have one brother and yourself that would be two.
F.H.B. It is a very encouraging thought that a few saints can enjoy the benefit of the headship of Christ.
J.T. It shows us that we are not deprived of the very best things in the last days. I think the secret of it is seen in the state of Philadelphia. The assembly works out locally. I have often thought that the second commandment is local responsibility; "thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself".
E.B. Would you say that the education always goes on in the local company?
J.T. Yes; it goes on locally. If you want to have a meeting, and there is no gifted brother available, then, if the conditions the apostle is labouring for exist, you have the mystery.
{361}
F.H.B. A brother is put to the test in the local meeting.
Ques. Is it your thought that each local meeting is set up in its own responsibility and with sufficient resources?
J.T. Except that you always take into account the body.
J.D. Each individual has a wonderful resource, because I believe that the word is in the singular, "holding the head".
J.T. "Risen with Christ" places you positionally in correspondence with Him, not only outside of Egypt, but outside of conditions of flesh and blood. It is a matter of life; we are raised, it says, by the faith of the operation of God.
T.H.R. Would you not say it puts us in moral superiority to everything of man?
J.T. I suppose it does. You are in the light of the operation of God, and that operation is superior to every other power.
T.H.R. When Christ was here He was dealing with the circumstances that were here; for instance, He stilled the storm on the sea, but in the second case He walked on the sea -- there was moral superiority.
J.T. I quite go with that. It is really the platform on which God carries on all His operations. Only in Colossians and Ephesians it is connected with the assembly, and the quickening puts us into subjective correspondence. We are in sympathy with Christ through quickening power in our souls.
T.H.R. It is remarkable that in Colossians you get quickening after resurrection, but in Ephesians quickening necessarily precedes "raised up together".
Rem. F.E.R. used to say you live in the love of God.
J.T. Quickening is not said to be by faith; it is a very real thing indeed.
{362}
Rem. And resurrection is more what you leave behind you?
J.T. Not only do you leave behind, but you are in the good of the power that overthrew everything; you are in the light of the operation of God. I believe we are now on the crucial point; we want to find out really what the body is.
Ques. Would you say a little more on quickening?
J.T. I believe it is that the operation of God has become formative in your soul, so that we live in the life of Christ; we are with Him in sympathy and affection. Things would be out of joint if you were not in the position in the state of your mind. I have no doubt many are farther on in their affections than in their intelligence.
A.S.L. You are entitled to take that position; then, if you do, the meaning of quickening is known in the heart.
T.H.R. Quickening is always given as out of death; it is what was dead is quickened. Say a man is condemned and he is executed; so far he is justified, but if he could be brought to life again, no one could lay a charge against him. Having been raised from the dead, if I know resurrection, it is not the old man that is brought up; it must be in the life of Christ that I live.
J.T. So that in Gilgal it is adjustment for the new position. It is the question of their adjustment to the new position which Colossians has really in view. You do not want to carry old things into the new position.
T.H.R. You must have ability, and that comes in the power of resurrection and quickening.
F.H.B. I think the operation of God gives the ability for this new condition.
J.T. And then you find there are certain things which you are ashamed of which were quite an honour to you on the other side.
{363}
G.E. Would you say the quickening gives you intelligence?
J.T. I think quickening is power more. There is light objectively presented as to the position, but quickening gives you power, and there is a leverage in your soul enabling you to throw off things. The new situation is so marvellous that these things are a disgrace to you. All that attaches to man, birth, education and means, had a certain place in the wilderness; in the land there is absolutely no recognition of them, you are ashamed of them. You get hold of the magnitude of the position, then you feel, 'I must adjust myself to the position'; hence you cannot bring in these things which may attach themselves to you in the world; they are an offence there. Who could endure the thought of a title, something received from the world, being brought into heaven?
T.H.R. You have only to say, 'Who could give a title to Christ when here on earth?' @Psalm 16 really gives us what we have been speaking of, what Christ is. Faith goes out to Christ in heaven, and affection towards the saints here.
J.T. So the apostle says he knows no man after the flesh; he does not even know the saints after the flesh. It is a most serious offence in Scripture to be looking at the saints in the flesh, because you would see the most hideous things in them. There are most unseemly things there, but you are warned against uncovering the nakedness of the near relative. That is very pronounced in Scripture, and we have Ham as a constant testimony as to that.
Ques. Why is Christ so prominent here?
J.T. To bring Him in as Head. They had received Him, but they were not making enough of Him, and the apostle insists that there is really nothing outside of Him.
{364}
J.S.G. Is it not important that in Romans you have the power to go over Jordan, but in Colossians there is preparation for the enjoyment of the sphere to which you properly belong?
Ques. And in Ephesians you have power to go up?
T.H.R. I think God puts you there.
J.S.G. In Ephesians exaltation is in view, but in Colossians the road the soul is led along experimentally is in view of exaltation in Ephesians.
J.T. In Ephesians it is God's work, not our going over; but in Colossians it is on the line of deliverance; hence the necessity of power in the soul.
J.S.G. It appears to me that we have to accept circumcision before we are ready for the truth of baptism.
T.H.R. Circumcision is the absolute cutting off of Christ, in the cross, from all connection with the flesh.
J.S.G. And would you agree that it is cutting off in view of entering into a new order of things; therefore it was on the eighth day? I thought that no person is ready for the full truth of baptism unless he is in the light of circumcision; in baptism you go right out of sight.
T.H.R. You have to take things in a different order in the New Testament from the Old.
W.J. What has come to pass in chapter 2 is maintained in chapter 3; it is the moral result of chapter 2.
D.L.H. But in chapter 2 it does not seem to be presented in the order of the Old Testament, the book of Joshua.
J.S.G. Whilst in chapter 3 it corresponds with the Old Testament, it is striking that it does not in chapter 2.
J.T. Circumcision in chapter 2 is as positional as resurrection; it is the circumcision of Christ.
{365}
J.S.G. Do you not have to take into account that in Colossians the persons have grown, and are now capable of seeing from the resurrection of Christ that the pleasure of God is that the saints should be raised with Christ. In Romans the saints are capable of seeing the bearing of Christ's resurrection on justification.
T.H.R. Baptism in Colossians is looked at as a past thing. It does not give you the bearing of it, but as having been baptised, you are viewed as risen through faith of the operation of God in raising Christ from the dead.
J.J. Do you mean that circumcision was done once, and that mortifying is a continuous thought?
J.T. Yes. Circumcision is positional, a matter of light, but in chapter 3 you have the effect of that.
F.H.B. Gilgal was not only a camp, but the place to which they had to return?
J.T. Yes; that was the secret of power. Now, another thing, you begin to draw a line between heaven and earth, the soul becomes interested in heaven. Because, as our brother remarked, resurrection is in view of heaven, although it is the platform on which all stands, but in the light of chapter 2 you begin to draw a line between heaven and earth. So the apostle enjoins them, "If ye then be risen with Christ set your mind on things above", which you can do. One is entitled to govern one's mind, "set your mind on things above, not on things on the earth"; it seems to me that the "not" is a sort of line between the earthly things and the heavenly.
F.H.B. I have often thought that that is the test whether we are in the good of chapter 2.
J.T. And the danger is implied that in spite of chapter 2 and all the light that is there, one might have one's mind on the things on the earth.
P.R.M. The "not" is an emphatic one.
{366}
J.T. I have connected it with @Numbers 34, which gives us the boundaries of the land which every Israelite was to know; he was to know the geography of his country. @Numbers 34 gives us the boundaries of the land which God gave to the people. It suggests not what heaven is literally, but what the purpose of God is now for us, and we must not connect it with the earth. It is our territory, and you want to have your mind there and keep it there.
W.J. Whilst you have the boundaries in Numbers you have the division in Deuteronomy.
Ques. What are the things that are above?
J.T. I think we may find out what the things are. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit". They are revealed, and the things which are revealed belong to us, we are entitled to look at them.
W.J. Would it take in Ephesians?
J.T. I think it does take in Ephesians. In Colossians your *mind* has gone in there, but in Ephesians you have gone in there.
Rem. The boundary line was as far as the river Euphrates?
J.T. Not in the chapter I alluded to. The original thought of God as regards the limitations of the people was simply Canaan, but as regards the extent of influence it was as far as the Euphrates. As regards the living associations of the people Jordan was the boundary, but in Deuteronomy the boundary is extended.
F.H.B. The great point is that it is across Jordan, the things that centre in Christ.
J.T. You cannot carry anything of nature over.
T.H.R. When they came to the mount of the
{367}
Amorites they might have gone straight into the land, but flesh cannot do it, and therefore God has to take them round quite another way. God has to test flesh and bring them round through Jordan, which was practically death and resurrection in order to come into Canaan. Flesh cannot take this line at all.
J.T. One of the first statements of the book of Deuteronomy is what Moses says; "there are eleven days¬ journey from Horeb" to the land, but they did not take advantage of that.
T.H.R. After thirty-eight years they are not a step nearer Canaan, but the flesh has been judged.
E.H.C. I thought that in the forty years God also gave the nations an opportunity to repent; therefore it says that Rahab believed.
W.J. You made a remark, that we must be established in our own territory before we can see other territories.
J.T. I would not like to depreciate prophecy, but we must distinguish between the letter of it, the parting out of countries, and the spirit of it. "The spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus". Really and truly we take our view from heaven, and it is a great thing to look down on things. And I believe that the true way is to trace things from @Genesis 10. The outlines are all clear from Scripture, but the thing is to get into the true position, to look down from heaven.
W.J. I suppose if you are established in your own territory, you will understand the things of the others.
J.T. When it is a matter of prophecy the apostle John is caught up into heaven.
W.J. Is there not great moral instruction in that?
{368}
T.H.R. And in that way John comes in to support Paul. We see John following Christ, then you have the breakdown of what Paul has set up, and John is caught up to heaven to see things on the earth.
E.H.C. We often say we are *brought* nigh, but where it speaks of bringing in, Peter says "brought to God", whereas in Ephesians you get the word "made" repeated three times, "made accepted", "made nigh", and "made to sit in heavenly places in Christ".
T.H.R. I think that is very important.
{369}
CHRIST FOR THE ASSEMBLY AND THE ASSEMBLY FOR CHRIST
@Ephesians 5: 22 - 33
F.H.B. I suppose the two thoughts, the body and the bride, are distinct? The body more connected with display, and the bride the saints as clothed in the fine linen pure and bright for the pleasure of Christ.
J.S.G. Do you get the bride here? I think the body and the bride are both connected with display, but that the wife gives the position of the assembly in connection with the thought of union, "his wife hath made herself ready". And "to her has been granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen". This shows the distinction between the two ideas.
J.T. The first chapter of this epistle clearly presents the assembly in connection with the ways of God for the setting forth of Christ in that connection, and this passage is clearly the place the assembly has, in His own affections.
W.J. We have to go back to @Genesis 2.
J.T. I thought of that. The completion of the ways of God is in heading up all things in Christ, things in heaven and things on earth, the administration of the fulness of times, all being gathered up in Christ. Then I suppose the position of the assembly is given. Christ is made Head over all things to it.
Ques. How do you understand that sentence, "Head overall things to the assembly"?
J.T. I think it shows the great place the assembly has in the heart of the Lord, so that He would give her that unique place. He is Head over all things, but He is not alone in that glory. It is as if a king might associate his wife with him in the dignity of the throne; it is more that, I think.
{370}
J.S.G. That is, it is, the counsel of God that Christ should be Head over all things, and that the assembly should share that glory with Him.
J.T. Think of the glory connected with the affection between Christ and the assembly! Take, for instance the sun, "which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber". Now to see a man at his best you must see him when he is a bridegroom, because it is there that all his intelligent affections are in activity. All things will be influenced by Christ in the activity of His affections towards the assembly, and those affections are reciprocated; all that is involved in the headship. What a conception for all that is under that! It is not simply the exercise of authority or the exercise of wisdom. Wisdom is there in the headship, but it is guided in all that gracious dignity, the activity of affections between the MAN and the woman. Take a household. If the husband or wife be absent what weakness there is, and how the children are affected by it: it is the union of reciprocal affections from the top that gives character to all below.
D.L.H. So in Adam we see what was typical of all this. He was head over all things, but he was head to his wife in rather a different sense to that in which he was head over all things.
J.T. It is really union there, and the woman is merged in the headship.
F.H.B. She is taken out of the man to be with the man. Christ and the assembly will give character to the whole universe.
J.T. That is what will rule then. Think of the existing ruling powers being superseded by the influence of the affection between Christ and the assembly.
J.S.G. We hardly get the thought of the bride in Ephesians. Christ is Head over all things, and
{371}
the assembly is His body, the fulness of Him; so that He Himself may be displayed.
J.T. Quite so. The thought of the body is added.
He is "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body".
W.J. If the assembly had not been taken out of Him she could not be His fulness.
J.T. Adam had named the animals, but when the woman is brought to him he says, "This time it is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called woman because this was taken out of a man". Hence the suitability of the assembly to Christ. We know that, but those below will not understand it. We understand it now, we understand how the assembly is taken out of Christ.
D.L.H. Do you not get the idea of unity in the body, and of union in the husband and wife?
J.T. Yes: the thought of unity is not in the latter, but it would be morally unsuitable that the Lord should unite to Himself what is disunited down here.
F.H.B. Is not the unity among ourselves what you may call the unity of the body? Is not that the result of each member being united to the one living Head by the Holy Spirit?
J.T. I think the body is to be taken account of by itself as formed by His Spirit. He is Head of "the body", a distinct thing designated by the article, and it had already been brought to pass here by the coming in of the Spirit. He is Head of that, for He has animated it with His Spirit. If you follow the scriptures you find in Romans that we, the saints, are all one body in Christ; there is not the idea of the Head there; then it comes out afterwards that the body has a Head, which is Christ. But we have to take account of that body by itself. I do not mean that it could ever be viewed apart from Christ, but as to the actual formation of the
{372}
body it is viewed as the saints here, and then afterwards it is said to have a Head -- even Christ.
E.J.McB. So, too, it is presented as building itself up in love.
J.S.G. Do you think it helps to remember that the thought of the body precedes that of union?
J.T. It does. If it were otherwise you would have Christ uniting to Himself what is not suited to Him. I think it is important to maintain the thought of the body by itself, viewed as an organism here, hence you have it building itself up in love. But then Christ is Head of it, and all the substance comes out of Himself.
P.R.M. Is it not "head *to* it"?
J.T. For the moment, down here, He is Head of it; all the direction comes from Him. But when you come to the thought of "*to* it", it is the dignity of it.
H.D'A.C. There is a living organism, of which the "I" is Christ?
J.T. But undoubtedly the body is presented in Scripture as a thing formed by itself by the Spirit, and we must come into it before we realise the full working of the Head, for we must know unity first.
H.D'A.C. I do not see how you could have the living organism without Christ, and if so, it is entirely His body.
J.T. What do you make of @Romans 12?
H.D'A.C. I am taking the illustration of the human body.
J.T. But why not take it from the Scripture? It begins with us. I am speaking now about the Spirit, we must take account of the Spirit's work in the body. "We have all been baptised into one body ... made to drink into one Spirit"; so that the body is viewed as an organism by itself in that way, but when it is developed you have the full working of headship. I am not saying for a moment
{373}
that you have not the link with Christ always, but I am going by the order of Scripture, and Scripture begins with the body. The whole body in @Ephesians 4: 16 is deriving its life from Christ, yet it is one entity, it maintains its distinctness.
J.S.G. Do you refer to distinctness in the sense that Eve was distinct from Adam?
J.T. Yes.
E.J.McB. Now Colossians does not present the thought of *united* to the Head, but *holding* the Head, but the point in Ephesians is bringing them to the point of union.
J.T. And that means that the assembly is merged in Christ, and hence the distinctness is lost as you may say, the Man and the wife become one flesh. But here in @Genesis 2 she is builded and presented to Adam as a separate individual.
W.J. In the passage which we read does it not refer to the assembly in its completeness?
F.H.B. I think that is important to bear in mind. No two scriptures view it in the same manner. Here in this passage it is the whole assembly.
J.T. Certainly; and it is in the heavens with Christ. There you have the full divine thought of the assembly. What we have been dwelling on is most instructive and most consoling, if one might use the word, that the assembly has that place ever in the mind of Christ. He is Head over all things, but Head of the body now.
Ques. When do you think the truth of Headship was first known?
J.T. I think after Paul's ministry.
E.H.C. I suppose it commenced at Pentecost, and the Gentiles were brought in later.
J.T. I think headship was there, but as to its being formally known, I do not think it came out
{374}
until Paul made it clear that a Man in heaven was to rule everything here. And while Jerusalem was owned in any way there could not be that, and Jerusalem *was* owned in a sense after the Spirit had come.
H.D'A.C. But there was a living organism at that time, and how was it moved? I have in my mind that you could not have a living organism without the "I" moving.
J.T. Scripture speaks of something and calls it a body; why could not that body move? Of the saints at Rome Paul says, "We being many, are one body in Christ". There was unity. The question of the mind that governed the body is not raised, but the fact that they were one body in Christ is stated.
H.D'A.C. I thought what was underlying that was that Christ was the "L"
J.T. Still, I think you are introducing that too soon according to the setting of Scripture. There is more in that than you might think. Brethren have to come to recognise their obligations to one another, to be of one mind. Christ is not brought in as Head until that is brought about. We ought to allow for the Spirit. I think as regards the assembly Christ is the mind of the body when you come to the full thing, but in Romans and Corinthians you do not come to the full idea; it is more what the saints are as *having the Spirit*. When you come to Colossians and Ephesians you have *the Head*.
J.V. You are tracing the way it is brought out in Scripture.
J.T. That is the only safe way. The effect of the work of the Spirit is to bring about unity down here, not *union* but *unity*. In Romans it is just mentioned, but in Corinthians it is connected with the Spirit.
G.R. Is not headship seen in @1 Corinthians 12?
{375}
J.T. No. The human body is in view there.
A.S.L. "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?"
How do you take that?
J.T. I take that as His body. But *then* the rejection of Stephen had come in.
A.S.L. He speaks of it as "me".
J.T. Yes; but look at what it is that He speaks of as "me", something that was suffering. The Holy Spirit formed them in that way; that was the only way Saul knew them, and the Lord says, Those suffering ones are "me". I think we have to recognise what is due to Christ. Are you going to make Christ Head of what is disjointed? It is well to have before us what is developed in Scripture, and what is seen as complete.
A.S.L. Is not the whole truth of the assembly involved in that question, "Why persecutest thou me?"
J.T. I think so. It was like Paul's commission.
Paul's commission was wrapped up in it.
Rem. The One who spoke was in heaven, but the suffering ones were on earth, and yet it was "me".
J.T. In the end of Luke it says the Lord "was parted from them"; that is not the idea of headship, nor of a body. He was parted from them.
E.H.C. The word for "Head" has been sometimes translated "Chief".
J.T. Although He is Head of the body, He is not said to be Head of it in Acts, Romans, or Corinthians. You might make it Chief over *all things*, but I think Head of the *body* is right. We have to make allowance for the conditions which obtained at Jerusalem. God bore with Jerusalem, and whilst God bore with Jerusalem you could not have the idea of headship here in its fulness. Hence it was after Stephen's rejection that this wonderful disclosure is made to Saul, that this people whom you are persecuting are my body -- "ME".
{376}
H.D'A.C. But is that a living organism, or the idea of the body?
J.T. I think it is the living organism. I was pointing out that in the end of Luke the Lord was parted from them. He blessed them on earth, but He was going to heaven. That is not the idea of the body, but when you come to Acts He is there Himself.
W.J. It is not developed there.
E.J.McB. But you must remember this, that we meditate upon it in the light of the truth which has explained it to us.
A.S.L. But I think in that light to go back to it is of the greatest possible help.
D.L.H. I would like to ask a question as to the illustration of the human body. Is that found in Ephesians?
J.T. No. It is not.
D.L.H. That is what I thought. The word is really Chief.
J.T. How could He be Head over all things in the sense of an organism?
D.L.H. Quite so. You must certainly drop that illustration, and you must think of @Genesis 2.
A.S.L. Perhaps @Genesis 2 explains it more than any other scripture.
J.S.G. Do you not think it helps that sonship comes first in Ephesians? There is the position of the Son of God in the presence of His God and Father, with the sons in connection with Him. Thus you have in the body a vast company manifested in the intelligence of sonship, so that they are a perfect manifestation of Christ. Christ is expressed in them.
P.R.M. Is it involved in the Lord forming all in the truth of sonship? you cannot shut any out.
J.T. No. You take all in. In @Romans 8, having spoken of the Spirit of Christ, Paul says, "If Christ
{377}
be in you", and I think if the Spirit of Christ is there you can say Christ is there, but then it is of great importance for *Christ* to be *formed*. It suggests the greatest difficulty to endeavour to arrive at the truth in connection with present conditions. The only way to arrive at the truth is from the way in which Scripture presents it. The apostle says "we are all baptised by one Spirit", so you would not except one believer from that. But at the same time the body is marked as formed in living affections down here, and it is when you get that you have the thought of headship.
Rem. It would never do to accept a principle that shuts out any of the saints.
J.T. No: as Judah said in @Genesis 42: 13, "we are *twelve* brethren". You see the working out of it there in type. Where there is unity the "all-various wisdom of God" is seen. If you get it in a company the working out of headship is there.
Ques. But what about the rest?
J.T. Well, the comfort is the Lord knoweth them that are His.
Rem. We ought not to be content that we are an intelligent company of Christians; there are a good many absent, and we ought to miss them.
J.T. I was going to remark that from the moment the Lord took Saul up, He spoke to him. Saul got the thought from Christ, like the men of David who heard the yearnings of his heart. Israel was gone, the death and burial of Stephen is the end of that. The Lord's affections for Israel had remained, and He lingered over Jerusalem, but now it being all over with Israel His heart needed a companion, craved companionship, and Paul goes out into the Gentile world to bring in a companion for Christ. And I have no doubt that the truth of sonship is at the bottom of it, for Paul announced *immediately* that Jesus is the Son of God.
{378}
J.S.G. It seems to me very important that we can only reach the full truth of the body through sonship.
F.H.B. Why do you put it in that way?
J.S.G. Because the first thought in Ephesians is the Son of God as Man in the presence of His God and Father; then the sons are seen associated with Him. As sons they are formed in the divine nature, and are intelligent; and they are associated with Christ as wisdom in working out of every problem in the universe, and they display Him, for they act exactly as He would. It is not only that they *do* right things, but they do them *as He would*, and so they are His body.
J.T. The assembly is viewed by Christ as a distinct entity. It is a company formed intelligently in the mind of Christ, there is ability for counsel there. It is Christ's assembly, and competent to express intelligently His mind for the universe.
H.D'A.C. I want to know where the fulness comes in.
J.T. It required that for Christ to express Himself fully.
H.D'A.C. Then in that case you do get the two thoughts in that chapter. You get the thought of Adam and Eve, and you get His body.
J.T. His body is brought in because Christ is to be expressed, but I think we ought to note the word "assembly". It is a company capable of intelligently giving the mind of God on any question that may arise in the universe. It will be the highest court of appeal in the coming age.
J.J. Where does the prayer in chapter 3 come in?
J.T. The two prayers are wonderful. The prayer in chapter 1 is that we may know the will of God and see the greatness of His power, but that in chapter 3 is that we may be great ourselves. I think there is the thought of ability. Very few
{379}
Christians are capable of taking in divine thoughts, because of their weakness spiritually. So the apostle prays that they may be strengthened by the Spirit of the Father in the inner man. I think it is a question there of power *inwardly*, of being great enough to take in what is so wondrous, not merely mentally, but in your affections.
J.S.G. In chapter 1, you have the body, but in chapter 3 it is more the thought of the house, the habitation.
W.J. Is not unity secured if the prayer in chapter 3 is realised?
J.T. "That you may be able to apprehend *with all* saints". It seems as if ability to take in divine things is greater when you are with the brethren than when you are by yourself.
Ques. Is that what you meant by the thought of the assembly?
J.T. I look upon the assembly as being composed of spiritually intelligent persons. What is the idea of an assembly if it is not for counsel? You see He is Head over all things to it, not to the body, but to the assembly. But then that assembly is His body.
It has intelligence.
D.L.H. I suppose that in Eve you get the thought of an *helpmeet*, and in that there is the thought of suitability for the position.
A.S.L. Going back to @Genesis 2, which is a marvellous and complete picture, is not the deep sleep to be noted? Also that the woman was the outcome of the sleep and builded from the rib taken from the sleeping man. Could Romans be spoken of in any sense as the building of the woman?
J.T. I think formation is implied by the rib.
The Lord takes account of certain things down here; there is Eleazar, for example, in the book of Numbers, he was chief of the Levites, he represents a spiritual state which the Lord Jesus has placed
{380}
here, and which He counts upon as down here. And how much more when we are up there, if she was to be a helpmeet to Him. She would not suggest things, no one would suggest things to Christ. But how advantageous it is to have one who understands things; how the Lord would greet her when she goes up to heaven! Do you think she ceases to act when she enters into her full place?
A.S.L. Does it not refer to a work of God?
J.T. Quite so; the Lord recognises us; "this is now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh".
F.H.B. And it shows what a favoured creature woman was, there could be no counsel between Adam and the animal creation.
J.T. Now we are coming to it; He is Head over all things, but He is seen in all that she does; "her husband is known in the gates" gives the principle. If the woman had maintained headship, Satan would never have had a footing in the earth.
E.J.McB. Would you say a word about reciprocal affections at the top giving effect to things at the bottom?
J.T. I do not know anything more interesting than that. What a world it will be! It is not only influenced by Christ, but under the influence of reciprocal affections between Christ and the assembly. Christ has been down here and has sympathy with all the creation, and so have we, and so it is a sympathetic influence in regard to all that is below.
D.L.H. In regard to Ephesians, I suppose we must not localise this at all; what is in view is rather universal.
J.T. I think it is the counsels of God. There was a company at Ephesus sufficiently formed by the ministry of Paul that they could take these things in, but it is intended to set out the whole divine purpose.
{381}
D.L.H. So that those at Ephesus were representative of the whole assembly?
J.T. I think they were. The apostle had ministered to them the whole counsel of God.
A.S.L. It is interesting to note that a great part of this epistle is taken up with prayer.
J.T. It suggests what ought to affect our hearts whenever we open this epistle, a sense of the meagreness of our ability to take it in leads to prayer.
W.J. The immensity of it caused the apostle to feel that he must pray.
D.L.H. I suppose there is a spot where ministry must end and prayer begin?
J.T. I think that spot is where the whole counsels of God have been made known; then all you have to do is to pray. I see the great importance of the brethren getting together. When we are together in affection there is far more ability both to communicate and to receive than when we are alone. Then when you come to chapter 3 the apostle says, "I bow my knees". I understand that meant the *excess* of exercise. We read of the apostle kneeling down with them on the sea-shore; but bowing the knees means, I think, excessive exercise, and it is to the Father. And it is that the saints may be strengthened with power by His Spirit in the inner man.
F.H.B. I was thinking as to the display. In Ephesians it is different to Colossians. In Colossians the display is more of the moral perfections of the second Man, but I thought that in Ephesians it is the display not only of what Christ was as Man, but what has come out in Him of God. It is said of the church as coming down from heaven, that she has the glory of God.
J.T. As to @Ephesians 5, we ought to consider what Christ desires for Himself. The apostle sets out to bring in that which the heart of Christ yearned
{382}
for; he says to the Corinthians, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ".
W.J. Is it not here what she is to Him for His own pleasure? Is it not the highest thought?
J.T. I think it is. The most intimate relations are involved in it, and He is to present it to Himself glorious.
W.J. I suppose you had in your mind the idea of Isaac being "comforted after the loss of his mother", @Genesis 24.
J.T. I think that in Rebekah you get the assembly taking the place of Israel in a provisional way. Rebekah did not go into what is typically heaven; she went into what had existed on the earth before, namely, Sarah's tent, and in that way she ministered to Isaac's heart. We may say the assembly ministers to Christ provisionally here, but in @Ephesians 5 we get her highest calling, that she ministers to the affections of Christ in heaven. I think @Genesis 2 is union, probably the only type of union we have.
P.R.M. Before sin came in?
J.T. Yes, "one flesh".
E.B. So we get one worthy of His love.
J.T. Yes, quite so; worthy of His love and capable of reciprocating it.
W.J. Does He not love the assembly apart from any history?
J.T. Eve must have been a beautiful woman; I mean as answering a man's conception.
W.J. And Christ sees in the assembly the reflection of Himself.
Ques. What is referred to in "the saviour of the body"; what body?
P.R.M. Mr. Raven always used to say it referred to the human body.
J.D. How are we to understand verses 26, 27?
F.H.B. The Lord saw the assembly prospectively
{383}
in all its beauty and perfection, and is He not occupied now with that end in view?
W.J. Is He not presenting Himself to her in order to reproduce Himself in her?
J.T. I have no doubt the idea of the assembly arose historically as the Lord saw the disciples with a new type of affections springing up in them. The Lord saw the idea, but a great deal had to be accomplished to bring that out in perfection; hence He gave Himself. @Matthew 13 speaks of the pearl, but He has not got it yet. I think it helps to bear in mind that the things was there in principle in the disciples. Now He gave Himself for that, He *loved* that, and He gave Himself for it, in order that He might have it without anything incongruous; "that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish".
E.B. Is that the object of true ministry at the present time?
J.T. I think the Lord uses one and another to help in this, and it comes out in perfection at the end. I think it is very encouraging and beautiful that the bride speaks at the end. It is as if the Spirit had been speaking to her all the way through, and now He has her to speak with Him. He speaks to Christ, and the bride is with Him; there is perfect unison of mind between the Spirit and the bride.
E.B. So that the full thought of the bride is found at the end.
Ques. What connection has the bride with the body?
J.S.G. I think @Ephesians 1 is the body, chapter 3 the assembly as the vessel for the display of the glory of God, and then in chapter 5 it is the *wife*. It is the wife who becomes the bride. I think the bride is
{384}
the saints displayed in the results of suffering here in the scene of the Lord's rejection, whereas His body is entirely for the display of Himself.
F.H.B. In human things the bride becomes the wife.
J.S.G. Yes, but in divine things the wife becomes the bride. The judgment-seat will enable Christ to reckon everything that has been done here as the fruit of union.
J.T. The idea of a bride is not continuous. The assembly comes out of heaven in the freshness and vigour of bridal affections. She shines at her best then, and there will be no deterioration. A bride presents a woman at her highest and best in the activity of her affection at the beginning, and the figure shows that the assembly appears at her best when she comes out with Christ.
J.S.G. In @Revelation 21 she comes prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. The point there is that, although the thousand years have passed, all the brightness of the garments remains. There is no deterioration at all.
Ques. *The bride* as the wife of the *Lamb*; is that the suffering side?
J.S.G. Yes.
W.H.B. Is not @Revelation 21 more in accord with @Psalm 45, the "within" rather than the thought of display?
J.S.G. The king's daughter is glorious in the royal apartments, but the thought of the bride in Scripture is always connected with display. We must bear in mind that the divine order is first sons, then the thought of the body, then the assembly as the vessel for the display of the glory of God, then you come to union. When the marriage of the Lamb is come, His body, the wife, appears as one who has been faithful during the night of His rejection, and she
{385}
comes out in her bridal garments, woven during the time she shares His suffering and rejection.
J.T. The graces of Christ are seen in the assembly *now*, but in the *future* she will be His fulness; all that He is and all that God is will shine out in the assembly.
W.J. But is not sonship the greatest thing of all?
J.S.G. Yes; I think so. But in Ephesians you have Christ as Head over all things, and the thought of sonship has preceded it. The saints are always greater Godward than in manifestation, and the inside place is sonship. But when you come to His body the sons move corporately, and are thus a perfect display of Christ. When you have the thought of *sonship* it is the Son of God and His God and His Father, but His *body* stands in relation to Christ. Then you have the thought of the assembly as being a vessel equal for the glory of God being displayed in it.
{386}
RESTFULNESS AND LISTENING TO CHRIST
@Luke 8: 35; @Luke 10: 38 - 42; @John 12: 3 - 8
My desire is to seek to show how saints come into the good of the headship of Christ, and that in coming into the gain of it, Christ becomes known to us, not only as guiding us individually, but in regard of all that is in the mind of God. It has to be borne in mind that whilst His headship is special to us it also extends, in the principle of it, to all the creation. In this way we come to value the Lord not only according to what He is to us, but according to what He is to God. The Godhead has undertaken through Him to "reconcile all things to itself", and the more we know Him, the more we desire to see this accomplished; to see all things put under Him. The Lord Jesus Himself created different offices, thrones, principalities, powers, and He created them all in view of the reconciliation of all things. Others were placed provisionally in these offices only to show how incapable they were, and to make obvious the necessity for Christ to appear, so that He should take up each office and fill it efficiently. Now a right understanding of Christ as Head and of that which flows from it enables us in the way of education to take in that expanded scope, and hence we come to value Him the more.
I selected this passage from @Luke 8, because it shows how souls begin, it shows how, normally, the soul begins with Christ. It is a great thing, beloved friends, I need not remind you, to have a good beginning; and what marks a good beginning, in one who has been relieved by Christ is, that there is a certain restfulness of soul. This man had been anything but restful hitherto; he had, as we all know, roamed at large. The world as it stands is a sort of theatre in which men, according to their
{387}
measure of power, roam at large without restraint or rest. What has marked the world from the outset as having broken away from divine rule, from divine authority, is a certain violent spirit.
Now as to the world, it is just as well that things should be uncovered for us; but as to the saints, one would not uncover them, because God has covered them, and it is one of the most grievous offences known in Scripture to uncover one's brethren, to uncover the nakedness of their flesh. I dwell on it just for a moment. God has been pleased to take us up and cover us. First of all there is the covering of nakedness, then you have the idea of covering for adornment. He has covered us in order to hide up the nakedness, and woe be to the man who uncovers what God has covered! It is a terrible thing to dwell on what our brethren are or may be after the flesh, and that is what we are prone to, to dwell on what a brother may be after the flesh; that is to uncover his nakedness, and there is no more grievous offence known in Scripture than that. One would not be engaged in that; it is the work of the enemy. One has seen a history of the Lord's people written for the eyes of the world. Uncovering all their failures, all their nakedness! Think of that!
Alas! there is enough to say on that line, but it is Satan's work.
Now this poor man in @Luke 8 was naked, and he represents, as we may say, the world in its moral nakedness which it cannot hide. The present terrible conditions in the world are simply an exposure of the world's nakedness. A certain veneer called civilisation has existed, but all that is torn to shreds and the world appears in its nakedness, and no one in sympathy with God would care to cover it; one would do all in one's power to expose it; the very salvation of the Lord's people from the world depends on the exposure of the world's nakedness; it ought
{388}
to be seen just as it is. God is going to allow developments to proceed until it comes out in all its hideous nakedness; that is what the world is coming to, but the man who has the Holy Spirit sees it already. The apostle Paul saw it; John saw it; they saw the working of certain principles that would issue in a complete exposure of the world's nakedness. And so now we are able, as having the Spirit of God, to look at it as it is in its naked principles. As I was saying, the present conditions are but the exposure of it.
Well, this poor man in @Luke 8 was naked, restless, violent, untameable. Now the Lord Jesus (how one dwells with pleasure on Christ as He is presented in Luke!) comes in as Man, in the midst of all that, and is entirely subject to God. All His inner springs were governed by the will of God, and that was the divine idea for Man: all is to be brought to that, beloved friends. God has brought out His thought in Christ and all have to come to that. "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in *men*"; not "man" but "*men*"! The Lord Jesus is going to bring all that about. Well, the man is found; the people "went out to see what had happened", and they found the man. One would advise people to turn about to see what has happened; not what is happening over the water, but what has happened by the incarnation, beloved friends, by the death and resurrection of Christ and the gift of the Spirit. Those are the things that should occupy and engage our hearts; that is the kind of happening. How one delights in the thought of a company of people restful with Jesus! "They went out to see what had happened", and in coming out they found the Lord Jesus and the man there *together*! I want you to be just like that man. What about him? He was *sitting*.
There are very few Christians who are sitting; one is not accusing any one, but very few of us know
{389}
how to *sit*; a restless spirit is what marks many of us. Martha was of a restless spirit. It is true that she loved Christ, and He loved her as much as He loved Mary; she owned the house and she opened it to Christ. The Lord did not overlook that. If you open your house to Christ He will not overlook it; however little you may do for Christ, whatever service you may take up for Him, He will take notice of. I was saying recently that Jacob's vow implied that he would think of God once out of ten times; but God would give him credit for that once. And so Martha's act was appreciated by Christ; she opened her house and it was His retreat; it was a sweet spot to Him; He found communion and rest there; He made use of that house. Anything you devote to Christ He will accept; He will make use of it. The Lord has wonderful means of using things; there is nothing wasteful about His ways; He will accept anything you give Him and find use for it, but depend upon it, He wants you. He wanted Martha.
Now this man was found *sitting*, and that, dear brethren, is what I would desire that we should cultivate; he was found sitting at the feet of Jesus. Firstly, he is restful; secondly, he is clothed, no longer naked; there are no unclothed people *where the Lord is*. The apostle dreaded lest any should be "found naked". It would be a terrible thing, in spite of all the pretension there may be of love to Christ and love to the saints, to find that, after all, it is *only* pretension. This man was covered over in the presence of Christ. He could not have been restful had he not been covered, and then, beloved friends, he had a right mind. Now a right mind is a very rare thing. A right mind is by the Spirit. You are not prepared for the headship of Christ without a right mind. "God has not given us a spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind".
{390}
A person who has a sound mind takes account of things just as they are. Men do not seem to be "as trees walking" in the eyes of a person who has a sound mind; you do not over estimate your brethren, neither do you under estimate them; you have a true estimate both of yourself and others.
In Mary is seen a person who *has* a sound mind, and she is using it: she is sitting at the feet of Jesus, hearing His word. That is what I want you to recognise. You can use your mind in no better way than in listening to Christ. We are living in a day of many books; it is the printing age; but books have been used to shut out Christ from the mind. The mind must certainly be fed, but God has given us a *right* mind, and that mind must be ministered to. But how ministered to? I think you see it in Mary. Supposing you had come to Mary with a novel as she sat at the feet of Jesus, what would she have thought of you? She would have said to you, No product of man's mind can minister to mine, you cannot feed my mind with that; you may feed the swine with that. The prodigal in the far country "would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat", but he was not satisfied. Mary was not going to feed upon that; she had a divinely given mind, it was a right one, and she would feed it on Christ. It is not simply that He was saying something to *her*. She was *listening* to what He was saying; if He spoke to Martha, she heard it; or if He spoke to Lazarus, she heard it. You want to hear *every* word of Christ, not only what He has to say to you. It is a question of the mind; the divinely given mind has to be ministered to, and the Lord Jesus *has* spoken, and is speaking, and the thing for us is to listen to what He is saying.
There are many voices in the world; there is the pulpit, and the platform, and the press; but if you have a right mind, you will listen alone to Christ.
{391}
What does Mary learn from Christ? Do you think the Lord would limit anything -- do you think He would hold anything back from one who listened to Him? No; it was the delight of His heart to speak in her hearing all that was in His mind. Oh, beloved, think of the mind of Christ! Think of the infinite richness of that mind, coming out from the Father, freighted with all the Father's affections on the one hand, and with all the Father's thoughts on the other hand! She was listening to what *He* was saying; that is the right reading of the passage. He came out from God to make known what was in the mind of God; He was speaking about that; He was opening up that, and Mary is singled out by the Spirit as the example of a right minded person, and the proof of it is that she is listening to Christ.
We have in the epistle of Peter the thought of "the sincere milk", or "pure mental milk", as it may be read; it is that which the mind requires. Your mind, young though you may be, requires to be ministered to, and the Scriptures, the "pure mental milk of the word", are there, that you may grow, that you should not be dwarfed. You will not grow on husks. The thing, beloved friends, is to grow up unto salvation. That is to say, in the believer's mind there is growth, there is growth into manhood. The Spirit is superior to influences around, that is what it means. If you have *grown up* unto salvation, you find yourself arrived at a point where you are not influenced by any element of the world, and in that way you are prepared for headship. There has to be the development of the sensibilities of the person, so that there may be growth; there is maturity, and now you want only to listen to Christ; to listen to nothing else. Other things may have to be attended to, from a business point of view; but as regards your preferences, as regards the inmost desire of your soul, you only want to listen to Christ.
{392}
That is simple Christianity, beloved friends, to listen to Christ.
Well, now I pass on to @John 12, because I want to show you how Mary progressed. The Lord watches over each one of us as a tender plant; He delights in our growth. In @John 12 Mary had come to the full recognition of Christ, not only according to what He was to her, but according to what He was in relation to what was in the mind of God. I want to make that clear. She anointed His *feet*, mark you! not here His head. We have the anointing of His head elsewhere, and that has reference to His personal dignity. Mary was equal to that. But what we find here is the anointing of His feet. I do not know how you take account of the feet of the Lord Jesus. In @Luke 7 we have His feet anointed; they were anointed in the house of Simon the Pharisee. His head was anointed in the house of Simon the leper. In the house of Simon the Pharisee His feet were anointed by a woman who was said to have been a "sinner". What I understand by the anointing in @Luke 7 is that the woman appreciated the fact that those feet had carried the grace of God to her. The grace of God had been carried by those *beautiful feet*. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings". They had brought good tidings to her; in that blessed Person she saw the embodiment of God's grace for man; her heart was melted in the presence of *that*, and "she loved much". I do not know of anything so touching as the Lord's comment on her. He says, "she loved much". He does not tell us *why* she did it as He does of Mary here in @John 12, He just says, she loved much.
In @John 12 Mary acted with intelligence as well as with love. The woman in @Luke 7 acted out of affection; it was the Person whose feet she anointed that had attracted her. But then there is a greater
{393}
thing, not only to love that Person, but to know that His feet have carried Him all the way to the cross for the accomplishment of the divine counsels. That is learned by headship; that is learned from *Himself*; only from the Lord could Mary have learned that, and she *did* learn it. She had come to know Christ from His words, from what He had said to her as the One whose feet would carry Him to the cross, and He says, "against the day of my burying hath she kept this". The Lord in @Luke 7 vindicates the *affections* of the woman; in @John 12 He vindicates the *intelligence* of the woman; the two things go together. First you love Christ, then you listen to His word, you become intelligent; your action now is not only the act of love, it is the act of intelligence.
That is what He looks for in the assembly.
In @1 Corinthians 12 you have the Spirit as the motive power, as it were, of things; in chapter 13 you have the love; and in chapter 14 you have the intelligence. It is in chapter 14 that it is said, "God is in you of a truth"; in the midst of a people who are intelligent, who are intelligent in God's word, by coming to listen to Christ; that is how we become intelligent. Everything that you do in the assembly now is not only the fruit of love, it is governed by intelligence. As I have often said in regard to actions in the assembly, the point is to be governed by the light that governs the position. Whatever determines the position, determines the light that governs it. There is light to govern every position.
Take the gospel of Matthew. One feature of it is that there is a new kind of legislation. The Lord says, "I say unto you". Well now, the point for us to inquire is, What has *He* said about this position; what is *His* mind about that difficulty? Whatever is His mind about it, *that* is the light that governs it, and your action is to be governed by that mind, and that is acquired by *headship*.
{394}
Well, I do not proceed further. I hope I have made my point clear. The Lord would have us, in this day of commotion and excitement, to sit *down*, and in sitting down to open our ears and listen to Him. There is speaking going on; depend upon it the Lord is speaking; let us listen to that. We may be very feeble now on account of the conditions that exist, but nevertheless the Lord is speaking. Sit in quietness in His presence and listen to what He says, for in listening to what He says, you acquire knowledge about *everything*.
What I would say further, beloved friends, is that it is of much greater importance to get knowledge as to the limits of Canaan, the sphere of divine purpose, than to get knowledge as to the limits of any earthly territory. I do not despise prophecy, no one who loves Jesus will despise it, for "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy". But how will you get light about it? By listening to what He is saying. What do you think the Lord Jesus would talk to us about now? What territory? Do you not think the Lord would occupy us with our own territory? We are Levites, and Levites have no earthly territory at all. We belong to "the assembly of the firstborn ones registered in heaven". You do not want to be engaged with what belongs to another man until you find out about your own territory.
The Lord would take us up as He did Moses to the top of mount Nebo, and He would show us all the land of Canaan; what a vista that is! He has made it all good for us; we owe it all to Him; He has given each one of us a place in it, and from that point of vantage, that altitude, as we may say, we can look down upon the earth. @Genesis 10 is the great beginning of the prophetic line; all the families there you will see plainly marked out on the earth, and in the power of the Spirit from that high altitude we may be enabled to trace them all. In that we
{395}
are not out of sympathy with God, because the earth is God's footstool; heaven is His throne, the earth is His footstool; it belongs to God; we hold it in faith for Him, but our *place* is on high, and if the Lord speaks to us about territory He speaks to us about heaven.
May we then be like Mary, restful. I would remind you of a beautiful touch in @John 11. Of Mary it is said, she "sat still in the house"; she had the habit of being quiet. Whilst Martha rushed out to meet the Lord, Mary remained till He called for her "The Master is come, and calleth for thee". May the Lord give us that restfulness of spirit, so that we may listen to what He is saying.
{396}
THE DIVINE HIGHWAY
@Exodus 15: 13 - 17; @Numbers 33: 1 - 4, 50 - 56
My thought is to say a word about the journeyings of the saints. What I desire to make clear, by the Lord's help, is that divine record is kept of all our soul movements. It is necessary, first of all, that our souls should be in the light of what God effects from His own side, and to know that nothing can fail of that. In @Exodus 15 the saints are typically under the first impulse of the victory which had been achieved for them, and first impressions are always the richest. They had come to believe, we are told, in the Lord, and in His servant Moses. Since God had undertaken to deliver them, they are to go out of Egypt suitably. So all the plagues brought upon Egypt were not only intended as testimony to Pharaoh, but they were also intended as education for Israel.
Every plague carried with it its own lesson which Israel had to learn, until finally there was the last and greatest plague sent by the Lord, the death of the firstborn in Egypt. They were to profit by that above all the other plagues, and the lesson they were intended to learn from it was that in themselves they were no better than the Egyptians. I do not dwell on that, but as we proceed in the history we find that they finally arrived at definite faith in the Lord: they believed in Jehovah. It is a wonderful time when the saint arrives at that, when there is absolute confidence in God. They believed in Him we are told in a previous chapter, and not only did they believe in the Lord, but they believed in Moses. No mistake had been made in selecting a leader. They believed in Moses, so that they were in the full light in their souls typically of Jehovah in His faithfulness to them, and of Moses as the one whom He
{397}
had raised up in wisdom to lead them out. So much indeed was Moses before them that they were baptised to him, they "were all baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea".
Now @Exodus 15 is the outflow of the first impulse of victory, and as I said, you get the fullest and best thoughts at the beginning. The difficulties of the way needed God's sustainment, but it is refreshing to *start* with these wonderful thoughts. And what you find is that God had undertaken to *take* them out; He led forth the people whom He had redeemed. He had led them forth -- He had brought them *out* in order that He might bring them *in*. I want every soul here just to accept that. Not one iota of the divine mind about them can fail. He brings them in and *plants* them. What a wonderful plantation that must be! No mountain had ever been planted as that mountain, the mountain of Jehovah's inheritance. Think of being planted there! He brings them in and plants them in the mountain of His inheritance. In the light of the Christian's position what is it? It is just that wonderful epistle, known so well to us by name, but alas! known so little in power in our souls, the epistle to the Ephesians. God "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". That is what God proposes to do. It is put as if it were *done*, and the more you value the position the more you value the present tense: for if it is done it cannot be undone. God never repents of what is good. His calling is without repentance, His gift is without repentance; hence, as I said, the more you value the position the more you value the present tense: It is accomplished, and the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.
The epistle to the Ephesians is all on the line of gift and calling: that ye might know "the hope of his calling", and what guarantees the hope is the
{398}
power. What power? The exceeding greatness of His power manifested in the resurrection of Christ from among the dead. There is the guarantee for the hope. "That ye should know what is the hope of his calling ... and what the surpassing greatness of his power ... which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead". And another thing -- "the riches of the glory of his inheritance".
Think of it! It is the mountain of His inheritance all planted over, enriched with plantings such as that. He shall plant them in the mountain of His inheritance. Think of being there! Will you ever admit the thought for a moment that you arrive there by any efforts of your own? He has "made us to sit, down", and we do well to accept that, for the gifts and calling of God are not subject to change. It is viewed as accomplished, and there is no recalling it, and your soul will do well to accept that.
Then, on the other hand, there are the journeyings. You have nothing about Moses planting them in the inheritance, you have nothing about Aaron doing it, the Lord does it. But when you come to the journeyings you need Moses and you need Aaron, so that you find in @Numbers 33, "These are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron". Now I would be very simple and very practical, and I appeal to you as to whether you have set out under the guidance, "under the hand of Moses and Aaron". Do you wonder why it is that the Lord does not take us in at once? What about that delight, beloved friends, that God has in every movement of the saints? You do not wish to deny Him the delight that He has in every step? Think of Christ; God says, "Mine elect in whom my soul delighteth". That was Christ going through the world to carry out the divine will. He set out in this world to walk through it.
{399}
It was one labyrinth of evil, there was no way in it. You have in the Scriptures the idea of a divine highway. In @Judges 5 Deborah tells us that before she was raised up the highways were untrodden. I want you to bear in mind that there is a divine highway. That highway has been marked out through this world by the steps of Christ, and there is no crookedness in it. In the heavenly city there is only one street, and it is Straight. I mean to say there is only one street mentioned in the city. The street in which Paul was found was "called Straight". @Acts 9: 11. He was found in that street. It was a straight street. Now Deborah tells us that the highways were neglected, and the travellers went in byways, and the result was there were no villages. Depend upon it, if the highway which the Lord Jesus has marked out for us is neglected, we are in by-ways, crooked paths. How is it that the Lord's people are in crooked paths? They turn aside from the "highway", and there are no villages, no meetings, to use a well-known term. A meeting is scarcely a city. A village is not a city or town, there were not even villages, that is what Deborah tells us. Now the Lord Jesus has marked out a highway, a divine highway. He has gone before us, and, oh! with what pleasure the eye of God rested on those steps which turned not to the right or to the left! He went straight on I was speaking last night of Mary's anointing of Jesus¬ feet in @John 12. It expressed her appreciation of the way He had taken. It referred to her appreciation of the path He took, and of where it led to. It led down into death. That is the way the divine highway led. You may depend upon it the highway out of every difficulty is on that line. Mary anointed those feet. And, beloved friends, feet like those deserve our attention. I do not pursue that; I only wish to point out that in the journeyings of the
{400}
saints God has His pleasure. He had pleasure in Christ's footsteps, and we are to follow in those steps. It is "steps"; that is to say, there is one step at a time; not one complete journey, but one step after another, after Christ. It is in that way that the elect of God come to light, for in the epistles of Colossians and Romans we are regarded as the elect of God. God has His pleasure in His elect, and so we find in this remarkable chapter that by the commandment of the Lord all the journeyings of His people, from the moment they set out on the fifteenth day of the first month until they arrived at the banks of the Jordan are noted, Well, you may say, there were many crooked ways. Yes, they did not keep to the highway. But God followed them even in the crooked ways. The crooked ways are recorded. I do not know that any one could trace out on a map of the desert of Arabia the journeyings of the people, but God followed them. This chapter gives the spirit of what occurred, and we want to get at the spirit of things. If you have to do with prophecy you need the spirit of prophecy, and if you want to look at the journeys of God's people you need the spirit of them. The spirit of it is that God's eye follows you ever step. What! you say, in those crooked by-ways? Yes! even in crooked by-paths. Did not the Lord's eye follow Peter when he turned in there into the palace; that was not the highway. No, that was a crooked way, but the Lord's eye still followed Peter even in that crooked way. He had said, "I have prayed for thee". He follows us in grace in the crooked ways, but think with what pleasure He follows us when we come back into the straight path. In @Psalm 107 we read how "they wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way; they found no city to dwell in", but He led them forth and placed them on the right way. I connect that for the moment with @Numbers 21.
{401}
I do not believe that any Christian is really on the right way until he recognises the Spirit instead of the flesh. If you recognise the flesh in any way it will divert you, but if you recognise the Spirit you are on the right way. Then you begin to move on.
"That they might go to a city of habitation". You have power now to go there.
I want to engage you specially with the interest that God manifests in every one of us from the very outset of the journey until we arrive at the end of it. First, I would dwell for a moment on the start they made. We have often heard that it is a great thing to make a good beginning, and I desire to point out in Numbers how they began. They began publicly; and what I would say to you is that you begin with God publicly. Israel "went out in the sight of all the Egyptians". Many of us would like to go out privately; many a saint is content with that, but the Israelites went out publicly. What does it come to? It comes to this, that I have come to love Christ, and I want to make known to the world that I am on the side of Christ. I take a public position as identified with Christ. Have you done that? Are you doing it? They went out, it says, in the sight of all the Egyptians. What a glorious beginning that was! You may say, What do you mean? I mean that you take a public stand for Christ in the sight of the world, and in taking that public stand you are turning your back on the world, not only because you do not want it, but because it has rejected Christ; the world has rejected Christ, and in sight of that you go out of it. And what do you find then? You find the hand of God supporting you. If you follow what I am saying you will get profit by putting it in practice. If you take a public stand for Christ daily you will find His support.
God has a high hand; His support is with the believer as he goes out publicly.
{402}
Now I have often thought we do not go into heaven publicly. I quite admit the two witnesses in Revelation are said to ascend up to heaven in the sight of their enemies: that was God showing His approval of them. But the Lord Jesus went up into heaven privately; He did not go out of the world privately. He went out of the world at Jerusalem from the cross. The world never once saw Him after that. He remained on earth forty days after that in private, and when He went up to heaven it was not in the sight of all the world but in the sight of His loved disciples. Those who loved Him were His witnesses; they saw Him go into heaven, their hearts followed Him in, but He went out of the world in the sight of all the Egyptians. What a glorious testimony that was, and we are called to follow it. I dwell upon that especially for young believers, that they may make a good start and go out "in the sight of all the Egyptians". God records that. You notice how much He makes of it here. There is a great deal more said about that than of any other point in the passage, but nevertheless the Spirit of God through Moses records every step of the journeyings of His people. Oh, may the Lord give us to have a sense in our souls -- in our movements -- that He is taking account of us! If we had a sense of that there would be much less discouragement even in the presence of failure.
Now take @Exodus 17. The apostle, in alluding to this, says "they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them". @1 Corinthians 10: 4. Notice that! It is not which they carried, but the Rock that followed them. And who was the Rock? "That Rock was Christ". He follows you. If you notice in the allusion to Rephidim in @Numbers 33 you will see there is nothing said there about the people's murmuring; they did murmur grievously, and "tempted the Lord". But what does it say? "There was no
{403}
water for the people to drink". How touching that is! Instead of complaining about the murmuring of the people, it is said, "there was no water for the people to drink". That is a touch of grace. The Rock was there. So that in the presence of evil, even in the presence of failure, though it is not condoned, your heart is not discouraged in the journeying, for the Rock follows you. The Rock is there with the bountiful supply and refreshment of Christ; we have not to go for it, it follows us. Moses cried unto the Lord: "What shall I do? ... the people will stone me", and the Lord tells him to take the elders, "And thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go. Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb". Think of that! Think of God turning a deaf ear to the murmurings of the people and being at Horeb when the rock was smitten. The Rock was Christ: Christ was smitten, and God said, "I will be there". Ah, and He was there at the smiting of Christ. The people deserved chastisement, but the rod fell upon Christ and the water flowed forth. Now where is the need for discouragement? There is no excuse for murmuring, but God turned a deaf ear to the murmuring and said, "there was no water for the people to drink". What a touch of grace! He provides the water through the smiting of Christ. The Rock followed them.
Then we come to @Numbers 20, and there you have another Rock. I touch on this point just for a moment. We are all liable to failure on the journey. There are again murmurings in @Numbers 20 long after the event recorded in @Exodus 17. There are murmurings again; so much so that Moses called the people "rebels", but there is not a word about rebellion in the record which Moses wrote long afterwards under the hand of the Spirit. The Lord says to Moses, "Take the rod". What rod was that?
{404}
There was only one rod now. It was Aaron's rod, that is, in type, Christ in resurrection; not now Christ as smitten, but Christ as risen. If Christ be risen, if Christ is at the right hand of God, what may we not get from Him? God has raised up Christ and exalted Him in heaven, that your faith and hope might be in God. What now? What did the Lord say to Moses? "Speak to the rock". Do you habituate yourself to speaking to Him? It is not the time of smiting now, it is the time of speaking. If Christ be risen and glorified it is time to speak to Him. The way is open for men to speak and the water flows. The rod then taken was the rod that sprouted, blossomed and bore almonds; that was no rod to smite the rock with. You cannot connect smiting with Christ in heaven. It is the time of speaking. Now suppose you speak in the hour of your need, you will never be disappointed; the water flows, and the soul is refreshed.
In @Numbers 21 again you have water, not from smiting, nor speaking, but from digging. The flesh is now refused definitely in the history of the believer, and judged in the cross of Christ as set forth typically in the lifting up of the brazen serpent; and the water springs up. It is now within you, a fountain of water springing up to everlasting life, and you go on with that. You are on a straight road now. You are on the highway of which Deborah spoke. So the people went straight forward until they arrived at the banks of the Jordan. Thus you have step by step God's supply on the one hand and God's notations on the other, and I believe that there will be many more books, that is records, in the future than we think, and amongst them will be the record, the divine record, of the spiritual movements of God's saints in the wilderness.
Now when they come to Jordan all that stops, and what you find is that the people are to go in
{405}
and take possession. I was speaking of God taking us in and making us to sit down together. I do not know anything more beautiful. Think of God doing that! Raising us up and making us to sit down.
What attention we get in heaven! Not even an angel deputed to do it, God Himself does it. Think of the attention that saints receive at the hand of God in heaven, and in company with those we love there. After all the journeyings they want to go in to, Canaan. I do verily believe that the Spirit of God would put it upon the hearts of the saints to go into Canaan. I believe the Lord would speak to us as to what belongs to ourselves, as to what is our own distinctive territory. In @Numbers 26 the inheritance is carefully divided by Eleazar and Joshua amongst the tribes, whereas here they are to go in and take possession and divide it amongst themselves. I will just say one word about that. What is it to be doing things amongst ourselves? It is one thing for Christ to do things for us, or for God to do things for us, for truly we shall be allotted our position there by divine appointment; but according to this chapter the people are to go over and divide it amongst themselves. What mutuality there is in that, and how are they to do it? Is there to be selfishness? Is there to be a me first? No, there is consideration for others who have large families. See the grace of the Spirit of Christ. What puts us to the test is to do things together, dividing things between ourselves. There is nothing more pleasing to God than mutuality if it is governed by divine affection, and that is what this passage supposes. It supposes that the people have arrived, in the power of the Spirit, at the banks of the Jordan. And He says, Now go over and divide the inheritance amongst yourselves.
I would put it before you, beloved, that mutuality of affection is one of the greatest features attaching to the Christian position. God does not leave anything
{406}
indefinite from His side: all is carefully divided under the supervision of Eleazar, but here they are to go in and divide it themselves; it is this mutuality that brings out where we are spiritually, and it soon becomes apparent as to whether self rules or whether love rules. If we are under the influence of love there would be consideration. The circumstances of each are taken account of, and that is the principle that obtains in Canaan. I would add that I am not speaking now of heaven literally; Canaan is not heaven literally, it is the light of heaven for us now. When the Lord comes to take us to heaven He comes Himself. Abraham's servant does not represent the power that takes us to heaven actually, but the power that takes us to Christ now in the history of our souls. When it is a question of being taken to heaven the Lord Himself comes for us; He does not leave it even to the Spirit, although the Spirit would do it faithfully; the Spirit brings us to the banks of Jordan. I want you to understand that. You go over in the Spirit's power to Canaan now, but Christ comes to take you to heaven literally. Christ comes for us, "The Lord Himself shall descend", and we shall go up with Him; our place there is already arranged, our abode is already prepared; we do not divide it amongst ourselves there; it is all arranged by Christ in heaven. Hence this chapter alludes to what we have now. It is the light of God's purpose known now in our souls, and the mutuality that is to mark the saints, due consideration for each other; that is one great feature of Canaan.
May the Lord use these thoughts, for one feels the seriousness of the day, that we may journey and that we may go on the straight highway that Christ has marked out. I love that thought! The Lord Jesus Christ has marked out a highway, the apostles trod it, and all the men of faith trod it,
{407}
and there it is now for us. Deborah spoke about the highway as untrodden, so that the travellers went in by-ways; and is it not so with many at the present time? To a great extent the highway is deserted, people have turned aside into by-ways.
May the Lord turn our feet into the highway. You will minister pleasure to God's heart as you walk in the steps of Christ.
{408}
COVENANT RELATIONSHIPS AND FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS -- PART I
@Romans 5: 5 - 11; @Romans 8: 14 - 17
It is important to connect @Romans 5 with @Exodus 19, as it answers to it, and it would help if we were to see that the covenant, which God has been pleased to make, involves a certain kind of relationships and affections. These are in themselves distinct from the relationships and affections connected with the revelation of the Father, which involve the family. We have to do with God in both these connections, and the family connection is the higher, and is that which will abide. The covenant relationships connect themselves with our circumstances here, and stand in relation to God.
I do not say that the family relationships are not connected with God, because God is our Father, but the covenant supposes that at one time we were not in relationship with God, for a covenant is, according to the type, formally entered into; whereas, as children or sons, we are from the outset related to God; as children we are said to be born of God and as sons we are adopted, all from the divine side. It is very interesting that in suggesting the covenant, God condescended to commend Himself to the people, and so in @Romans 5 He commends His love to us. In proposing to enter into a covenant with Israel, He called attention to what He had done for them, what He did to the Egyptians, and how He had borne His people upon eagles¬ wings and brought them to Himself. God then proposes that if they should keep His covenant and obey Him, certain consequences would follow, as much as to suggest that it was worth their while to enter into a
{409}
contract with such a God as He was. The bearing of that now is, that as God becomes known in the gospel, the believer is challenged as to whether he is prepared to enter into covenant with such a God as that.
It is the Christian's privilege to take up everything in relation to God; his family and his business, all is now on that ground. In Timothy we are told that every creature of God is good and to be received with thanksgiving, for "it is sanctified by God's word and freely addressing him". That is to say, God is admitted into everything; you do not keep Him out of any part of the sphere for which you are responsible. Obviously we must begin with a certain understanding with God, and this is what covenant suggests.
The earlier chapters of Romans show what God has been to us, and in chapter 5 the suggestion is that it is worth our while to enter into covenant with such a God as this. God is pleased even to commend His love to us, as though He would say, Now you know; so that the soul has an understanding with God. Romans regards us as men here upon earth, once alienated and away from God. Now He has come out to where we were; in this chapter He appeals to what He has done. He commends His love to us, not as His children or His sons, but as those who were sinners, who were without strength. So that it comes to this in one's soul: Is one prepared to enter into this understanding with God? He has reserved nothing; indeed it is most touching to consider how God has come out unreservedly. He has held back nothing. He said to the people, "Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians", and then He makes the proposal that there should be a definite bond between Him and them. I think it is a most important question to raise in one's soul as to whether there is that understanding with God; whether, as a responsible
{410}
person here in this world, there is an understanding with God in the light of the revelation of Himself.
The wilderness takes its character from that. The people who walked in the wilderness were by formal committal, outwardly at least, in covenant relationship with God. They were not simply a delivered people, but were a people with whom God had formed a definite bond. Moses "told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments; and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words that Jehovah has said will we do"; see @Exodus 24: 3 - 8.
God intended that He should become an object for the soul. I think that is quite left out in the popular preaching of the day. God's thought is that, as delivered, there should be an understanding between Him and us, and not only so, but a definite bond to which He has committed Himself to begin with, and to which we also have committed ourselves, because it is in our committal to it that the conscience is brought into play. If you commit yourself to a bond, and you are at all honest, you must be consistent. This chapter shows, in the experience of at least one man, Paul, that he had found it a profitable bond. He had found it worth while to take it up, because this is a triumphant record of his experience. God having acquired a permanent place in the heart of the believer, it is God's thought that the believer should put out his hand, as it were, and commit himself.
The early chapters of Exodus up to chapter 19 set before us what God has done on His own initiative. The people did not ask to be delivered. He took account of their condition, and on His own initiative He came down to deliver. But in coming down He intimated that the people, as delivered, should serve Him there where He met Moses on the mount of
{411}
God, mount Horeb, chapter 3. In chapter 19 there is a formal message sent by God through Moses to the people, and Moses delivered the message, and then returned from the people with their answer to God. In that way the contract is sealed in the hands of a mediator. Henceforth the people are not simply a delivered people; they are a people in relationship with God. They have definitely committed themselves to a relationship, a bond with God. Now I think that is what we want to see in Christianity.
In @Romans 5, we being sinners and without strength, is all past, just as their circumstances in Egypt were past history, but what I see is the commendation that God gives of Himself. He was pleased to condescend to commend Himself to Israel, so that the people might see that it would be a gain to them to enter into covenant with Him: The idea of the covenant originated with God. It was as much as to say: I want you nearer to Me than you are. That is really what is in it. The law is that by which sin is made known, but behind the suggestion, in God's heart, there was the desire that His people should be near Him, that there should be a closer relationship than simply knowing God as a Saviour God.
@Romans 5 does not contemplate our side. It shows how God has intervened for those once without strength, and who were sinners, and has delivered them. He has shown His love objectively in the gift of Christ His Son. The cross is the testimony objectively to what He is to us. But He has not only done that: He has shed abroad His love in our hearts. "Shed abroad", or poured out, indicates plenitude: it is in our hearts in fulness by the Spirit, to the end that there should be a people in the world in close relationship with Him and richly responding to Him. The end of the passage says: "through whom now we have received the reconciliation".
{412}
We have received it. We, who were once alienated, are now for God's pleasure. There is a definite understanding between us and God, and the reconciliation implies that there is no disparity morally on our side, for we are made the righteousness of God in Christ, @2 Corinthians 5: 21.
The love that met our condition remains, and not only objectively, as seen in the death of Christ, but it is in the believer's heart. James, in @Acts 15, shows that God had visited the nations to take out of them a people. There is a people and God. That is not God and His sons or His children, but God and a people. That is the situation outwardly in the world now. In the future God's law will be written in the hearts and minds of His people, but what we have now is not only that, but His love is in our hearts. God is definitely before the believer, so that he joys in God, and this is brought about by the Spirit. The Spirit sheds abroad the love of God, and in consequence of that there is a drawing near to Him by those who love Him.
You get the idea in Elisha. "Elijah went over to him and cast his mantle on him", and Elisha was affected by it. He was not quite ready to go, but later "he arose and went after Elijah, and ministered to him". Now there is a divine touch in every believer's heart. The question is what are you going to do after that? If it is answered to, there is a turning to God in the soul, and an entering into an understanding with God, which places you amongst His people in this world. The soul commits itself to God, not simply that God should keep and protect you, of course He will, but that you are among a people of whom He is the God, with certain responsibilities attaching to you as amongst that people. This is altogether another matter from your relation with Him as a son and a child. The former is a national thought, you may say, for you have the
{413}
very expression, "a holy nation"; whereas the latter is a family thought, and hence more intimate. But God never surrenders any thought He introduces, and He has introduced the idea of a people and a nation, and these continue and find their answer in the saints now, for we have the Spirit. You see what it is to be in relationship with such a God as He; as another has said
<blockquote>"In the desert God will teach thee <br>What the God that thou hast found <br>Patient, gracious, powerful, holy: <br>All His grace shall there abound". (`76:6)</blockquote>
The apostle's word to the Thessalonians was that they had turned to God "to serve the living and true God; and to wait for his Son from heaven". I think that indicates the position. God is presented to the soul in the gospel, and the question is, whether the light you have of Him is sufficient to induce you to put out your hand, and commit yourself to Him. If you do, it places you among His people, that we "might serve him without fear ... all the days of our life". That is what is in view in these covenant relationships which exist while we are down here. I do not see that these relationships go into heaven, but refer to what we are as down here, that we are in relationship with God, and our boast is in Him. We were once in the world and had our part in it, and we were not distinct from it, but now we are distinct from it; we belong to a people whom such a God has set apart for Himself.
In @Romans 8 we have the Spirit to enable us to answer to the obligation each has committed himself to, so that the righteous requirement of the law is "fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". There is a righteous requirement attached to the position, and the Spirit enables
{414}
us to comply with it, so that God is honoured in His people.
There is a helpful distinction between the widow in @1 Kings 17 and the widow in @2 Kings 4. The widow that Elijah had to do with had a little meal; it was not yet kneaded into dough; it was a little meal in a barrel and a little oil in a cruse. Whereas the widow that Elisha had to do with had oil in the house; it does not say she had meal. In the former case the meal and the oil would subsist until rain came down from heaven; whereas in the case of the widow in @2 Kings 4 the oil was to increase until there was not a vessel more left. I think the little meal in relation to Elijah rather signifies Christ here, whereas the oil in relation to Elisha in 2 Kings signifies the Spirit here, but the difficulty was that she was not trading with it; she did not make the best use of it, and hence she was in poverty, which is, alas, illustrative of many of God's people. Although it is really a day of plenty, and they have the Holy Spirit, yet they do not trade, they do not use the Holy Spirit, and hence are in poverty. Elisha says, "Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt". It means that you make full use of, give full scope to, the Holy Spirit. It is not enough to have the Holy Spirit; the thing is to use the Spirit, so that there are transactions which I understand to be exercise of soul. You are not waiting for rain from heaven; you are availing yourself of what is here and you are in affluence.
Rain from heaven is a necessity, and God gives it periodically; but you do not want rain every day, and if you are depending on rain, on ministry, there is a danger that you will go without anything, you will often go hungry, whereas if you use the little you have, that which every Christian in principle has in the Holy Spirit, you will have abundance with which to pay your debts and live besides, and will
{415}
no longer be a public charge. A person who depends entirely on ministry is a public charge. In Christianity no one ought to be a public charge, because the little oil is there in the Holy Spirit. God has paid all your debts. In the cross, God has met everything, adjusted everything in the face of the universe. Now the knowledge of that in the soul leads to the same principle in the believer, and you want to be right, in right relation with everybody. We are set down here to be like God; that is the idea in "a people". Now, what has God shown Himself to be? He has met every obligation in Christ. On the ground of redemption, every possible obligation has been met and adjusted, and God looks for an answer to that in us. If He is to be God to a people, that people must conform to what He is; hence He gives us the Holy Spirit in order that we might discharge every righteous obligation; for "the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh, but according to Spirit".
When you come to a truly spiritual man he considers for God and Christ and the saints, and goes down to the lowest creature in God's creation. He considers for everything. You will find that in the book of Deuteronomy even a bird is to be considered. A sparrow does not fall to the ground without God, and the saint is in accord with this. The book of Deuteronomy opens up that in the most remarkable way, but evidently, before you can act in that way, you must pay your debts. I think it is a fine thing to see a man paying his debts and then living handsomely. That is a Christian.
I have often thought about the clean birds and the unclean birds. In @Deuteronomy 14 we have the different creatures that are to be used and those not to be used for food, and among these we have a list of unclean birds. There is no list of clean ones;
{416}
the unclean ones only are given. Now I refer to it here because it fits in with the covenant and the Spirit, that not only do you pay your debts, but you live handsomely, you have independent means. It says, the Spirit is life, that is, the means of living. The unclean bird I take to represent a man of the world who has worldly means, he is not dependent on anybody, but carries a high head. He soars above the common people. Now the Christian also has independent means, and he is superior, but he is clean, and lowly in his superiority; before he leaves the earth he has discharged every righteous obligation that rested upon him.
Now, the young man that came to the Lord had abundance of means, and the Lord says, "go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor"; that is the righteous requirement of the law. He was unequal to this: he "went away grieved", @Mark 10: 22. Selling what he had and giving to the poor, he would have treasure in heaven, but retaining his riches, leaving the Lord at the same time, constituted him an unclean bird. He should not dwell on high, see @Psalm 15 and @Isaiah 33: 15, 16. No man can leave the earth, according to God, until he discharges every obligation resting upon him. He is enabled to do that by the Spirit, and then he can mount up. You love God with all your heart and your neighbour as yourself. You do not leave any unrighteous conduct behind you, everything is adjusted.
We find these moral obligations in all the circumstances in which we live on the earth. You begin with your house. It is remarkable that in @Luke 5, the man who was healed of the palsy is sent into his house, and he comes into his house carrying his bed. That shows that he has means, he has power. His wife and children would regard him as a very different man from what he had been. If you look at it
{417}
spiritually, the man is sent back into his house carrying his bed, a changed man.
The next character you find is a man who makes a great feast to the Lord in his house. It is the same man really; the Lord can share in this entertainment. These conditions are brought about by the Spirit. The Spirit enables us to provide for the Lord, so that, instead of expecting the wife and children to do everything, you carry things, you are on that line. That maintains happy conditions in the home, and the same thing would apply to the whole circle in which your obligations lie. Thus the enlightened Christian makes a better master or servant. He is enabled to discharge every obligation differently as serving "the Lord Christ"; that dignifies the service; everything is done for Him. When you come to the family of God we read, "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God"; it is not now that you are using the Spirit to pay your debts, nor to live by, but you are led by Him, @Romans 8: 14. The land of Canaan is in view, to speak typically. The Spirit will not lead you to prominence in business, politics, or society. He will lead you out of sight, out of the world entirely, and God knows you thus as a son.
Sonship is not seen in paying your debts, which is a matter of righteousness, but in being led by the Spirit, the Spirit controls us. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God". It is not the walk in the wilderness that is in view.
It is the walk out of it. The Spirit leads you out of the wilderness, the world, into Canaan. I would connect walk as a matter of wilderness testimony with paying your debts, and in this respect guidance is by the pillar of cloud and the tent of meeting, rather than by the Spirit.
In @Romans 8 it is a question of how you are recognised as a son. A son is marked by the fact that he
{418}
does not consult the flesh; he consults the Spirit. The Spirit is the leading power in his soul; he is led to glory; that is where the Spirit leads us. As thus controlled by the Spirit, we are recognised as in the dignity of sons. Then it goes on to say, that God has not given us the spirit of bondage, but He has given us the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. So that in this the Father is before the soul,, it is the family line, the line that leads into the Father's house, which is eternal.
In @Numbers 21 you have a people typically led by the Spirit, and Deuteronomy is on that basis. They are in Moab, which is viewed there as divine territory, not territory in which they are to live, not the territory of family relationship, but the stepping-stone to it. Deuteronomy supposes a people led already by the Spirit, and hence they are prepared for the heavenly side of things, for the land. It is a company of sons, who are led into Canaan. The authority of Moses led them out of Egypt through the wilderness, it is divine authority in leadership.
But Moses does not lead into Canaan. The people that go into Canaan are already led by the Spirit.
The Spirit leads the sons. I do not say that there is not a place for Joshua, because there is. But I think we ought to emphasise the fact that the Spirit leads the sons. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God".
Deuteronomy is a sort of moralising on all the previous experience of the people. They are referred back to certain experiences in their previous history, and it is pointed out to them what God was to them and what Moses was to them in these circumstances; that is, what God and Christ are to us, and all to the end that we might be induced to go over to where They live, where divine affections flow.
The boundaries having been given in Numbers, in Deuteronomy you have the full extent of the land
{419}
explained and described, that is Ephesians. The boundaries are really Colossians, you set your mind on things above, not on the things on the earth. The boundary lies in the "not". For the moment God is moving in connection with heaven, and it is for every Christian to be acquainted with the boundaries of Canaan, so that he may not be found outside of them. I mean that in your mind and heart you are inside the boundaries of Canaan; that is, living in heavenly associations.
The laws and injunctions in relation to Canaan come out more in connection with Moses. You scarcely find in Deuteronomy the expression, "The Lord spake unto Moses saying". What you do find is what Moses said himself. That is, it is the unfolding of Moses¬ personal interest in the people. He loves the people and he is concerned that they might get all the good of the divine purpose, that there should not be anything lacking in them, that they might reap all the benefit of the purpose of God, that they might come into that good land, a land watered by the rain of heaven, a land flowing with milk and honey. He says, I cannot go in, but I want you to go in. Typically, he could not go in because he represented the authority of God. That is the light in which to read the book of Deuteronomy. You will find that the Spirit of God, especially in the opening chapters, greatly stresses the land of Canaan.
Romans and, to some extent, Colossians answer to Deuteronomy. The latter more the entrance into Canaan, giving the boundary between earth and heaven. You are to live on the other side of Jordan. You are to set your mind on things above, not on things on earth. No matter how apparently good anything is on the earth, you are not to set your mind on it. Ephesians contemplates the land possessed: there we are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies
{420}
in Christ. The book of Deuteronomy supposes that the spiritual man feels with the whole creation, but at the same time the mind and heart are set on things above; his living associations are in heaven. "Our commonwealth has its existence in the heavens", @Philippians 3: 20.
COVENANT RELATIONSHIPS AND FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS -- PART II
@Romans 8: 14 - 17, 28 - 30; @Ephesians 2:18 - 22
In these passages we see that the effect of the Holy Spirit in the believer is to lead him to the Father, and this has to be distinguished from entering the holiest. We have in Hebrews the idea of entering the holiest, drawing near to God, whereas in Ephesians what we have is access to the Father. The first has reference to the covenant, to God, whereas the second is the family thought, drawing near to the Father.
We ought to be prepared for the family thought. It implies the greatest privilege, for it abides, it goes on for ever. We have the complete thought presented in @John 14, the Father's house. The Father's house has to be distinguished from the house of God. The house of God has reference to what is down here; the Father's house has reference to what is up there.
There is a distinction between access to the Father and entrance into the holiest. Entrance into the holiest is connected with the mediatorial system. It is "having an high priest over the house of God", and "Having ... boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus"; that is, the blood of the covenant. Having these, "Let us draw near", @Hebrews 10. It is a mediatorial system, in connection with which the covenant stands, whereas the Father is a family name, and those who have access stand in relationship to Him and approach Him by the
{421}
Spirit, not by the blood of Jesus, see @Ephesians 2: 18 and @Hebrews 10: 19.
The mediatorial system appears in the wilderness. It was set up at Horeb, whereas access to the Father corresponds more to entrance into Canaan, where priesthood and the blood are not in evidence. Leviticus opens up the thought of approach to God, and that is what is alluded to in Hebrews, and took place in the wilderness. The believer is looked at as having come out of Egypt, as having had a previous history in responsibility in Egypt, a sinful history and sinful associations. Now he is seen as having title to enter into the holiest of all, but it is by the blood and by the priest. Hence it is as one of the people that you have to do with entering; but when you come to the Father the thought of the blood is dropped. Of course it has its place foundationally, but it is connected with the covenant. You enter into the presence of the Father on the ground of family relationship, and it is by the Spirit. In the history of our souls of course both go on together, but I think you can understand that approaching God on the ground of the blood is one thing, and approaching on the ground of family relationship another.
In the tabernacle there was just the ark in the holiest, indicating what Christ was under God's eye as Man. Within the ark there was the testimony, the law, which represented the will of God, and of course the cherubim were there looking towards the mercy-seat; that is, Christ had the law in His heart. So that, entering into the holiest, what you find there is a Man entirely different from what you are accustomed to outside. You are accustomed to lawless men outside, whereas inside you are accustomed to a Man who does God's will, His pleasure is in God's will, so that He is totally different from the man you are accustomed to outside. Hence, when you get in there, your mind is altered about everything,
{422}
and you form an accurate judgment of what is outside. "Until I entered unto the sanctuary", says the Psalmist, "then understood I their end". Inside He saw a Man that was to abide. Of course He is the Son of God, but it is the Man who carried out God's will whom you see there, and we gather from that that all other men are to go, for he says, "then understood I their end", meaning that all other men have to come to an end. Only that order of Man is to remain.
When you come to the Father, He Himself is in view, that is, as revealed by the Son, and also the Son, and the brethren; the Spirit being the power subjectively by which we draw near.
Approach or having access to the holiest is as individuals, as I understand it. Each one has the title to draw near on the ground of the blood. The Spirit is connected with it as power, because it says by the new and living way. We require power in our souls for it. It is what we see there that enables us to form a judgment as to what is outside. There we learn the divine mind about everything.
In having access to the Father, there is this difference that we have the idea of "two" there. We "both", it reads, through Him have access to the Father by one Spirit. But whether it be entering into the holiest, or entering into the Father's presence, it certainly has an individual application, because each one has to enter. Only, when you come to the Father it is as "worshippers", @John 4: 23. Sonship as to us is usually in the plural -- "sons". And so in Ephesians we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father. Of course that is Jew and Gentile, but the plural is there.
There is a difference between the holiest and the sanctuary. The holiest (literally, "Holy of holies", @Hebrews 9: 3) was inside the second veil of the tabernacle: it represented the immediate presence of
{423}
God. The sanctuary generally included the whole tabernacle. In @Psalm 73:17 the word is in the plural. The sanctuaries of God necessarily include the most holy place. Thus while the sanctuary is a wider thought, the holiest is exclusive. The holiest is where Christ is seen as the Man who carried out God's will down here. It is the ark with the law in it, and the law signified God's will and that was in Christ's heart. The one predominating thought in His heart was to carry out God's will. His delight was in it, not simply as a matter of duty. That is the kind of Man that is inside, and one deduces from that that all other men have to go, because, although the Psalmist learned himself, he also judged others. He said, "then understood I their end", hence it is obvious that God is not going on with a Man that is inside and a man that is outside, though it does appear sometimes as if we could go on with them both. That is, we assume we have title to enter the holiest, and yet we go on with the man outside as well. Now that is not consistent. God went on with the man outside until Christ appeared, and in Christ here God graciously presented to men in Him His thought in manhood, but men refused it; they preferred to retain the old. Now Christ is no longer in public evidence; He is inside the veil, and we go in there and learn in Him God's thought, and come out with a true judgment of what is here. Hence I do not think any man has a right judgment of things in this world unless he has been in the holiest.
In the types the holiest was both in the tabernacle and the temple, and will appear in the millennium, as Ezekiel shows: it marks the assembly's place, the holy place referring to Israel. But viewing the wilderness and the land (meaning the heavenly position) as applying to the believer now, the holiest is properly connected with the wilderness.
As we come together for the Lord's supper we
{424}
should be led on to access to the Father. Entering the holiest is a matter of light; a question really of the apprehension you have of Christ in the presence of God. Having a High Priest over the house of God you feel quite free to look at Christ, and consider Him as near to Him, not at a distance, also as He is as Man before God now.
This enables us to understand how God brings everything to pass; we get divine secrets there. We learn that in Christ as Man, God has before Him the means of bringing everything to pass for His pleasure, and understand how His thoughts will be realised. But then we have to come out again into the world, which is the very opposite of all that, and we come out with a true judgment of what is outside.
As we enter the holiest we are enabled to judge as to what we are in the flesh. We do not forget what the flesh is in us. The Psalmist, for instance, learned it. He says, "I was as a beast before thee",
@Psalm 73: 22. But he did not have that judgment before he went in. Moreover, he learned what other men were, and what their end would be. The mind of the believer is adjusted in regard to present conditions by the holiest, and thus he can understand how God can bring His thoughts to pass in spite of present conditions, because He has a Man who does His will. We get light for the wilderness in the holiest. We are adjusted as to everything, and our way is clear and we see the end of all down here. We form a moral judgment of everything that exists in this world.
Our conduct in the wilderness is governed by what we have learned inside. It is the secret of our course. Men do not understand our course, and it is quite impossible for us to explain it to them. Nothing is so difficult, in a way, as to try and explain our position to men who are "beasts"; that is, those who have no intelligence, because such are those who have
{425}
not entered the holiest. "I was as a beast", says the Psalmist, "before thee". So the apostle refers to unregenerate men as senseless, and nothing is more difficult than to explain our course to such people.
The fact is, we cannot do it. We have to endure the reproach attaching to a position that seems unreasonable. We seem to be unreasonable because we cannot vote, we cannot join in military service, we cannot assist the nation, and so forth. It is unreasonable to those who have not entered the holiest, but it is not unreasonable to those who have entered; it is the most reasonable thing, it is the only course.
On that ground you suffer the reproach of Christ. You take the course with a firm tread because you have been inside. You have no doubt about it. It is thus imperative to go inside, because we must have the mind of God; we can then step forward; we have no doubt at all about our path; but are prepared to suffer for it.
The effect of entering the holiest would be seen in what we do and say as we come together in assembly for the Lord's supper. That is, we act in accord with it. Your hymn and your giving of thanks, indeed, everything you do would be spiritually intelligent. That is how it comes out. One can discern a man who has been inside; he knows what to do. Where did he learn it? He learned it from Christ. Those who act and speak at the Lord's supper disclose whether they have been in or not; but the Supper is outside, not inside.
You learn in the holiest both the ways of God and the purpose of God. You learn how His thoughts are brought about. They are brought about in a Man who has pleasure in carrying out God's will; that is really the secret of how God brings it to pass. And where do you see that Man? You see Him inside. But then you also learn there what has been brought about, and which abides for ever. Thus you
{426}
not only know how to regard what is in the world and how to walk through it, but you know what is in God's world; what He is in the assembly and how to serve Him there.
@Romans 8 lays the basis for Ephesians. It is the spirit of things in @Romans 8, but in Ephesians you get the things themselves. But the point as to the holiest is most important for us. You will always see in what a man does and says, whether he has been inside or not. The most of us learn from people who have been inside; but why should not each one go inside?
Mary in @Luke 10 was listening, and she sat at Jesus¬ feet. In that way she learned what kind of a Man He was. Necessarily that would be reflected in her. Intelligence was seen in what she did. So with all of us. A man who has been inside knows how to act in the assembly, and in every sphere, but particularly in the divine sphere. He knows what to do, and he does not mix things. He is governed by the light that governs the position. Whatever the position may be, he recognises that there is a light governing that position, and he is governed by that light.
When it is a question of approach to the Father it is much more intimate. Priesthood is not so evident. The Father stands in relation to the family. The mediatorial system as set up at Horeb contemplated the existence of sin, but that the service of God should proceed notwithstanding. We come into the antitype, as we learn in Hebrews. It is provisional in view of actual conditions in which the people of God are found. In spite of these conditions they are enabled through it to enter on their eternal portion now, and able to worship the Father. While it is clear that mediatorship in Christ does not cease, for men must in all circumstances be in relation to God through it, yet what provides
{427}
against sin and its results will necessarily be needless when all things are of God.
In the verses read in Ephesians the apostle is treating of what Christians already come into, as a present enjoyment; it shows that we may enter now into the sphere of privilege. We shall be taken to the Father's house, @John 14, but already, in the power of the Spirit, we have access to the Father. The family thought for us is connected with heaven; when sons are spoken of, the objective is glory. God is "bringing many sons to glory", @Hebrews 2: 10.
In the Lord's supper the breaking of bread is from the side of Christ to bring His love to us: it brings Christ to us so that He obtains a place in the heart. The Lord is recognised as having a place in the heart, and then you get the movement from our side. He comes to us, as it were, in the Supper; and then He takes a place in relation to us which implies another movement. In the cup, which is the new covenant in His blood, He is on God's side, and He impresses us with the love of God, which liberates us, and then He takes a place on our side and leads us to the Father. He is our Head. The Lord becomes leader, and that necessarily refers to the Father, so that you come into what is eternal and heavenly for the moment.
The mediatorial system as we have spoken of it effects adjustment of everything for us in regard to the present mixed condition of things here, whereas, having to do with the Father implies what is eternal, the Spirit being the power in us for access to Him. In Hebrews access is by the blood, but while the blood is mentioned in @Ephesians 2 as making us nigh, it is by the Spirit through Christ we approach the Father.
Referring to the Supper, it is clearly connected with the covenant. Hence it is connected with what is mediatorial. It effects adjustment, so that we
{428}
are free to take up family relationships. The cup is the new covenant in Christ's blood.
It is most important to remark that we cannot hold in our minds both thoughts at the same time. The conditions connected with the holiest as in the wilderness are distinct from the conditions connected with the Father. This is sometimes overlooked. Hence we find in the meetings hymns about the Father introduced at the beginning, taking us forward beyond what is immediately before us. We ought to go on with what is immediately before us, and be governed by the light that governs that position. You go on with that, and you recognise how Christ has given up the body in which He carried out God's will here. We must remember that the Lord Jesus had pleasure in carrying out God's will. He gave up that body in devoting Himself for our sakes, and God gave Him up for our sakes. So you have God and Christ in their love for us presented to us in the Supper. All that ought to affect our hearts in regard to God and in regard to Christ. All that being gone through in our souls, there is conscious adjustment, and in virtue of that adjustment we are prepared for family relations.
You contemplate the body of Christ. "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?" That is a serious thing to consider. How are you eating it? Do you discern that body? Many, the apostle says, eat and drink, not discerning the Lord's body. In discerning the body you learn in your soul what is for God's pleasure, in the One who carried out God's will, and that challenges you. So also when you come to the cup, it refers to the life of Christ, and what that life was for God here on earth; it was given up. That touches the heart. God gave up that life for us. Hence it is said to be "the new covenant in my blood". It is Christ viewed in His devoted life as Man on earth. God
{429}
gave up that, and that was a real sacrifice on God's part. God's side is thus seen in the cup, because it refers to what is in God's heart for us.
I was thinking of the sons of Jacob. They said to Joseph that they were honest men, the sons of one man, and they were twelve brethren, but they had to say, "one is not". They were tested in Joseph's presence. We come out as true men in the adjustment which the Supper suggests. That is one effect of it, and we must have that side first. We must have the idea of God and man before Him rightly adjusted in our souls and minds, and that adjustment is to be maintained. They said, "Thy servants were twelve brethren". When you come to brethren and father you have the family thought. The Lord comes in at the Supper, and as coming in He is the Firstborn. He is the Firstborn among many brethren. It is in that connection that you come into the family affections. It is as we are each adjusted by the breaking of bread, in discerning the Lord's body, that the Lord can take His place in the midst. It comes about in that way.
I think it is of great importance to have clearly in our souls the idea of being true men; that is, men of Christ's order. The box may be considered as very trivial; but it becomes an opportunity for a true man to show himself, to show just how much he has been affected by what God is. That is our side of the covenant. God's side is that He has given up that precious life for us. Now, what are you going to give up? So the box becomes an occasion to show how much we are affected. It comes in in connection with what is righteous down here; what a man ought to be down here in the light of what Christ was down here.
The box is in the nature of sacrifice. It shows how much you are affected by what God has done. "For God loveth a cheerful giver". You give liberally.
{430}
God enters into that more than we think. It is not that He attaches any value to the money itself, but He attaches value to what is behind it, to what leads you to give. The widow put in all that she had, and the Lord greatly valued that.
In a meeting where the brethren were true they would have no difficulty in making ends meet. Every one does his part; that is righteousness in us. "He has given to the poor, his righteousness remains for, ever". That is what each brother is to be -- a righteous man. Righteousness is seen in giving. The intention in the epistle to the Romans is to adjust the saints as on earth, and there is no possibility of entrance into heaven by the Spirit now until things are adjusted on earth. You have righteousness.
That is to say, a man reflecting what God is. He is held to be righteous in the gospel as a believer, but then he is to have righteousness in a practical sense. The Spirit is life in view of righteousness, and how it works out is that a believer is able to pay his debts and to give, he has means. It may seem to be irrelevant to bring that in in connection with the Supper, but it goes with the Supper. If you have a company of people here, where Christ was under God's eye, maintaining righteousness, you have a company of His disciples, they are like Him; they are adjusted in regard to everything here. They are prepared for heavenly privilege; that is the other line, the up line.
How can we enter into heavenly privilege now until we have paid our debts and fulfilled righteousness? You cannot think of a man having access to the Father, who is not right as to his position outside. It is quite unthinkable. God means to have a people before Him like Christ. They are adjusted as men; then they are sons as well. There is adjustment through the Supper; and then there is liberty for the up line. Righteousness in the sense we are
{431}
speaking of is, so to speak, a horizontal line. It is a question of things being right here on the earth, but when you come to sonship it is on the ascending line. God is leading many sons to glory.
Sonship is a collective idea, you are a son; but God is leading many sons to glory; going to heaven is collective. Paul was received up into heaven, but it was as a special vessel. The thought applied generally is that God "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 6.
"Draw me, we will run after thee" gives the thought; it is as if she said, we will all go, but it starts with the individual. That is very beautiful. I think there is a great disposition to leave some of the brethren behind. They are not just the kind we like, and if they do not come we are content to be without them; but that is not the divine sentiment at all. You will always find where there is faith, and the activity of divine love, that all who belong to God are included in the heart. Whatever their state may be, we do not want to be without them the family is a necessity, so that there might be a proper outlet for the affections.
When you touch sonship the whole range of divine purpose opens up before you, for "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God". You have that expression in @Romans 8. The whole number is in view, the object being that Christ might be the Firstborn among many brethren. Then you have the thought that every one whom God predestinated, He called; whom He called, He justified, and whom He justified, them He also glorified. God does not leave any out. Every single one that He has predestinated shall appear in glory.
Now, this chapter corresponds with the last half of the book of Numbers, where you have, in type the gift of the Spirit, and Balaam's prophecies, and
{432}
the boundaries of the land. You have there also the great interest that God manifested in the people in recounting all their experiences; every inch of the journey that had to be traversed is divinely recorded, a most touching thing. That is found in the last part of the book of Numbers; so that they should be assured of God's interest in them. The people were there in the plains of Moab; they were a people typically who are led by the Spirit, not by the tabernacle. The tabernacle is not in evidence; they are led by the Spirit. It is one thing to be led by what is outside of you, and another thing to be led by what is inside of you. The Spirit is inside, and you are led by the Spirit. The book of Deuteronomy then comes in to show the place that belongs to the sons, and the conduct that is suitable to sons in their proper sphere. Abstractly the sons are viewed entirely connected with the work of God in the soul.
Entrance into the land after the brazen serpent is in virtue of the subjective work of the Spirit. It is not a question of the holiest and entering by the blood, but what is in view is entering by the Spirit, and it is in the sense of family relationship. The Father's pleasure in relation to the sons is the great end in view. It is a wonderful thought, that God's pleasure should be in the family; there is that which is agreeable to Him, the Father having a house, the Son there, and all the sons with Him there.
The consciousness of sonship goes with the state proper to it. You cannot be conscious of the relationship without the state suited to it. The Spirit operates in us, forming family affections. It is not new creation exactly; new creation is on another line. New creation does not suggest the family idea. In new creation it is "God", not the "Father". The idea in connection with the family is derivation or adoption.
The truth I think comes out, to begin with, in
{433}
Abraham and Isaac. There is the father and the son together. "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest". "Whom thou lovest". There is the great feature of the family thought. Then you have Joseph, who is the brother. Isaac is not the brother, he is the father's son. Joseph is the brother. That is to say, Joseph is Christ in relation to us. So that you have in him the brother, born for adversity, who in due time, when the state of a brother is present, makes himself known to his brethren.
When? When Judah manifested the state of a brother. It is thus that the Lord makes Himself known as in relationship with us, as His brethren.
{434}
THE FIRST COVENANT -- ITS TYPICAL SIGNIFICANCE
@Exodus 19 and @Exodus 24
Before entering upon the subject named at the head of this paper, it may be well to make a few remarks upon the value of the Old Testament scriptures as compared with those of the New Testament. In writing his second epistle to Timothy, Paul says "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work", chapter 3: 16, 17. Special attention should be paid to the above passage, as appearing in an apostolic epistle intended for the "last days". "Scripture" here includes the Old Testament; indeed the "sacred letters", which Timothy knew from childhood, are the Old Testament scriptures. There is a disposition to discredit or undervalue the Old Testament; this the Spirit of God foresaw, and guarded it by the above passage.
In order to profit by the reading of the Scriptures we must recognise the Spirit of God, by whose aid alone we can understand their meaning; and, further, an important injunction appearing also in 2 Timothy, must be observed. Paul speaks of "cutting in a straight line the word of truth", chapter 2: 15. Observing this, and depending on the Holy Spirit, we shall "behold wondrous things" in the Old Testament scriptures as well as in those of the New Testament. We need both. No Christian should conclude that the New Testament alone furnishes all that his soul needs. The passage quoted shows that all Scripture is inspired of God, and is profitable and necessary for the furnishing of the
{435}
man of God. The New Testament has, indeed, the first place: it presents to us, in the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, the revelation of God; man as seen in Christ before Him for His pleasure and glorifying Him; accomplished redemption; the exaltation of Christ; the gift of the Holy Spirit, and the consequent formation of the assembly; the counsels of God as regards Christ and the assembly; the disposition of the earth as ruled over by Christ, with Israel restored to their own city and land, according to the promises made to the fathers. These great and blessed subjects, involving the glory of God in Christ, and a creation blessed in Him, are presented to us in divine perfection and fulness in the holy pages of the gospels and the epistles "by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven", @1 Peter 1: 12. The words "sent from heaven" are to be specially noted. The Holy Spirit on earth, as given by a glorified Christ, involves a freshness, and vigour in all that is ministered which the earlier scriptures do not afford. The Christian lives, normally, in what is thus presented as in his native atmosphere.
But to be complete, fully fitted, he needs all the holy writings. The Old Testament, in type, gives direct statements of truth, record of experiences and breathings of the Spirit of Christ in holy men of God; it furnishes amplifications, elucidations, and adorning details of New Testament truth, which, if the Christian neglects, he must suffer great loss. In a word, the Old Testament, in every section of it, bears witness of CHRIST. We read in @Luke 24 that the Lord expounded "in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". How delightful such an exposition must have been! It is not recorded, but if we are subject to the Holy Spirit, and attentive to Him, we shall be led into the understanding of the things written concerning Christ "in the law of Moses, and in the prophets and in the psalms". Indeed the
{436}
Spirit has done much for the people of God in this respect through qualified servants who have spoken to us the word of God. In this service, as in all others, the Lord has set the example. He began "at Moses". It need scarcely be said that Moses in the law furnishes the greatest variety of typical teaching. The books of Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers especially abound in this, as is well known to many.
What may be remarked here is that the term law is not always limited in the New Testament to the Ten Commandments; it is more often referred to as covering the whole Mosaic ceremonial system, and in one or two instances, the whole of the Old Testament. In Galatians and Hebrews the reference is generally to the ceremonial system of which circumcision was the sign. It was "the law of commandments in ordinances". In Hebrews the law is contrasted with the great spiritual system set up in Christ, who came by the "greater and more perfect tabernacle". In Galatians "the principle of works of law", as presented in the literal Mosaic system, including the Ten Commandments, for justification, is utterly condemned. The vigour and zeal with which the apostle combatted the Judaising error is explained by the serious nature of the error itself; and also by the fearful result of it as seen around today in the ceremonial religion of Christendom. It is important that the far-reaching nature of the error, as thus seen, should be understood, lest anyone should labour under the misapprehension that the law in its spiritual significance is abrogated. Its "righteous requirement" is "fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh, but according to Spirit", @Romans 8: 4. Indeed, this is taught in the Galatian epistle itself. "The whole law", says the apostle, "is fulfilled in one word, in, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself", @Galatians 5:14. This involves a
{437}
debt that is never liquidated, as has often been remarked, nor do we wish it to be! @Romans 13: 8 says, "Owe no one anything, unless to love one another for he that loves another has fulfilled the law".
Having said so much about the references to the law in the New Testament, so as to clarify and guard our subject, we may now look at the section of Moses in which the law is introduced, namely, @Exodus 19 to 24. Our inquiry is, Does this section, with the other parts of the book, afford typical teaching, or is it to be regarded only as recording the historical facts of the giving of the law, as viewed, for instance, in @Hebrews 12: 18 - 21? As already pointed out, the New Testament writings largely treat the law, the Ten Commandments and the whole ceremonial system connected with them, as given by God, expressing His rights as regards man (Israel) as he was; who being thus tested disclosed the lawless state of his heart. "Why then the law? It was added for the sake of transgressions", @Galatians 3: 19. It was a schoolmaster to those who were under it up to Christ. By it was the knowledge of sin, and the terrible fact established that those that are in the flesh cannot please God. The carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, nor can it be. The law supposed sin in those to whom it was given, for it was "not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient", @1 Timothy 1: 9. All this, and very much more on the same line, is seen on the face of Scripture, and hence is of the greatest importance for the saints.
Referring now to the first part of our inquiry, does the section of Scripture which introduces the first covenant afford typical teaching? We would say that there cannot be a doubt that @Exodus 19 to 24 occupies a special place in the typical teaching of the book. This, we believe, will be recognised by every spiritual student of Scripture. There is in this passage a "shadow of good things to come" as
{438}
with the other parts of the law. The first, and perhaps the greatest, of the good things foreshadowed is the love of God towards us. Jehovah said to the people, in His message through Moses the mediator, "Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles¬ wings, and brought you unto myself. Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation"; @Exodus 19: 4 - 6.
Comparing this wonderful message with @Deuteronomy 32, @Psalm 78, and similar passages, we can discern that the heart of the blessed God was peculiarly active at this juncture. The people were to know Him not only as a Saviour God, but as a God who loved them, and would have them in a definite relationship with Himself as priests; yea, as taught later, He would take the place of a Husband to them, @Jeremiah 2: 2. We have thus here, at least, a shadow of @Romans 5, where the love of God is said to be shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us. @Romans 3 may be said to correspond, in a sense, with @Exodus 12; @Romans 4 with @Exodus 15; and @Romans 5 with @Exodus 19; these presenting to us the righteousness of God, the power of God, and the love of God.
All this is on God's side showing what His thoughts were. What follows, alas! brings out what man is. The divine proposal was contingent on Israel's obedience. Was there "such a heart" in them as would respond to such a God? Alas! no, for "the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can it be". The answer of the people to Jehovah's message only proved how ignorant they were of the utter weakness and unprofitableness of the flesh. The terrors of Sinai that followed, and the barrier set up between
{439}
God and the people thee, tell only too plainly the state of man in the flesh, and that there could be no true nearness, nor entering the holiest, until redemption was accomplished. Still God had indicated what was in His heart as to the people. In due time He will get a full response, fir in Israel's minds His laws shall be given, and upon their hearts they shall be written.
The general typical position is thus clear. God had borne the people on eagles¬ wings, and brought them to *Himself*, and would now have them with Him in the dignity of priests, which could only be on the ground of obedience. They undertook to obey, but their obedience was not proved, hence the barrier raised up between them and God. Had their obedience been fulfilled the terms of the covenant would have been available, "but they kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law", @Psalm 78: 10. Nevertheless, the will of God is the will of God, and obedience is obedience, and both met in perfect harmony in Christ who had the law in His heart, and delighted to do the will of God. The Christian, too, delights in the law of God, and as walking in the Spirit fulfils its righteous requirements.
A question arises here as to whether the position of Israel, with whom the covenant was made, shadowed in any way that of the people of God in this dispensation. The distance established between God and the Israelites and the terrible solemnity which marked the actual giving of the law speak with great plainness of the divine intent in the scene presented. He had acted in grace up to this time, had borne them on eagles¬ wings and brought them to Himself. Now the people are to be impressed with the majesty and holiness of the God whose love and power had already beer shown. On the other hand, the solemn question of their state had to be raised.
{440}
The awful fact is before us that man in the flesh,, however favoured outwardly, is utterly unfit for the presence of God. He is as an unclean thing, and all his righteousnesses are as filthy rags. God knew all this from the outset, but the awe-inspiring scene at Sinai was to impress it on the Israelites, and on the whole race of man. That there may have been a. Joshua or others in the camp, who had faith, and who thus were known and loved of God, made no difference. The same solemn lesson must be learnt by all. Even Moses said, "I am exceedingly afraid and full of trembling". This fact shows that the scene was extraordinary, God emphasising His majesty if man in the flesh presumes to undertake to do His will. This testimony being thus rendered, the book of the law and the people were sprinkled by blood, showing that all should ultimately be secured through redemption, the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.
We may return now to the typical feature of the position of the people. Taking full note, as we have, of the main teaching of the scripture before us, we may, point out that there is the general fact of a people taken into relationship with God on the ground of obedience. There is no blood mentioned in chapter 19 but it is introduced in chapter 24. In the latter chapter the blood is directly connected with the undertaking of the people to obey, as if to intimate that the obligation could be fulfilled only through redemption. The challenge on God's part to man to obey is morally right. It cannot be divorced from His expressed will in any dispensation or circumstance. The fact that Israel could not keep the law did not cancel their responsibility; nor could the law fall to the ground. The Lord said that every jot and tittle of it shall come to pass. Hence alongside the anticipated failure of Israel we have the beautiful type of Christ presented in the Hebrew
{441}
servant in @Exodus 21. This is too well known to need much comment. He is in the place of a bondman, the service of love being presented, where obedience is to shine, and as there He loves His Master, His wife and children, and so dying, for Christ in His love was obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, He remains a bondman for ever. Here we have the headship of Christ foreshadowed, we may say, only it is on moral grounds. @Romans 5: 12 to the end of the chapter presents Christ as qualifying for headship on the moral line. The obedience of the "one man Jesus Christ", who accomplished righteousness, is dwelt upon.
The truth, therefore, is that whether Israel undertook to keep the law or not, the responsibility was there, for God claimed obedience; but they did not have the heart to obey, as Jehovah in His love exclaimed later, "O that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever!" @Deuteronomy 5: 29. But Christ had "such a heart"; He undertook to do the will of God, saying, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God". He had the law in His heart, magnifying it and making it honourable. Christ undertook to obey in becoming Man; He has led the way in obedience, and so Christians are sanctified to His obedience, @1 Peter 1: 2. Hence, redemption accomplished, He brings in a people before God who are of His own order and pattern, and they obey. This is true, in principle, of Christians as of those in whose mind and hearts, in the future, God's laws shall be given and written. They obey from the heart the form of teaching into which, they were instructed, @Romans 6: 17.
The great Head introduced in @Romans 5 leads in the way of obedience; His death is the full proof of this. Shall the believer on Him continue in sin?
{442}
Far be the thought! He is committed in baptism to Christ, and so to His death, and should, therefore, as Christ is raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, walk in newness of life, a life marked by obedience. In a word, there is a definite committal by believers, normally, as in one like Paul, in baptism, to what is presented on the part of God in Christ, both as regards its blessings and obligations. God is infinitely real in approaching us in Christ, and He looks for corresponding reality in those who by faith embrace the blessed light of the gospel. He can count on this now, for the Christian has "such a heart", through the divine work in him which will obey, a heart that can "delight in the law of God"; thus, as having the Holy Spirit, he does the will of God. It is not a question of being under a legal system, but by definite committal the believer becomes a bondman to that God who loves him and who has saved him. Besides this, he has become dead to the law by the body of Christ, and is married to Him as raised from the dead. The believer is thus in relation with God and with Christ in well known bonds. See @Romans 6 and 7.
Peter in his first epistle, chapter 3: 18 - 22 and 4: 1, shows even more clearly the leadership of Christ in the path of the will of God, and how the believer commits himself to Him and to His path. Christ suffered, the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God. Had this occurred at Sinai, had Christ been there as Mediator instead of Moses, how all would have been changed! But the principles are the same, for the will of God existed then as at the cross. Christ suffered to bring us to God. Evidently here we are brought to God in our souls, for we are still down here, and so baptism follows. It is "the demand as before God of a good conscience". It is the renouncement of the flesh and the world as in the light of the death and resurrection of Christ.
{443}
We may say it is the stipulation, or requirement, of the conscience of a man who honestly embraces the light of the gospel. Compare @Matthew 3: 13 - 15. Then, as Christ suffered in the flesh, the believer arms himself with the same mind; a mind that ceases from sin. It is as if the believer, having accepted the sufferings of Christ in their vicarious value, has committed himself to a have-done-with-sin (if the expression may be used) order of things; but he lives on down here for the will of God. He is committed definitely to the will of God, and consistency with this is to govern his whole course. Drawing back from, or inconsistency with, this position of discipleship is the mark of apostasy.
Lest there should be any misapprehension, we would remark that the believer's justification, his reception of the Holy Ghost, his relationship with God and with Christ, and his place in the divine counsels, are all secured, according to the gospel, through his faith in God and in the work of Christ. God effects all on the ground of pure grace. What we have been dwelling upon has reference to the Christian as left down here in the wilderness. Viewed thus he is regarded as in a spiritual system, set up in Christ, to which he has committed himself. Through baptism and the Lord's supper he commits himself to this spiritual system, which is marked by the perfect law of liberty, as truly, and indeed as formally, as the Israelites committed themselves to the system set up through Moses.
In conclusion, then, we would say that the general thought presented in the section of Scripture before us, is of a people brought to God in grace and in power, and then set up in covenant relations with Him: they accepting the terms of the covenant (the feature dealing with God's holiness and man's sinfulness has already been enlarged upon), and then blood sprinkled both on the book itself and all
{444}
the people, by the mediator saying, "Behold the blood of the covenant which the Lord hath made with you"; see @Hebrews 9: 19 and @Exodus 24: 8. All, therefore, is on redemption ground.
Following on this the representatives of the people ascend to God on the mount, and are, figuratively, at least, accepted: "They saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness. And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink". Wonderful scene! Figuratively it is a people in reconciliation. Then follows in @Exodus 25 the great truth of the habitation of God. It is with a redeemed people, brought nigh and reconciled, that God dwells. Compare @Ephesians 2: 11 - 22. The typical feature in the chapters under consideration is perfectly clear and in it the people of God of the present dispensation are foreshadowed.
{445}
SERVICE IN THE ASSEMBLY GOVERNED BY INTELLIGENCE
@1 Corinthians 14
There is a connection between these four chapters, 11, 12, 13, and 14. In chapter 11 the Lord's supper is introduced to correct the feeling of partiality which had sprung up in Corinth. Instead of caring for one another, they had been individualising themselves, and each had been eating his own supper. So that the Lord's supper is introduced here correctively. Of course the Lord's authority was in question, but really the subject is introduced to correct them in their treatment of one another. We are to wait on one another.
There is to be oneness of mind in the assembly; we do not individualise ourselves there. We are on assembly ground with the outflow of affection Christward, and God's mind flowing out towards us. The point of chapter 12 is oneness. Partiality is unworthy of such ground. In chapter 11 it is a question of what is done in the assembly. How do we regard one another when sitting together? Partiality leads to so many units, but the Lord has unity in mind. Chapter 12 corrects that condition. We must be together morally. Right relations with each other is a great point in chapter 11. You do not connect yourself with any special persons. You do not cherish the feeling that you are different to or above some one else. That is schismatic. All are made to drink into one Spirit: that is the remedy.
Gift brings in another matter. Gifts are given by the Spirit, and the Spirit indwells all the saints. Gifts are not given to the body, but are set in the
{446}
assembly. Gift is put last. If we are in accord with chapters 11, 12 and 13 we are ready for chapter 14. If you are in danger of partiality, accept Paul's principle in the way in which he regarded those at Corinth. He says, "I speak as to wise men". We ought to recognise one another in this way. That brethren in general are not spiritual is true, and that there is very little response with them, yet the apostle took account of Corinth as endued with all gift, waiting for the coming of Christ. They were God's temple, and Christ's body. He holds to this in principle right through. "Ye are unleavened", he tells them. In spite of their practical condition, they were God's assembly. As having the Spirit, they are regarded by the apostle in principle as intelligent. His attitude was successful. So long as a brother is not opposing the truth, you can go on with him; but suppose he connects himself with what is contrary to it, your walk must diverge from his. If you are well assured that he is a genuine believer, you seek to help him and seek his recovery, but you cannot walk with him. Of course, we have the injunction, "of some have compassion, making a difference", in @Jude 22, yet if there is association with what is in opposition to the truth, we must hold a man responsible, for God requires that which is past; there is no glossing it over if there is refusal of the truth. However, if a brother holds aloof from me, the Spirit of Christ would not have me hold aloof from him. No feeling, or supposed feeling, should make me hold aloof from him. Again, I would say that there is great danger of party feeling among us, and that destroys the principles of the assembly. This wrong spirit was to be corrected by chapter 11.
Now chapter 13 follows beautifully after chapter 12. Love thinketh no evil; it would rather impute good motives than evil ones. In chapter 12: 31 the apostle says, "Yet show I unto you a more
{447}
excellent way". All can attain to this excellent way, worked out on the platform of regarding the brethren as right, at least, in principle, rather than imputing evil to them, and seeking to bring one another into accord with divine principles. A brother would often be greatly encouraged if good were imputed to him. Chapter 13 is a corrective of a lawless spirit. There is often a lawless spirit among us, without a lawless act; one may study to keep within the bounds of a sort of unwritten code. Love considers for one another, acts in a seemly manner; in fact, it is what is of God formed in the saints. You must see the things mentioned worked out in persons. First we have them in Christ, then in the saints. Love takes form in the assembly and is seen in all our relationships with one another. But while love does not impute evil, it does not allow sin on its object; you cannot allow your object to be damaged because you love it.
Understanding, or mind, is the prominent feature in chapter 14. This chapter is instruction for the saints as gathered together. It does not say, however, "when ye come together in assembly", as in chapter 11: 18. It is not exactly the assembly in function, but the saints, or "whole assembly" come together in one place. It is not to eat the Lord's supper, but for edification. The word "spirit" here refers to our spirit, not the Holy Spirit. We must be governed by our intelligence and not only by the impulse of our spirits. "I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also".
Ques. Is a word in order at the morning meeting when in its normal healthy state?
Paul discoursed at Troas. The soul is strengthened by a word given in priestly unction, and worship is not hindered. The Lord would give a portion, so a word is often most suitable. There is to be food in God's house, yet you come with the soul filled with
{448}
Christ. The instruction here, however, refers more to a meeting for edification. Coming to such a meeting you may have the psalm or the doctrine. We never come with anything definite to the assembly as seen in chapter 11. The breaking of bread is the beginning of all things to us, the start of our week, and to it we come filled with Christ. We are not to appear before God empty. But for a specific meeting for edification, such as a so-called open-meeting, one should be exercised to come with food, for the saints must be fed. Supposing, however, I have something, but I have had no opportunity to give it out, am I to abandon it? No, I hold to it; it will often enlarge with the keeping. In the meeting we are to "tarry one for another". There is to be no confusion, no disorder, no irregularity. Only three at the most are to speak. We do not come as units, but as parts of a unit; all have one spirit, and the saints are to view each other in that light.
We must have active love among us to hold a love-feast, and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak; but order is required where brethren stand up to speak. If more than two speak, special power is needed with the third. There is wisdom in Scripture mentioning, two or three; and I think emphasis lies on the two, for it is adequate witness, and two can usually give enough. If we followed these four chapters we should have more power with us in an open-meeting, and we should consider for others who have more ability, experience and power than ourselves, or for a visiting brother amongst us. Room would be left for genuine help to be ministered if we waited more on one another, and upon those better fitted. If Paul were with us, how unsuitable for one to get up ahead of him, or for us to give him no opportunity! Why should not gift have full scope, and why should the saints be robbed?
{449}
Divine intelligence and discrimination should mark the assembly; it should be free from radicalism. Chapter 11 lays the basis for this, allowing for the operations of the Spirit as spoken of in chapter 12, and governed by divine intelligence as indicated in chapter 14. Is it suitable? should be our question, if we wish to take part, when gathered in such a manner.
{450}
*Pages 450 - 506 -- "How the Truth of the Assembly appeared in the Development of God's Ways", Belfast, 1915 (Volume 24)*.
HOW THE TRUTH OF THE ASSEMBLY APPEARED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF GOD'S WAYS (1)
@Acts 9: 1 - 22
J.T. It occurred to me that the circumstances connected with Saul's conversion help to show the bearing of the assembly's position in the ways of God. Inasmuch as the record is by Luke, a comparison between it and his gospel helps to show the assembly's position. Luke's gospel is Christ on earth; and the record in the Acts is rather Christ in heaven. Taking them together, we have a history of the development of God's ways in Christ from "the outset".
Ques. What do you mean by the development of God's ways?
J.T. Well, there is Christ's body here; that is what is disclosed in the Lord's word to Saul, "Why persecutest thou me". Now, by comparing that with the end of the gospel, we may see the difference at once; because at the end of the gospel He is parted from them. His being parted from them does not convey the idea of His body.
Ques. As if He were gone from the earth, and they left here; whereas in chapter 9, as you were saying, it is "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me". His body was here.
J.T. Yes; and there is no such thing as being parted from "Me".
Ques. I suppose the earlier chapters in the Acts, would not give you that, although the Holy Spirit had come down?
{451}
J.T. Up to chapter 7, He is in heaven, and they on earth; they do not see Him; indeed in chapter 1 there is "a cloud". "A cloud received him out of their sight". That is a very suggestive fact, showing that the cloud period still remained, and that continued up to chapter 7.
Rem. You mean until the martyrdom of Stephen.
J.T. Stephen is the first to look into heaven. I believe that the Lord would exercise our hearts about the heavenly position, and the line that goes with it.
Ques. I suppose in the beginning of Acts, God was waiting upon Israel?
J.T. Yes; we find in chapter 3, that the people are still held to be in relationship with God; they were the "children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers". But even if Jesus had gone into heaven, He had simply gone in there provisionally. Peter says, "whom the heavens must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began". But if they had repented God would send Jesus Christ to them. That is to say, He is simply received into heaven pending their repentance; and whilst that condition of things existed there could not be the assembly properly.
Rem. Pending, really, the setting up of the kingdom.
J.T. Quite so. I do not know if that is quite clear to all here; it is very simple to me, and doubtless to many of us; but it would be a great thing to see the difference between Christ being parted from the disciples, and they being placed, not in heaven, but on earth; and the light that Paul brought in, even that we are placed in heaven.
Rem. And that is the assembly's position.
J.T. Exactly. We are blessed in the heavenlies,
{452}
in Christ; whereas they were blessed on the earth and the High Priest while blessing them is carried up into heaven. Now, you may link the end of Luke with the millennium; a company here, blessed on earth, and in the temple praising God. That was the position; had the Jews accepted Christ, He would have come back, and would have resumed His position with them on earth, and they would be blessed on earth. But then, the counsels of God were in abeyance. Now, we come into the great parenthesis, which we may designate "our light". Israel's light is really in the end of Luke's gospel; and she is called upon to arise and shine in that light; but she failed to do so, and has lost her opportunity.
Rem. Those brought in, in the beginning of Acts, formed the assembly.
J.T. Yes, ultimately; but in the ways of God they were still regarded as the remnant here; and this was that which, as Peter says, was spoken by the prophet Joel: "it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh". It was a wonderful moment for Israel. The Holy Spirit was upon earth, and Peter says, "the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call".
Rem. I suppose the assembly is not much looked at until the Lord took His seat in heaven.
J.T. Quite so. He is standing in the end of chapter 7; it is when He sits down that things are final. He is no longer waiting on Israel; He is seated.
Ques. I should like to follow your thought about the light. Do you connect the light that shone on Saul, with the disclosure of the heavenly position of the assembly?
J.T. Yes; that leads you into the divine thought.
{453}
The light shone from heaven; it did not shine from Jerusalem. Remember there are three accounts of it given. I think we spoke of it before. It is very interesting. The first is Luke's account in @Acts 9, the second is Paul's account at Jerusalem, @Acts 22; and the third is Paul's account at Caesarea, @Acts 26. Now each account exceeds the other in the appreciation of it; the first is simply a light from heaven; the second is a great light from heaven, and Paul adds to that: I could not see for the glory of that light -- the glory of it; and then the third account is that, "At mid-day, O king, I saw in the way a light above the brightness of the sun"; that is to say, above all earthly light.
Rem. It shut out everything here.
Ques. In what way do you connect the thought of the heavenly position with those people whom Paul was persecuting?
J.T. Well, the Lord, in His statement to Paul, announced that these people were His body, thus showing the intimacy and nearness of the saints to Himself. There is no "cloud" now.
Rem. It is Himself.
Rem. It is not, 'Why persecutest thou My disciples', but, "Why persecutest thou me?"
J.T. Yes; so that it is intimated that the assembly is the body of the heavenly Man.
Ques. Where? It does not say the body on earth.
J.T. When that thought comes out as in Corinthians, it is more local. The Corinthians were Christ's body in that city; but the disclosure to Saul is that the heavenly Man has a body; and that is what the assembly is. The voice came out of heaven, and said, "Why persecutest thou me".
Rem. The connection could not be closer. "Why persecutest thou me?"
J.T. I am afraid that many of the Lord's people
{454}
would be more content to be blessed on earth, than to be blessed in heaven. If we go through this book of Acts, you will find that it is an upward trend until you reach Ephesus in @Acts 20.
Ques. Why do you think there is a take up the heavenly position?
J.T. One has felt it in oneself, and one has noticed in others the desire to be blessed on earth. But the magnificence of God's design that His people should be blessed in heaven is but feebly accepted. It is not simply that the blessings are heavenly; the point is; "blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ".
Rem. The point is to accept the position in faith, and turn to God for light and understanding.
J.T. That is the simple principle of the truth of God; it is a matter of accepting it; you must accept it first.
Ques. Does not @Ephesians 2 show how we enter into it?
J.T. It shows the power that places us there. The chapter really is a description of God's work in us in its completeness. It is therefore anticipative, for it is not yet fully accomplished; but the Spirit of God takes account of it as if it were accomplished; hence it is anticipative.
Rem. But made good in the souls of the saints.
J.T. Yes, quite so; only that literally it will not be completed until the assembly is in heaven. Rem. So you would say that up to @Acts 20 it is development.
J.T. You will find, in Acts, some particular feature of the testimony in each locality where Paul visited; there is no repetition. The Lord says, "Why persecutest thou me?" Now Paul reaches that in his ministry in Ephesus. There was a company formed there in which Christ was expressed. He said to them, "I have not shunned to declare
{455}
unto you all the counsel of God". There were conditions at Ephesus which enabled the apostle to do that: to open up the counsels of God. He could not do that at Corinth.
Rem. There was not the state. Having that state is necessary for the revelation of the truth. Ques. Would you not say they had a great deal of exercise to go through?
J.T. Yes; but He brings them up to it. He had laboured longer in that town than in any other; He laboured three years there, and he accomplished a mighty work. He tells us what he did there, how that with tears he preached the gospel to them, taught them publicly, and from house to house. He visited them in their houses, and then having done all that, he calls for the elders of the assembly, and places upon them the responsibility of maintaining the full truth. Then, having been taken a prisoner to Rome, he writes to them his epistle.
Rem. Then you think that the saints at Ephesus had accepted the heavenly position.
J.T. I am sure they had. The inference is clear enough. Paul says, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God". The whole counsel of God implied that the assembly was to have a place in heaven. They evidently had accepted the light of God's counsel. When Paul said they should see his face no more, they all wept. They loved him on account of his ministry.
Rem. They were in the apprehension of the truth. They responded to Christ as the heavenly Man.
J.T. The apostle shunned not to declare unto them the whole counsel of God; he had it in his own soul doubtless; yet from the way he speaks, one would infer that he waited on God until they were ready to receive the truth.
Rem. He tells the Corinthians formally that he
{456}
could not unfold the divine wisdom to them on account of their state.
Ques. You have spoken a good deal about the state of soul, would you say that to accept the position in faith would be the thing for us; though exercises might come afterwards to test us?
J.T. Yes. If you accept it by faith, then you maintain it by prayer. It requires a person to be established, to take up the heavenly position. If you get the light of it, and lay hold of it by faith, then you pray. Prayer brings in power; God will not fail you.
Rem. One scarcely goes after a thing unless he values it.
J.T. Yes; that is a good point. What a marvellous thought of God that we should be blessed in the heavenlies.
Rem: I suppose you would say that really there is no other position for us at the present moment.
J.T. No other. As the hymn puts it, "Heavenly light makes all things bright".
If we do not take up that position, we are not right in any position. To use the language of Isaiah, it is the light in which we shine, and we ought not to shine in any other light than that, because that is where we shine best.
Ques. "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest". Why did He give that name?
J.T. To identify Himself, I think. It expressed His complete identification with the saints whom Paul was persecuting; that they were not simply His disciples; they were Himself. The assembly is the complement of the heavenly Man. Paul prayed to God that they might know "the exceeding greatness of his power ... which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion,
{457}
and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; and hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all". It is a Man in heaven that is in view, set there according to God's pleasure and power, and the assembly as His fulness.
Rem. It is not the thought of headship in @Acts 9.
J.T. It is more identification here. I have often thought that what answers to Paul's ministry in the types is Isaac. After Isaac is born, all the communications come out of heaven; even the communications relative to Ishmael came out of heaven. Showing that all Abraham's seed are taken up in connection with Christ in heaven.
Ques. Is not the name of Jesus connected with suffering?
J.T. Yes; the moral features of that Man shone in Stephen; and he saw Jesus in heaven.
Rem. That is, a Man who was rejected here. "Behold I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God".
J.T. Paul bore about in his body the dying of Jesus: And it was that the life also of, Jesus might be manifested in his body. If we could only get into our souls the idea of a Man in heaven.
Rem. I suppose it was that light that gave Paul to deal so tenderly with the saints afterwards.
J.T. He saw "Christ's body" in them afterwards, and he was so humbled; he said he was not meet to be called an apostle, because he had persecuted the assembly.
Rem. James says, on lower ground, "Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you". That is Christ; that is a feature of Christ: "he does not resist you".
{458}
Rem. That is what Paul was doing -- "Why persecutest thou me?"
J.T. Paul witnessed Stephen suffering, and the character of Christ shone in the martyr; and then when he went into the houses of the saints, he saw Christ in the saints; they did not resist him. "He was led as a lamb to the slaughter and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth". That is the kind of Man the eunuch saw; and that is the kind of Man who shines out of heaven, and who was reflected in His suffering saints on earth. That is the kind of Man who said, "It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks".
Rem. If one is suffering persecution he is not to resist; but to leave it to the Lord.
J.T. That is the spirit of Christ.
Rem. That is where the trial comes in, if one feels one is in the right.
J.T. If you feel you are right, you are prone to justify yourself. But who was so right as the Lord Jesus? Think of Him in suffering and not opening His mouth. He committed Himself to Jehovah. I have often thought of Zephaniah's prophetic allusion to the remnant: "The just Lord is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity; every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not". In the English courts, if you have a grievance, you may bring your case and have it tried; some morning it will be called. God never forgets anything. If there is a case, it is down, so to speak, on the calendar; and the morning comes for your case to be heard, and it is judged. The just Lord is there and He will not fail: "Every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not". Your morning will come; and the question for you is whether you can wait for that. As a matter of fact, you do not think whether it ever will come up or
{459}
not; it will all come out at the judgment seat of Christ.
Rem. That is the fourth chapter of 2 Corinthians "I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified; but he that judgeth me is the Lord. Therefore judge nothing, before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart: and then shall every man have praise of God". They were charging Paul with things, and he left it to the Lord.
J.T. I think it is well for us to see that those whom Saul persecuted, were Christ.
Rem. It would help us greatly, I think, to take that in.
Rem. So that what would follow, in the light of the position, would be in accord with that blessed One here.
J.T. It would help one to be the kind of man that Jesus is, that is to say, that the traits of that Man might dwell in us. And there is abundant opportunity for this, because we are in a scene of suffering. It is suffering that brings these traits out; but then, woe be to the man by whom the saints suffer, unless he judges himself as Paul did. Rem. But that is not our side.
J.T. No; the Lord takes care of that. The government of God goes on, morning by morning; those who have eyesight for it, see the working out of that. You cannot escape the government of God. The Lord says, in @Matthew 18, "Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea".
Rem. I was thinking of @2 Thessalonians 1, where the apostle speaks of their faith growing exceedingly, and the charity of every one of them toward each
{460}
other abounded. And then he goes on to say "So that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for your patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure; which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer; seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you".
Rem. It was wonderful the way the saints were brought before Paul at his conversion, speaking of what they were to Christ.
J.T. It all serves to show the place the assembly had at this particular juncture. They are brought to the attention of Paul in this way at the time of his conversion.
Rem. Yes; he was made to hear what the Lord had to say about them.
Rem. In @Ephesians 2, the saints are viewed as "seated": I suppose that is final, as regards them.
J.T. Yes, they are made to correspond with Christ. It is a wonderful thing to be introduced to a place of privilege, and to stand there; but it is still greater to sit down. @Ephesians 2 contemplates the whole work of God in the saints, from beginning to end; but then it includes every item of it; it is going on now in detail. There it is seen in its grand result. It is not a question of what is being done, or of time; it is the grand result. So that in result it is said, "We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them".
Rem. It goes on now, but we shall have the full bringing out of it in a day that is coming.
Ques. What is the force of "quickening?" Is not that making us to live?
J.T. I think so; only in Ephesians it includes the quickening of our bodies. "That in the ages to
{461}
come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness towards us through Christ Jesus". It is anticipative rather than retrospective, although stated as already accomplished. Chapter 1 is the work of God in Christ; chapter 2, His work in the saints; the latter viewed in its totality.
Ques. Do we take our place there now, anticipatively?
J.T. Yes, as a matter of light. But what a thought, that your place is in heaven. You have the enjoyment of it now according to your spiritual power.
Rem. That is the quickening side.
J.T. The quickening and formative work of God is to enable us to anticipate all that.
Rem. That is your power to enter into it.
Rem. In @Ephesians 1, we get the purpose of God; and in chapter 2 we find how He carries it out.
J.T. A man may draw a plan of a house he is going to build; but what is in his mind? It is the house; and the plan is of little use when the house has been built. Now that is the idea; God is thinking of the result; in His mind it is concrete; He is looking at it as He will have it; He is thinking of the concrete thing, because He knows how He will bring that concrete thing into existence. He is carrying it out now; He has planned it, but He describes it as complete. It is not the plan He is giving us, it is the concrete thing. The work is going on now, but that chapter shows it in its grand result.
{462}
HOW THE TRUTH OF THE ASSEMBLY APPEARED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF GOD'S WAYS (2)
@Acts 11: 22 - 30; @Acts 13: 1 - 3
J.T. We saw previously that the end of Luke's gospel presents the Lord as the Blesser, blessing a company upon earth; and having blessed them He is parted from them, and carried up into heaven. You have presented a company, blessed on earth, with the Blesser hid in heaven. This might be linked on with the millennial condition of things, a company blessed on earth. Whereas, chapter 9 of this book, which, as we know, is recorded by the same writer, presents Christ speaking out of heaven, and owning those that were on earth as His body; so that He is no longer parted from them. They are His body; and the body is vitally bound up with its head; there is no such thought as separation from it. Hence the position now is heavenly. The saints, persecuted, are Himself, really. And in connection with that, we have what is called "a light out of heaven"; a very suggestive thought. One has observed, lately, the frequency with which Mr. Darby's hymns have been sung amongst us; and it is noticeable how much the idea of "heavenly light" is found in them. Light itself is precious; I mean to say, if you are in a dark scene, light of any kind is to be desired; you may not think for the moment of the kind of light; it is a question of light. God has said, "Let there be light, and there was light". It was not a question where it came from; it was simply that the necessity for it was apparent, and the divine word brought it into existence. But then, in the book of Genesis, we have
{463}
a luminary set in the heavens, to show that light henceforth comes from heaven.
In the gospel of Luke Christ is seen on earth, as the Vessel of grace; in the Acts He is seen in heaven; and from chapter 7, onwards, the centre of the divine operations is transferred from Jerusalem to heaven; and the light now issues from heaven, instead of Jerusalem. The temple was in Jerusalem of old, and hence light came from Jerusalem; but now it comes from heaven.
Rem. I think the character of the assembly, in a way, is seen in Stephen's countenance.
J.T. His countenance shone as the face of an angel.
Rem. That meant that it was a heavenly countenance.
J.T. Quite so; he was affected by the light from heaven. We have to distinguish between an earthly remnant and their exercises and feelings, and a heavenly people. The earthly in the future will have certain exercises, which will find expression in the books of Psalms. If they have enemies, they call for vengeance on them. Now that does not describe the exercises of a heavenly man. He never calls for vengeance on his enemies. Stephen says, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". That indicates what the body is. That may be a crude way of putting it; but it is well to be practical. One feature of the body is seen in "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". One of Christ's members was saying that. It was a reflection of Christ.
Rem. That was the spirit of Christ.
J.T. Exactly; the member was actuated by Christ's spirit. A member of Christ is in character what Christ was here.
Rem. So in that way the body is to be for the continuation of that Man.
{464}
Rem. Paul's conversion was an intimation of the assembly.
J.T. Yes, the circumstances of his conversion involved the truth of the assembly. First of all, a Man speaks out of heaven, and He owns the saints on earth as Himself, saying, "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest". In thus owning the saints on earth as Himself, He could do it truthfully, because Stephen was like the Lord in that sense; he acted entirely in the spirit of Christ, when he was put to death. The Lord could say that. The next chapter, 8, shows us Saul going from house to house, seeking out the members of Christ to drag them to persecution; and there is no evidence that there was any resistance. James himself testifies "Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he doth not resist you". So that the Lord can truthfully own such people as Himself. Now, that is how you find out the "body"; you find it in people who do not resist suffering.
Rem. Who being reviled, reviled not again.
Rem. It is not so much the doctrine of the thing, as the thing itself.
J.T. Stephen's countenance shone in the presence of the council. Before his execution his countenance shone; in his execution his whole body was luminous.
Ques. What is the connection with what we have read?
J.T. The circumstances warranted the light that was vouchsafed, and if the light of the assembly, is revealed, room must be made for it. Christ here in His body is a great idea. It must be universal in its bearing; it cannot be limited to any locality on earth; and hence chapter 10 is to make room for it. Peter is brought forward in his official capacity; not as a vessel of the light, but as one who has the keys of the kingdom so that he might open the door
{465}
for the development of this wonderful light that had come in.
Rem. There was no room for it in Judaism.
J.T. If you compare this with @Matthew 16 you will see what is meant; the Lord said, "Upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it". And then He said, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven". He gives Peter authority to open the door for the Gentiles; to release the Gentiles from the governmental restrictions that lay upon them.
Rem. In every nation he that feareth Him is accepted with Him.
J.T. That is it. That is the force of Peter's action at Caesarea. If you compare Paul in chapter 9 with Peter in chapter 10, you will notice that Paul acts as it were voluntarily; his whole heart was in it; he announced in the synagogues at Damascus that Jesus is the Son of God.
Rem. Then, once the light is out, Peter is used to make room for what is involved.
J.T. Paul acts voluntarily, as one whose heart is in the thing; whereas in the next chapter, one might say, Peter is compelled to go to Caesarea.
Rem. That makes the commencement of Paul's ministry even more precious, because it was done voluntarily.
J.T. I think so. He was like Abraham's servant; he knew what was needed. Now, Peter is an official. Really one does not like to refer critically to any of those great men. Peter was obedient, when he was sent. Paul never thought himself too great to do anything. Now, in, chapter 6 of Acts, the apostles said, "It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables". Therefore they had
{466}
certain men selected from the congregation that they might appoint to what they called "this business". It was of a lower order than their vocation; the "business" was to look after the poor; to do the work of a deacon. Now, it is a remarkable thing that of the men who were appointed the Lord took up some to do the highest kind of "service"; and the apostles are left to some extent in the shade. He took up Stephen and Philip. But Paul does not select his work; he is prepared to do everything for the saints. So that in the end of chapter 11 he is seen acting as a deacon; Barnabas and Paul are acting together; and they shine in apostolic service in chapter 13. The spirit of service is this, that if a work is there to be done, the true servant will do it because it is to be done, without thinking whether it lowers his dignity or not.
Rem. All that came out in Christ Himself when here.
J.T. Yes. I do not know anything, in a way, that is so suggestive, as the remarkable manner in which Stephen and Philip shone, and the twelve are left almost unnoticed. It is remarkable that Stephen, although beginning as a deacon, should be the first really to reflect the heavenly light.
Rem. Paul, in a sense, was the fruit of that.
J.T. I have no doubt he got an impression in that memorable moment when Christ, as you might say, was put to death before him. Now, having room officially made for the assembly in chapter 10, in chapter 11 you have the connecting link of sympathy in Barnabas.
Rem. You mean the act of Barnabas going to fetch Paul.
J.T. Barnabas had great respect for the twelve. You find, in the end of chapter 4, that the apostles give him the surname of Barnabas, which means, "Son of Consolation". He had a piece of ground;
{467}
he did not give it away. It is a great mistake to give away any property in the sense that it is of no use. Everything is of value. He regarded it as of value; but he could use the money which he might get for it in the Lord's work; and so he sold the land, and brought the money, and laid it at the apostles¬ feet. He did not tell the apostles what to do with it; he had too much respect for their authority to do that; they represented in his mind the authority of the Lord Jesus; and he judged rightly that they could use the money more wisely and more advantageously than he could. It would be an impossible thing to do that today. If a man has money, he has to be steward of it himself.
Rem. We have no apostles to give it to now.
J.T. The difference between a rich brother and a poor brother is this. If a poor brother gives, he sacrifices; if a rich brother gives, he is a steward; he is giving for the Lord; he does not suffer for it; but he is giving as a steward, and the Lord will hold him responsible for using it in divine wisdom. Now, Barnabas has means; but in his day, he had this advantage that the apostles could use it better than he could, and he laid it at their feet. He was full of faith, and of the Holy Spirit; and in his affections he was enabled to go outside the twelve; he went to Antioch. He was the link between the ministry of the twelve and the ministry that the Lord was going to use in connection with the Gentiles; and he was a sympathetic link.
Rem. You mean Barnabas was sympathetic with the apostles, and he was sympathetic with Paul.
J.T. He was sympathetic with Paul, because he saw that Paul was the man. You see, the Lord moves but then He looks for sympathy in the saints in what He does. That is a great thing in service: you find you have not only the Lord's clear guidance in what you are to do, but you have the sympathy of the
{468}
saints. So, in Barnabas there is the link between the twelve and the new movement in Antioch.
Rem. It is a great thing to be in sympathy with what the Lord is doing.
Rem. The work is, in a way, lifeless apart from that.
J.T. I am sure you know how encouraging it is in seeking to minister, to have the sympathy of those you are ministering to.
Rem. It is a very great thing indeed.
Rem. And how much the Lord values that you are with Him in what He is doing.
J.T. In Paul I think we have the spirit of Abraham's servant. He knew that a bride for Isaac was needed. And Paul knew that the link with Israel being broken, consequently Christ was, as it were, alone. Isaac is said to have been in the field meditating; there was a need in his heart, and we are told that when he got Rebecca "he loved her and was comforted after the death of his mother". Paul was led to understand Christ's need for the assembly, so that all his activities afterwards were to the end that the assembly should be presented to Christ.
Rem. To bring in the church, the bride.
J.T. There is another touch which I think should be noticed. In the end of chapter 11 there is a true spirit of charity found among those who were converted. We read, "then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea; which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul". That was truly the spirit of love and care seen outside Judea. Well, all these things are guides as to how we reach the assembly here, and the kind of people that form it.
Rem. That is what grace did.
J.T. Exactly; they are the people that can suffer without murmuring or complaining; and, on the
{469}
other hand, they are ready to give where it is needed. Rem. So it all takes a practical shape.
J.T. Yes; there is nothing more practical than Christianity.
Rem. What do you mean by outside Judea?
J.T. Those living at Antioch, outside Jewish territory. God so ordered it in His government that the Jewish saints were suffering materially, and the Gentile saints were in a position to help them; and in that way God brought into evidence the work He was doing outside; there was a tangible evidence of it.
Rem. It is remarkable that it should come from the Gentiles.
J.T. Well, now, these things being found amongst the Gentiles, there is the evidence that God can trust the Gentiles; and hence in chapter 13 you find that God can act in that company. He is acting outside Jerusalem, and outside Jews.
Rem. And receiving in that way the expression of love from the Gentiles would prepare their hearts for the truth that the middle wall between them was broken down.
J.T. Yes, the barriers are broken down by love. "If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head". That is the way to bring him down; a man soon bows when you put the fire on his head.
Rem. The Holy Spirit said, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them". Barnabas is mentioned before Saul?
J.T. He was first at the beginning; but he soon becomes second; Paul outstripped him. Barnabas was the greater man spiritually, I suppose, for the moment, but in a little time Paul is mentioned first.
Ques. What is the fire you alluded to in @Romans 12?
{470}
J.T. Well, it is the thing that brings the down.
Ques. Why is it called fire?
J.T. It is a peculiar kind of judgment to use. Instead of judgment on an enemy, as in Psalms, love brings him down; it is just as effective; but then it does not destroy him.
Rem. It humbles him. The fire consumes the enmity.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. What do you make of Agabus coming in here?
J.T. Well, he and other prophets were found at Antioch; he came from Jerusalem; indicating another link, I think, with Jerusalem.
Rem. Although there were so many in the faith at Antioch, God had need of him.
Rem. He was evidently another that was sympathetic.
J.T. He did not stay at Jerusalem; he went outside. The truth is this, that these chapters indicate the movement of the tent of the testimony, and, as has often been pointed out, every true hearted person followed the tent when it moved. So that in Barnabas and Agabus you have men who followed the tent.
Now, when you come to the beginning of chapter 13 you have God definitely acting in the way of administration amongst a Gentile company. What a definite movement that was. The first thing to notice is that the assembly is formally recognised; there "were in Antioch, in the assembly which was there, prophets and teachers"; and then it says, "they were ministering to the Lord". All these things show what existed there.
Ques. What would ministering to the Lord convey to you?
{471}
J.T. I think it means that there was true priestly state there. That was what Aaron was called out to do: to minister to the Lord. In the end of chapter 11 there is the spirit of love. You can trust love. If God finds a man who loves the brethren, He can entrust him with something, He always does. Now, the assembly at Antioch was marked by that; and they ministered to the Lord; and they fasted. That is to say, they could deny themselves. Then the Spirit puts the honour upon them, in associating them with Him in the work, for He says, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them".
Rem. It is remarkable the way the testimony moved; it is not independent.
J.T. No, there is the recognition of the link of sympathy between what was at Jerusalem and Antioch.
Ques. Could you apply this at the present day?
J.T. Now, that raises an important consideration as to what light it is we are to walk in at the present time. If it is a question of church order, we walk in the light of first principles. In the last chapter of the Old Testament, the Spirit of God says,."Remember ye the law of Moses my servant which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments". They were to remember the statutes and judgments which were given there for all Israel. These were to be a light for the remnant at the last days; and the same applies to us; so that we walk in the light of first principles. Therefore, if it be a question of what was at Antioch, you look for love among the brethren, and care for one another; if there is need, ministering to the need. You remember the high priest had the breastplate and shoulder pieces. If you love the brethren you "support" them. And then, on the other hand, the priest ministers to Jehovah.
{472}
Rem. It is remarkable there are so many differences amongst God's people now; and yet every thing was so plainly stated at the beginning of the Acts in connection with them down here.
J.T. Well, I think the Lord would bring us back to that; to the simplicity of things as a company of people who love one another. Doubtless many, at Antioch had not seen the saints at Jerusalem, but the love of God in their hearts led them to minister to their need.
Rem. All would be well if we continued to walk according to first principles.
J.T. If there is love amongst the saints, then you may look for the ministering to the Lord.
Ques. Why were they first called Christians at Antioch?
J.T. That is another significant thing. Instead of being known as a sect among the Jews, they are looked at by the world as the followers of Christ. It is a name given them by the world, but accepted by the Spirit.
Rem. It is a great thing to see that it is the assembly, and nothing else is Christ.
Rem. So it is not simply a company of people who break bread; it is a company of people such as is presented here.
Ques. I suppose you would say you get back to first principles in 2 Timothy?
J.T. Yes. One important point there is that you must leave the saints in the Lord's hands. You do not know them all. The Lord knows them all. That is the comfort. Your business is to be sure that your course is clear, and that you see to it, that if there are others like minded you are with them.
I think it is very beautiful to see the place the Lord obtained in this Gentile company. They ministered to the Lord. What a place the Lord had
{473}
with them. And they fasted; that meant there was self-denial. It is the true priestly state amongst the Gentiles, that is what it is. The whole system at Jerusalem is superseded by this. So that Antioch, as it were, reflects heaven. That is the idea in the assembly, it reflects heaven. The Spirit of God is acting in the assembly there.
Rem. The Spirit of the Man who has gone up.
J.T. What a beautiful action it was, the saints laying their hands on Barnabas and Saul, because the Spirit wanted them. They are in complete sympathy with the work of God.
Ques. What do you say the laying on of hands was?
J.T. When they had fasted and prayed they laid their hands on them, and sent them away; it is complete identification. That is what the laying on of hands means. They said virtually, 'We are with you; you have our sympathy; you have our prayers'.
Rem. You would not say there was any gift imparted by their action.
J.T. No, it was simply identification. And then another important point is, the independent sovereign action of the Spirit; the Spirit acts; the Spirit speaks.
Ques. Do the hands mean nothing?
J.T. It is the means by which you identify yourself. As of old the offerer laid his hands on the head of the victim. Paul says to Timothy, "Lay hands suddenly on no man". You see, if you do, you become partaker of their sins if they go wrong.
Ques. "Lay hands suddenly on no man". Does that mean you are not to be too quick in receiving anybody?
J.T. Yes; take care. Beware with whom you are identifying yourself.
{474}
HOW THE TRUTH OF THE ASSEMBLY APPEARED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF GOD'S WAYS (3)
@Acts 20: 17 - 38
J.T. I think this chapter is the end of Paul's active ministry. When I say active, you will remember that it was after this he was imprisoned; he went to Rome. One would gather, from what was said here, "that they should see his face no more", that his active ministry among the saints had come to a close, at least, as far as the divine record goes. In sending for the elders at Ephesus, he intended to convey his final verbal message to the assembly; and the wording of it would indicate that Ephesus, as a local company, represented the assembly as it had been formed by Paul's ministry. He had withheld nothing from these Christians; he had declared unto them the whole counsel of God, which would indicate that there was a state there answering to those counsels. He could not communicate to the Corinthians in the same way, on account of their state; he says so definitely; he could speak wisdom among the perfect, but not to the Corinthians. So it is evident that the Ephesian believers were perfect, in that sense; they were fully developed; and therefore they were set, at to their state, in the love of Christ; for we know afterwards that the Lord speaks to them, and says, "I have against thee because thou hast left thy first love". I understand that Paul had placed them there; he had so presented Christ to them, in his ministry, that they were set in His love. That it is what one might call the climax, as it has indeed been called, the climax of his ministry, the top stone of his ministry.
{475}
Rem. Would you say that we get in the epistle to the Ephesians substantially all that had been communicated to them verbally?
J.T. Yes; the epistle is more a record; what is put down in writing is to remain; it is an inspired account of the counsels of God; of the place that Christ and the assembly have in the divine counsels. That is really what the epistle is for. It is more than a local epistle, it contemplates Jew and Gentile formed into one body; so that it is that part of Scripture which is, so to say, our heavenly charter; it gives us our heavenly position.
Rem. But now, as then, state is necessary for the truth ministered in the epistle.
J.T. Yes, in order that we should appreciate it. Ques. Do you mean the Ephesian epistle is the climax?
J.T. No, the assembly was. The assembly was really greater, in that sense, than the epistle. It was a great achievement to bring in a thing like this. Paul remained longer in Ephesus than in any other place; he remained at Corinth for eighteen months, but his stay at Ephesus was longer. It helps immensely to understand the book to see these characteristics. It is not a simple record of occurrences; there are no repetitions in Scripture at all; the Spirit communicates certain facts in connection with each locality that represents certain aspects of the truth.
Rem. So in that way this epistle becomes instruction for us today, as regards the different things that are needed.
J.T. Quite so; it is the development of the truth. So you have the door opened to the Gentiles in @Acts 10; that is not repeated; and then you get the inner workings of a local Christian company at Antioch; that is not repeated; it is cited once; that is all you need. The circumstances recorded
{476}
at the beginning of chapter 13 indicate how things were done in the Gentile Christian companies; and it is passed on; that is enough; you are to take note of that. Then Paul and Barnabas go out, and their ministry is recorded in chapters 13 and 14 and they return. It is said of them that they returned to Antioch "from whence they had been recommended to the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled". There was nothing lacking, they had accomplished what they had undertaken to do.
Rem. They returned to the bosom of the assembly again.
Rem. They were like the Levites, who were to recognise that the priest had supervision of their work.
J.T. Then chapter 15 records the assembly meeting at Jerusalem, in which certain things were adjusted in regard to the Gentiles. God, as it were, maintaining still, in His wisdom, the outward unity of the Jewish section and the Gentile section of the assembly. That was divine wisdom; and chapter 16 is the formal introduction of the testimony into Europe, and a very important feature of the testimony comes to light in that chapter that is not found in any other chapter in the same prominence; namely, the Christian household. That is a very important institution, which was to play a great part in the course of the testimony among the Gentiles.
Rem. You refer to Lydia, and the Philippian jailer.
J.T. It is noticeable that in both cases it is the household that is brought into view.
Ques. What is the importance of that?
J.T. Well, the households of those that were to support the testimony become a very important factor; for if you have not a proper household you cannot have proper overseers and deacons. "But if one does not know how to conduct his own house, how shall he take care of the assembly of God",
{477}
@1 Timothy 3: 5. So that the truth as to the believer's house, in @Acts 16, prepared for the overseers in Ephesus. The first epistle to Timothy is connected with Ephesus; and it is in that epistle you have the instruction as to overseers and deacons; therefore you can see the importance of chapter 16 as a feature of the testimony.
Rem. So the household being in order would be a good recommendation for the saint in that way as to his place in the assembly.
J.T. Yes. So the apostle goes into the household; it is not the saints coming together; he enters into the houses of the saints. Lydia says, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide". She did not think she was patronising Paul in asking him into her, house; she recognised that he honoured her in going into her house. Then, when you come to the Philippian jailer: he took care of the apostles; he washed their stripes, and he took care of them in every possible way; there was studied hospitality.
I think it is very beautiful to see the place the Christian household has in the testimony. You will find that where there is defective apprehension as to the household the person is defective as to the assembly; there is a certain defectiveness in the apprehension of the whole scope of the truth, if you are defective in any part of it.
Ques. Do you mean that God should be fully owned in the household?
J.T. Yes; and you will find that Paul emphasises the baptism of households. He was not sent to baptise, but he did the service and he baptised households. I do not say that he did not baptise individuals; he did; but he records that he baptised the household of Stephanas.
Rem. It is very beautiful to see the way Lydia invites them into her house: "If ye have judged me
{478}
to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide" there.
Ques. Is there any other principle you notice in the chapters between this one and chapter 20?
J.T. In chapter 17, the great point is the resurrection: it is recorded there that they said Paul was "a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection". He was emphasising the setting aside of all the pretension of man in the flesh. The Man by whom God is to judge the world is the Man whom He has raised from the dead. He says, "God hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead". His qualifications are in that direction; a Man raised from the dead. It is in view of that He commands all men everywhere to repent.
Rem. What is your idea in regard to a sister in the absence of her husband: is she to lead the household in prayer?
J.T. Yes. The virtuous woman, in Proverbs, helps as to how a woman should act in the absence of her husband. She is under authority and recognises it, but she has initiative, and acts intelligently, and for the honour of her husband.
Rem. What you have said about the Christian household is of the greatest importance. It all implies that the testimony was to be permanent; and everything is ordered in relation to it. That should bring in exercise that every detail should be ordered in relation to the testimony. It should be a living thing.
J.T. Yes. In @1 Corinthians 11, we see the divine economy; there is authority, beginning with God, and extending to Christ, then to the man, and finally to the woman; so that if the husband be not present the wife is under authority; she can act.
{479}
Ques. You said Scripture does not repeat itself, when referring to the household: are there any scriptures that substantiate that?
J.T. Yes; in chapter 16 we have the household as a subject; and it is well to take note of it. The apostle says, "Thou shalt be saved, and thy house". The latter part of the sentence is almost invariably omitted in quoting that scripture.
I think it is easy to see from chapter 17, that the resurrection is the great basis. Peter emphasises it in his sermon at Jerusalem, but here, in the very heart of the Gentile world, Paul establishes the great principle that the earth is to be judged, and ruled, by a Man risen from the dead; "Whereof", he says, "he hath given assurance unto all men in that he hath raised him from the dead. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked". The natural, cultivated man resents that; it means that he is to be removed; he is to be superseded. The Man who is raised from the dead is the approved Man.
Rem. That means the removal of every other man. It was a very serious thing to bring Him to them at Athens.
J.T. Now, chapter 18 is Corinth; and the point the Lord makes is, that He had "much people in that city". That is to be noted; He had the treasure in that city, and Paul was not to be terrorised by any circumstances; "No man shall set on thee to hurt thee". "I am with thee".
Rem. That is said, before they were brought to light.
J.T. Yes, they were there; His eye was upon them. So Paul was there for eighteen months, and he preached, with the result that the assembly was formed; a company of men and women called out of the city of Corinth, and formed into an assembly. The Greeks were well acquainted with the idea of
{480}
an assembly; it was no new thing to them; but that God should have one was entirely new to them it was God's assembly. Now in that assembly, in the city of Corinth, every divine thought was to be found; it was to be the assembly of God, and the building of God, and the body of Christ in that city. That is one side. Now when you come to Ephesus, in the next chapter, it is not the idea of the assembly in the city; it is the assembly in God's counsels. Of course, there was an assembly there, but I refer to the truth connected with it.
Rem. Christ sometimes speaks of the assembly as "My assembly"; and it is also called God's assembly.
J.T. The thought in Christ's assembly is that He has a company in which He is supreme.
Ques. Would you repeat what you said about the distinction between the assembly in Ephesus and the assembly at Corinth?
J.T. You can see, by what the apostle says, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God", that he wanted them to understand God's counsels. It is not the idea of a company in a locality; but of the whole assembly as connected with God's counsels in heaven. I am referring not only to the chapter before us, but also to the teaching of the epistle.
Rem. He was free to bring the counsels of God to their attention, on account of their state.
Rem. But what is true of all is that the assembly's position is heavenly.
J.T. Yes; the power of God will put her there. That is what the epistle develops; so the apostle contemplates her as there already in the heavenlies.
Ques. Would you say the Spirit of God is putting her there at the present moment?
J.T. Well, we are being formed for that. "He
{481}
that hath wrought us for this selfsame thing is God", @2 Corinthians 5:5.
Rem. The actual putting there will be an easy matter.
J.T. Yes; it is all connected together in @Ephesians 2. "He hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". It is all one stroke of His power; there it is seen in its grand result. It is going on now in every one of us. Rem. There are two sides to your thought: the greatness of the thing in itself, and then in the number of saints that are brought into it.
J.T. It is seen in the end in @Ephesians 2; it is seen in the end according to what it will be. As we know, it takes twenty centuries to accomplish it in detail; but there it is seen in its grand result; the assembly is set down in the heavenlies, as God's creation.
Rem. We often speak of things being true of us in Christ; we need a little help on that.
J.T. Well, they are true of us in the sense that they are in God's mind for us, and seen in Christ, and God will bring them to pass unfailingly; that is the idea of it.
Rem. "He that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God".
Ques. Is not the work of God in us to enable us to anticipate that moment?
Rem. The light of it is presented to us now, and we can anticipate being seated there.
J.T. Yes. The first prayer in the epistle to the Ephesians is that you might have the light of these things; the second prayer is that you might have strength to lay hold of them: that we might be filled with the Spirit. But in chapter 2 they are looked at as already accomplished; God presents them to us in their grand result.
Rem. You were saying the other evening, that
{482}
it took in the past, and present, and future of the saints.
J.T. It takes in every item of the work of God in the saints; of that I am fully assured. We are only able to take up things as we are formed by the work of God.
Rem. It is not doctrine, or terms, but a spiritual state.
J.T. I believe that; holiness is a great principle in connection with the things of God.
Rem. You see it here, in Ephesians; love and faith.
J.T. Yes; Paul having heard of their love, and their faith, begins to pray for them.
Rem. If we were more separate, we would have more light, and more ability to enter into the things of God. Holiness is a great element; we read, "without holiness no man can see the Lord".
Ques. Would you say the thing would develop to us more quickly if there was that state?
J.T. You see, if you feel you are not in these things; well, what are you going to do? We come together, and talk about them; and you say they are very nice, but perhaps you say I am not very much in them. Well, what are you going to do? Comfort yourself with the thought that you are as well off as others? No; what one should do is to turn to the Lord about it, and see what it is that hinders; because there is something that hinders.
Rem. Very likely it is something at the very beginning of our spiritual history. Mr. Raven said, that apart from the groundwork of righteousness being laid in the soul, there is no entering into the love of God.
Rem. If we were more light.
J.T. I think so. We are too much on equality with the world, and with those around us.
{483}
Rem. We are rather sociable.
J.T. Yes, we are all exposed to that. But the first great principle in Balaam's prophecy is that Israel "shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations". That laid hold of, brings in light as to associations; and, following upon that, you get strength referred to in Balaam's prophecy, @Numbers 23: 22.
Rem. It might take the form of religious associations, which would be more dangerous.
Ques. Is there not something more to be noticed in our chapter?
J.T. Well, verses 26, 27, indicate the place the assembly had in the apostle's mind. He says, "Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God". That is to say, the saints had no excuse at Ephesus; the whole counsel of God had been presented to them. He had brought in every bit of light; so if there was a turning away at Ephesus, it was in the presence of the fullest possible light. Paul was clear; he had delivered his message. That is what makes the failure of the Ephesians so serious; it was turning away from the fullest possible light.
Ques. Does verse 21 refer to the beginning of his work with these people, or afterwards?
J.T. I think it refers to the character of his ministry. He says, "testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ". "I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have chewed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house". That is what was presented, no matter who it was he visited, that is what he testified. "Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ".
{484}
Ques. Why do you think the apostle was specially concerned as to Ephesus above all other places?
J.T. He wanted to see the elders; that assembly had a very great place in his mind; he knew what he had done there, and he wanted the work continued; he was not to continue there himself, so he put the responsibility on the elders.
Rem. His heart is, opened out to them in a wonderful way.
Rem. He points out to them that in spite of all his ministry, grievous wolves would enter in among them, not sparing the flock.
Ques. What does he mean by saying he was "bound in the spirit?"
J.T. That had reference to him in going to Jerusalem. Jerusalem was not a door opened up to him. If you are going to a district where there is an open door, your spirit is free. He said a great door and effectual was opened to him at Ephesus; but it was not an open door at Jerusalem. All the way along the Spirit testified to him that bonds and afflictions awaited him.
Ques. Was it right for him to go on?
J.T. Well, it is hardly comely for us to say much about it; but it is clear enough it was not part of his service; he was called to go far hence among the Gentiles. It was really the Spirit of Christ, in a sense; he loved the Jews, his own earthly people.
Now another beautiful touch is his word in verse 28, "shepherd the assembly of God which he has purchased with the blood of his own". That is the assembly viewed in the full light of its preciousness to Christ, and to God.
Rem. It is the place the flock have here.
J.T. Yes, but it is purchased with the blood of His own Son.
{485}
Rem. In spite of the apostle's ministry, and the greatest possible light; that was the place where the apostasy began.
J.T. Yes, exactly; the Lord felt the movement. He says, "I have against thee, that thou hast left thy first love". Perhaps none else could have detected it. They were zealous of doctrine; He said, "I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are riot, and hast found them liars". But the Lord detected the cooling of their love.
Ques. Is it not wonderful, after all Paul's labour and hard work among them, he was able to say, "these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me".
J.T. Wonderful. Now another very touching feature is that these leaders loved Paul; and that was the proof that they loved Christ; that was the evidence of it.
There is no difficulty about the rank and file, if the leaders are right. You may depend upon it the mass of the saints will be right if the leaders are right.
Rein. It is very humbling that when the leaders go wrong the others go wrong.
Rein. There is only one course that love can take.
J.T. We read in verse 36, "when be had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed with them all, and they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see his face no more".
That was a most touching scene. It was real affection. No doubt it was the final touch, answering to the top stone.
{486}
RECOVERY
@John 21
J.T. The object the Spirit had in writing this gospel is stated at the end of chapter 20; so that chapter 21 is clearly an appendix. Among other things it serves to show us how the Lord is discerned here without a formal announcement. He is discerned by those who although they were in a wrong course yet had this advantage, they had already been acquainted with Him, and they discerned Him by His features.
Ques. What are His features.
J.T. It is His moral features. No one but He could have acted in the way He did. The feminine speaker in the @Song of Songs 5: 4 discerned the Bridegroom by his hand. She only saw one feature, his hand; he put his hand through the door, and she discerned it was he. John here discerns that it was the Lord without any announcement; and he says to Peter, "It is the Lord". I just mention that in a general way, as one great point in the chapter. It is a remarkable chapter because it begins with the saints really in a wrong position, they had returned to their nets, and it is a very noticeable fact that Peter and Thomas are the leaders in this position; men who had not made a very good showing lately. It is important to take account of people who take the lead in any movement.
Rem. Referring to Peter and Thomas, the one denied Christ, and the other was unbelieving.
Rem. It was dangerous to see such men leading.
J.T. Yes. No matter what a cause may be, it is important to take account of the leaders in it. What has their history been? Are they trustworthy?
Rem. It is interesting to see here that if Simon Peter was the one to lead them off, he was the first to come back.
{487}
J.T. Yes; you mean he makes a good recovery. He really was aided into his false position in the palace of the high priest through the influence of "that apostle" who "was known to the high priest". It is very interesting to see the recovery in one who may fall, when the ground work is genuine.
Rem. There was affection there.
J.T. Failure in anyone who has had reputation amongst the saints is serious, because it involves others. Peter says, "I go a fishing". They say unto him, "We also go with thee". The position of leadership is a very serious one in the things of God.
Ques. Would you say that this really follows after the light of the assembly had been brought to them.
J.T. Yes. This chapter is an appendix, but it is needed as filling out the subject. The immediate occasion of this gospel was that the saints might be believers in the Son. "These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name". That is the object the Spirit had in writing; but there was a want of completeness in the scope of the record inasmuch as it did not go on to the end; and the appendix shows us that; it goes on to show the end in the millennium with regard to the Gentile. John's supposition in verse 25 makes room for an infinite bearing; and the negative also makes room for the infinite bearing of the Lord's ministry. It goes beyond what is material and what is in time. I think it is an immense gain for us to be acquainted with the Lord; even from this point of view. If failure occurs you have the advantage of knowing the Lord when He touches you in your circumstances. Often our circumstances become the means of the Lord speaking to us; something happens, and you say, "It is the Lord"; you do not attribute it to second causes.
{488}
Rem. It shows that you know Him.
Rem. Recovery brings us back to the point of departure, but does it not also include a further step in our acquaintance with Him?
J.T. Yes. Abraham has to go back to the place of the tent where he had been in the beginning; there could be no further progress until he got back to that point; but the Lord, does not leave him there. If He once gets us on the move, He leads us on.
Ques. Was the Lord bringing Peter back to the point of departure when He said, "Lovest thou me?"
J.T. Yes, that was the point of departure, but then He leads him on when He sets him to work. He says to him, "Feed my lambs". "Feed my sheep". And His dealing with Peter ends with this; "This spake he signifying by what death he should glorify God".
Rem. Peter had said he would follow Him to death.
J.T. I believe in making resolutions. The Lord holds you to them. I think if there is anything the Lord dislikes in us it is indefiniteness; most believers are quite indefinite.
Rem. If you depart from, your resolution the Lord will bring you back to it.
J.T. He recalls you to your vow. You make a vow, and that vow is valued according to Moses¬ valuation; according to the currency of the sanctuary. In the book of Leviticus, chapter 27, God puts a distinct value on your vow; and if you depart from that, He brings you back to it.
Rem. What marked Laodicea was that they were neither cold nor hot.
J.T. Yes, there was nothing definite there.
Rem. While He may have to discipline one in that connection, still He would support and encourage in what is of Himself.
J.T. Yes, He will discipline you if you depart
{489}
from the resolution. The Lord called Abraham out of his country, and from his kindred; and from his father's house unto a land that He would show him. Abraham answered to that, in time; that was the call, and he answered to the call; but he departed from it when he went into Egypt, where he had never been sent, and the Lord disciplined him, and so brought him back. The Lord loves you to go forward, and make your resolution; you owe it to Him to do that. He did that on our behalf.
Rem. He said, "I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free".
J.T. Yes. Peter unquestionably meant what he said: he would lay down his life for Christ; he meant that, and the Lord graciously brought him to it. Peter was really called to be a leader; but leadership is moral. The Lord is the great Leader; and the way to lead is indicated here. The Lord brings Peter back to true leadership.
Ques. When Peter says here, "I go a fishing", you would look at that as being an independent line of his own?
J.T. Yes; he is the leader, but in this instance he is leading in lawlessness. To go back to that out of which one had been called is lawlessness.
Ques. Is there not something significant in the question Jesus asked them, "Children, have ye any meat?"
J.T. I think it is very touching to see that He addressed them in such an endearing way, and that He had such consideration for their need. I believe that if we are to help one another, there must be a ministry of Christ. If there is failure, and you minister Christ to a brother you give him a certain moral power to judge himself. The probing did not take place until they had dined.
Ques. Would that suggest the ministry of Christ to the soul now?
{490}
J.T. Yes; I think it requires a certain moral power to judge yourself: it requires power in your soul.
Ques. Would you say Peter came out a better man afterwards?
J.T. Yes, he did; when he was "converted" he strengthened his brethren, as the Lord had foretold. He had to go through all this to be a true leader.
Rem. You spoke about acquaintance with the Lord. How is that brought about?
J.T. I think it is brought about through the ministry of Christ to the soul. Repentance is really that you hate yourself in the presence of what Christ is.
Ques. Would @Romans 12 suggest your thought? "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice".
J.T. Yes; you come to see that your body can be used in the testimony, and you present it to God. It is a living one now, it is not dead; that is to say, the body is possessed by the Spirit of God, and it is worth something. That is said to be intelligent service; and in the light of all that preceded it is intelligent to do that.
Ques. "As for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord". Would you say that is a vow?
J.T. That is a very definite statement. You, as head, are responsible to the Lord for your house. It is remarkable how the introduction of the testimony into Europe is connected with the household in @Acts 16. What is made prominent in that chapter is the household; the brethren are merely alluded to. The testimony was received into the house by a woman; she had respect to the testimony of the apostle, and she invited him to come into her house, if he judged her to be faithful to the Lord. Therefore she held her house for the Lord.
Ques. "It is the Lord" seems to be prominent
{491}
here; is there any point in that? They do not say Christ or Jesus.
J.T. I think it was befitting that in their circumstances they should recognise Him as Lord; His authority had been impaired; they had gone to fish without His sanction, without His word.
Rem. It was in that line that they were to be recovered. They were to be in subjection.
J.T. Yes; in the passage it is said three times, "It is (or 'was' ) the Lord".
Rem. John had the inward sense of who it was. Was it by the Lord's actions they knew Him?
J.T. Yes; He said, "Children, have ye any meat?" He also said, "Cast the net on the right side". If you are not directed by the Lord, you get nothing spiritually. One of the most interesting things in Scripture is to find out what a leader is. There were princes in Israel; but their moral qualifications preceded the official. In other words, a leader is a leader; he is what he is. In the opening of the book of Numbers, Moses and Aaron are to take the heads of the tribes; they were leaders; they had distinguished themselves; they were not simply officially appointed; they were princes; and when you come to chapter 7 of the book of Numbers you will find that the leaders were united; and their unity is seen in their appreciation of the testimony; each gave the same thing; there was unity of appreciation of the testimony; a remarkable expression of unity. I have no doubt that true Christian leadership is seen in this chapter; that is to say, the true leader feeds the saints, and he dies for Christ; he dies for God's glory; he is prepared to lay down his life for God's glory.
Rem. That is contrasted in David and Saul.
J.T. And that is what Peter was brought back to. He had undoubtedly made the resolution to do this, and the Lord brought him back to it: to be a
{492}
feeder, and a leader. The Lord says to him, When you were a young man you did what you liked. That is what marks a young convert. But when you are old, you will not do what you like; you will resign yourself to the will of God.
Rem. When Peter said: "Though all should forsake thee yet will not I", he meant it, and the Lord brought him back to it.
J.T. So he says at the end, "Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me". He came to it beautifully; and he thought of the saints -- "I will endeavour (he says) that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance". He was true to his mission.
Ques. Would you connect God's discipline with that?
J.T. I think God's discipline is the means of our, preservation and growth. It is a very great thing to be able to see the Lord's hand; something happens, and we are apt to attribute it to second causes; whereas when faith sees the Lord's hand you get occupied with Him. The bride in Canticles observes the bridegroom's head, his locks, his eyes, his cheeks she describes every feature.
Rem. And she gets to him.
J.T. Yes, but it is his hand that stirs her up; she was drowsy, and the beloved withdrew his hand; and then she sets out to find him.
Rem. There was fragrance left where his hand had been; "sweet smelling myrrh".
J.T. Yes; it has been likened to suffering love. The Lord stands outside Laodicea, knocking. I think the recovery here is beautiful; it is complete. The Lord meets them in grace, and without any reproach; and then He turns directly to Peter.
Peter was really the leader of the apostles; and having probed him to the bottom, the Lord goes on
{493}
to show that the Levites must not interfere with each other's work. No Levite has any authority over another Levite; the only one who has authority over the Levite is the Priest. Peter says of John, "What shall this man do?" That was one Levite questioning another. The Lord says, "What have you to do with that?" This leads one back to the book of Numbers. There were three families of the Levites, and they were all under the supervision of Eleazar. The Levites were primarily given to Aaron and to his sons, so that they were directly under the supervision of the priests, and they had nothing to do with each other in that sense; each Levite gets his work to do, and it is his business to do it.
Ques. I suppose @Romans 12 would answer to that, the Levites were the "living sacrifice"?
J.T. Yes; you have a further thought there. But I think in regard to the body, "As we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office", and "having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith; or ministry, let us wait on our ministering", and so on; so that each one has his work, and let him do it.
Ques. What is your thought about the world not being able to "contain the books that should be written?"
J.T. It is John's estimate of the ministry of the Lord being infinite. It is the Spirit of God through John giving the ministry of Christ its full infinite bearing. It has been said that the approach is equal to the revelation, but it must be borne in mind that that refers to Christ. He only could compass the revelation: we could not.
Rem. There is no limit to it.
J.T. And I think the Lord's ministry is guarded in that way here. It is limited in chapter 20, because
{494}
the object was that we might believe; but chapter 21 gives it its full infinite bearing. It is important to have an estimate of things; you do not pretend to compass things, but you do have your thought about things. John here gives us his estimate of the Lord's ministry.
Ques. I suppose you would say that nothing Jesus said, or did, could be lost, or fall to the ground; it must come out in some way or other?
J.T. Yes; and His sayings are not local. Epistles were written by the apostles applying to local needs; but in the gospels the bearing is infinite.
Ques. I suppose it is in the saints that all is written?
J.T. No doubt every divine thought will find some expression in the assembly. Still the assembly is a finite thing, you know; it is not infinite.
Rem. I suppose our brother refers to the heavenly city.
J.T. Yes; but then that is finite, is it not? Rem. Your thought is that nothing finite can compass the greatness of the revelation.
J.T. Yes. The revelation of God. "No man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him".
Rem. The glory of God fills the city.
J.T. In @Hebrews 1 it says, referring to the Son; "who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power". That is all said of the One who revealed God; well, we cannot assume to compass that; but the Son is great enough to do so. Rem. In the light of that your soul will worship.
J.T. Yes; we have a great High Priest over the house of God, and we approach in the Priest. Our High Priest compasses the revelation, and He approaches
{495}
in the full light of it; we approach in Him; "Let us draw near".
Rem. The garments of the high priest were the same as the curtains of the tabernacle.
J.T. Yes. And there was the Urim and the Thummim; there was light and perfection; and the heart of Christ is equal to include every saint. No son of Aaron was equal to that. Nothing puts us to the test more than local association with each other; the breastplate is to teach us that the saints are to be in our hearts; they were all there in the heart of Christ.
Rem. Our blessing lies in the study of that Person who is equal to the revelation.
Rem. "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say his flesh; and having an high priest over the house of God; let us draw near". You have part in the approach, but you do not fully compass it.
J.T. You never could come to the measure of what He was.
Ques. Does the tabernacle foreshadow all the revelation?
J.T. Yes, I think so. The tabernacle was a necessity in view of all that Moses was receiving; the tabernacle was intended to be a suitable abode for the ark.
Rem. The Lord is "the minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man".
J.T. I have no doubt that Peter, at the end of his course is an instance of what a true board of the tabernacle is; he laid down his life to glorify God. That was what Jesus did. You and I glorify God in submitting ourselves to His will. "This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God".
{496}
"When thou shalt be old thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee". That shows resignation. The boards of the tabernacle were of the same wood as the ark, and they were covered over with gold only. Romans sets us out in the wilderness as boards; we are fit material for the tabernacle. Now Ephesians shows you the tabernacle set up, "Ye also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", @Ephesians 2: 22.
Rem. You mean Romans takes us up individually.
J.T. Yes, I think so; you see the thought in chapter 7. The apostle says, "I delight in the law of God after the inward man"; and then in chapter 8 he has power to answer to that through the Spirit. I think Romans prepares you for the tabernacle.
{497}
THE GENTILES RESERVED FOR BLESSING
@Genesis 2:15 - 18; @Galatians 3: 8 - 14
It is an important thing in considering the ways of God with the race of men to see that He divided them up into nations in mercy. In other words, it was His mode of preserving the nations from excessive lawlessness. There was lawlessness, I need not say. @Genesis 11 records for us, as is well known to many here, the resolution on the part of man to build a tower and a city in the plain of Shinar. It was a distinct resolution arrived at; and not only arrived at, but deliberately carried into effect.
We must not conclude that lawlessness is without method; lawlessness in the world has become organised; and one often notices this, even in individuals, deliberate, carefully planned sin; not simply the outcome of a rash outburst, as in young people, but sin deliberately planned and carried out with a measure of what we may call intelligence. Now, that is the kind of lawlessness God abhors. That is what marks the present world; and that is what is seen in @Genesis 11. One said to his fellow, "Go to, let us make brick". Everything is carefully thought out; and I have not a doubt but that the building, the workmanship, was excellent; and the material excellent of its kind; and all was carefully carried out. The Spirit of God records for us the end in view. Nothing is omitted: "Let us build us a city, and a tower whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth". All that without God.
Now, what I want to show you is that in the presence of all that, God comes down; not simply did He look down, as we read in the Psalms, but He came down. Now, think of that; men may plan
{498}
out a course of sin for themselves; a course which disregards every moral principle; think of that; and God comes down to see what they are doing. He comes near to you to see what you are doing, and, if possible, He is going to restrain your doings. If you are not to be converted at the moment God will hedge about your ways; wondrous mercy to have your ways hedged about by providential dealings on the part of God. The eye of God has been upon you from your birth. It was upon Paul; God had carefully separated that man in His mind from his birth; and I doubt not he hedged his way about; He saved him from many a sin; and so He does to each one of us. There is not one in this room tonight, converted, who, if he reviews his course even in his unconverted days, cannot recall how God stood between him and evil, when his heart would have led him into it; God stood between him and it. God, in that way, is reserving you for blessing. Now, that is a point I want to make clear; that there is divine reservation for blessing; not for cursing.
Well now, God came down to take account of what was being done; He surveyed the work, and the consequences of the work. He said, "And now nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do". Think of the mercies of God surrounding you, hedging you in so that you should be restrained. They would be restrained from nothing; their aspirations would exceed all bounds. If they succeeded in this, they would attempt something more; one sin precedes another; one act of lawlessness but paves the way for a more heinous one. How merciful, if God hedges you about, and saves you from additional lawlessness; the present is bad enough, but it could be worse; every sin but hardens you, and paves the way for worse.
God had foreseen the time when Christ should appear; He announced it to Abraham, and that He
{499}
would as a result reserve the nations for blessing. I want you to take note of that. God divided the nations so as to preserve them for the blessing He had in His mind for them. I would ask you to take that in. God reserves us for blessing. He had the blessing in His mind, and in order that the blessing should be preserved, He raised up Abraham, and his seed, but in order that the race should not enter on a course of excessive lawlessness, He divided them, so that there should not be intercommunion. I want you to ponder what I am saying. It is the divine way; the division of the race into nations was a mercy, and Satan perceived it. God says, "Let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech". So He raised up barriers between the nations to prevent them from intercommunion, and to save them in that way from excessive lawlessness.
The apostle Paul, when speaking to the Athenians concerning the nations, says, "God has set bounds to their habitations". Why? "That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him and find him". What a mercy it is to be circumscribed, so as to save us from lawlessness, from sin. You may endeavour to throw off the divinely appointed trammels which are to save you from lawlessness; you think to throw them off, but let me remind you that they are a most merciful provision for you in your youth, until you are saved, and get the Holy Spirit. Those trammels are the protection of God for you, to save you from Satan, and from sin, and from the world. When you trust Christ you get His protection you get the Holy Spirit, who becomes power in your soul; then you are free, and, as the Lord says, you "go in and out and find pasture". But that going in and out is not lawlessness; it is not to run riot like the Gentiles; it is to do the will of God.
Well, now, I want to make clear the thought as
{500}
to the nations. Think of the divisions of the nations, and remember that each one of them has a divine boundary; not in judgment, though in one sense it was judicial, but it was mercy. Every providential dealing of God is a mercy. So that all those ancient languages, take each one by itself, was a divine barrier in order that men should be saved from excess of lawlessness; and in order, as Paul says, that they might seek after God; and then he adds, "he is not far from every one of us". God was not far from the nations; every morning the sun shone in the heavens; rain came down; and the earth yielded her increase. All that was continually a testimony to God; He is not far from any one of us, for "in him we live, and move, and have our being". Now God, moreover, in His providential ways preserved the Gentiles until the time of the blessing arrived. It is the responsibility of the preacher to make it clear that the blessing has arrived. The nations were preserved during all the centuries of antiquity until Christ appeared. Ponder that think of God, in His providential dealings, preserving all those nations; preserving them until the appearance of the true seed of Abraham; until the time arrived for the Vessel of the blessing to appear.
Now, I want to add one other word as to the nations; and that is, that Satan perceived it was God's mercy to divide the nations; and hence he worked on the line of imperialism. Did you ever study the history of imperialism in Scripture? It was a satanic device; but a device which was met in Christ. But imperialism was an attack of the enemy on God's proposal in @Genesis 11. The enemy would overthrown God's intention. God's intention was to divide the nations, and to maintain them divided until the true Emperor should be presented to them, and they should be united in the power of the Spirit in Christ. Satan's device came to light
{501}
immediately in Nimrod. If God is seeking to hedge you about, and preserve you for blessing, Satan will do all in his power to help you to get loose; he will hold all kinds of inducements out to you; he will bring forward societies, and friends, calculated to ensnare you. Depend upon it, if God is doing anything for you, Satan will notice it, and he sets to work to prevent it operating. Now, that is what he did in Nimrod. Nimrod was a ready instrument for the evil one; he was a rebel; his name signified that; and we are told by the Spirit that he began his kingdom at Babel; and his kingdom signified imperialism. We all know that Babel is imperialism in Scripture; and all the great empires of the world, beginning with Babylon, implied that the nations should come under one head. The four great Gentile monarchies endeavoured to rule the world. In other words to overthrow the divisions which God had raised up in mercy to the nations.
God announced the blessing: "Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the nations on the principle of faith, announced beforehand the glad tidings to Abraham". Now nothing, in a way, can be more interesting than to consider the call of Abraham. "I called him alone", says God. He was called out alone; and as called out, the blessing is announced to him. Oh that one might make clear to you what is in the heart of God for you! In all those gracious dealings, God has blessing in His mind. Now, I have often referred to the division of the nations as judgment; and, in a sense, it was; but it was mercy.. God looked on to the time when Christ should appear, and die, in order to secure the blessing, in order to make good the announcement to Abraham that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed.
Well now, when you come to @Genesis 22 you have Isaac. I have often thought that Isaac in the Old
{502}
Testament represents Paul's teaching in the New. What you will find in connection with Isaac is very striking. In @Genesis 22 the angel calls twice out of heaven. It might, have sufficed to say that the angel "called", or "spake", as elsewhere; but it is recorded here that he spake out of heaven. In other words, Isaac is the object of heaven. Isaac is the heavenly man. I want to speak of the announcement. God says, in verse 17, "In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice". There are two thoughts I want to dwell upon briefly, in that passage: the first is, that the seed of Abraham would possess the gate of his enemies. I want you to understand, beloved friends, that that applies to Christ. He it is that possesses the gate of His enemies; and, in alluding to it, one might enlarge upon the Lord's conflict with the enemy, when the Lord had to say to the power of evil, in death.
I speak of this for the moment, so that you might understand the completeness of the deliverance. In order that the blessing might be diffused, you must have the enemy overthrown. I want you to understand that. His seed is to possess the gate of His enemies. That is the position taken up by the Lord Jesus in consequence of His conflict and victory. He has taken up a position in the gate of His enemies.
Do you need to fear them? Does the believer need to fear them? If you have any dread in your soul as to enemies, think of @Psalm 24: "Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle". He is worthy to enter.
{503}
The gates of glory are thrown open to Him; but the enemies¬ gates are in His possession. You will remember that when David slew Goliath in the valley of Elah, he took the giant's head to Jerusalem; that is an intimation of what is in my mind. The Lord Jesus holds the gates of His enemies; they have no power against Him.
Now, there are many believers on the Lord Jesus, true in heart, but they do not confess Him; and on account of that they do not get the Spirit; at any rate, they do not enjoy the support of the Spirit. If you do not get the Spirit, you do not get blessing. I want you to understand that Christ holds the gates of His enemies. You need not fear to confess the Lord. If you want to have the Spirit in real power, confess the Lord. I would urge you to test that. "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved; for with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation".
Then further: "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed". Think of the position of the Lord Jesus: He has gone into heaven, we are told, and angels, and principalities, and powers have been made subject to Him; and more, He has the keys of death and of hades. That is the position.
It is not that He shall have them; He has them. He is in the gate of His enemies; not one of them can lift a finger without the Lord; not one of them. Would that you could get that into your soul. He is worthy of your confession. The enemies dare not move without Him. If He allows them to act, to discipline you, it is another matter. Take it not from their hand, but from His. The Lord has control over everything, even of hades, and death. It is a complete triumph. He is worthy of your confession:
{504}
"If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus". That position is universal; His position on high has reference to the whole of mankind.
Simeon saw a light for the revelation of the Gentiles; the Gentiles are brought to light; God had carefully reserved them for blessing, they are brought into evidence; and now what? The blessing is carried to them. "That the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus". Think of that; it is brought near to you. What can exceed the grace, the kindness of God, in carrying the blessing to us in Christ Jesus. We have not now to go to Jerusalem for it. I wonder if you understand that. The epistle to the Galatians is to establish that we are living in the faith period; the period of liberty; and the faith period signifies not that we have to go to the blessing, but that the blessing has come to us. "That the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus". Christ Jesus is set up on the part of God as the Administrator of the blessing; and it has come to the Gentiles in such an One as that. Then the apostle adds another thought; "that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith".
Now this is the statement of the present situation; the blessing has arrived; it has come to us. What is your side? What is my side? Faith. "That we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith". Have you received the Spirit? This same Jesus, whom the Jews had crucified, God made both Lord and Christ. He has anointed Him. "Being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear". The Spirit was there; He was present at Jerusalem. Then the question is raised, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" That was a most remarkable question. It was the effect of conviction: "They were pricked in their hearts". Ah, it is a wonderful
{505}
moment when the divine touch is felt in the heart, and the cry issues "What shall we do?" The issue is tremendous. You are brought face to face with God, with Christ, and with eternity. What are you going to do about it? What an issue there was on that day at Jerusalem! And the answer was immediate; even as it is now: "Repent and be baptised, every one of you"; not en masse; no; "every one of you".
There is no such thing as salvation en masse; it is every one of you; "and you shall receive remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy Spirit". How plain, how decisive the answer! Three thousand people understood it; and they embraced it; they were baptised; they received remission of sins, they received the Holy Spirit, and they were brought into the Christian circle; a circle of affection, where God was. Indeed we are told, with very great significance, that the Lord added to the assembly such as were saved; He added them to it. How complete is His care for us; He never leaves us until He places us where the blessing is to be enjoyed. And so, on parallel lines, the blessing extended to the Gentiles. Paul presents things from the standpoint of Isaac, who is, in type, the heavenly man, the vessel of the heavenly blessing to the Gentiles; and so Paul says, that the blessing had arrived at the nations, in Christ Jesus, and that we should receive the promise of the Spirit on the principle of faith.
Now there is just one other thought, and that is in the epistle to the Romans. The apostle says "I have written to you the more boldly, brethren, in part, as putting you in mind, because of the grace given to me by God, for me to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the nations, carrying on as a sacrificial service the message of the glad tidings of God, in order that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit", @Romans 15:15, 16. 
{506}
Now, think of that. The nations are to be offered up to God. God is to have you and me "that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit". I think that is a glorious ending of Paul's mission. If you peruse the history from @Genesis 11, to @Romans 15, which I have cited, it is a wonderful story. @Genesis 11, the nations are in revolt; God comes in in mercy and divides them up for blessing; and now the blessing has arrived at them, and they are offered up to God. What a marvellous triumph on the part of God through the glad tidings!
One would appeal to souls as to whether we are really offered up? Paul looked at the whole Gentile product of the gospel as being all offered up to God; not divided up, but being brought into the unity of the Spirit; being sanctified, as he says, by the Holy Spirit. There was a good deal made of tongues in the early history of Christianity; and the point is that God Himself overthrew the barriers. In the coming of the Spirit, the barriers are overthrown, and we understand one another's speech; speech is no longer a barrier, and we hear, "every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born": Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, Cretes, and Arabians, "we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God". Not the wonderful work of the builders of Babel; but the wonderful works of God. And what works they are! Such is the theme for those who have the Spirit.
May the Lord grant that it may be so; and that amongst Christians, beloved brethren, there may be the practical unity of the Spirit. It is in that sense that we are sanctified, and offered up to God.
