{1}
Pages 1 - 366 -- "Ministry in Great Britain 1950", (Volume 185).
MANCHESTER -- READING (1)
@1 Corinthians 11: 1 - 34
J.T. This chapter has been before some of us lately, and with profit, but largely to develop out of it the import of the Lord's supper. This is in mind too now, only what is prominent at the moment is the idea of headship. The apostle brings himself forward and we cannot ignore the fact that he has been taken up by the Lord to develop this thought of the assembly. He did not fail to do so, for he is the one to do it, according to his word in the epistle to the Ephesians, "I speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". What is in mind now is to bring out the thought of headship in Christ and how it should develop in the working out of the Lord's supper. It would seem as if the Lord's supper is the initial idea in the service of God, and it may be remarked that the first day of the week has become increasingly valuable in connection with the Lord's supper and the service of God. All that follows in every week generally contributes to the service of God so that the brethren have come to regard it in this way. We have the service of God in the morning, and the scriptures read in the afternoon with a view to developing the truth and then the gospel preached in the evening. The first day of the week thus has a peculiar place as we all know in regard to the whole system of service. We commence with the Lord's supper and the service of God follows, so that the Father is approached and worshipped. The worship of God has thus acquired its proper place, and also what belongs to it, such as hymns, have acquired
{2}
their own place. Then too one believes that more and more there is real concern, at the present time, as to the Spirit and the place He should have. So that the service of the Spirit is not at all relegated in the service of God; it has its own place so that we have such thoughts as "Abba, Father", which would be by the Spirit and that belongs properly to the worship of the Father. I thought it well to lay out a little what is in mind both for this meeting and for the evening meeting. It may be remarked too that the types, as we properly call them, have acquired a great place, and such a place as they have not had earlier, so far as I can discern, and one believes the brethren would do well to use them, because they are intended to be used. Chapter 10 of this epistle refers to them. In fact in chapter 10 the cup is placed before the bread, but the order is the bread and the cup. There are not two suppers or really two parts of it, the idea is one Supper, it is the Lord's supper.
Ques. There are believers in wrong associations who claim to partake of the Lord's supper. Would you say whether they can truly do that in wrong associations?
J.T. I am sure they cannot. The Scriptures are so full of instruction and, in that light, what you refer to cannot be accepted. There must be right principles and right doctrine underlying the service of God and the Lord's supper leading in it. There are probably a hundred so-called religious christian systems; but there can be only one according to God, and that is based on the Lord's supper. Then the service of God follows on that, the brethren all being brought into it under the leadership of Christ as the "minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man".
{3}
J.S.E. Is that why you have been so concerned recently to emphasise the assembly amongst us, rather than permitting the thought of a remnant?
J.T. Quite so. I think the word 'remnant' is properly connected with Israel, whereas, in dealing with the service of God in relation to christianity, the word 'remnant' is not suitable. The Scriptures would require that the whole idea of the assembly should be kept before us; it is one idea. The assembly is the greatest family in the whole universe, and it is the family God has selected to set out His system of worship.
Eu.R. Is that confirmed in our chapter by the words "When ye come together in assembly"? Is it still possible to come together in assembly in spite of the broken state of things?
J.T. I think so, I think that what I was saying is of prime importance. It is not simply as a remnant that we come together, but the whole idea is to be there, and the Spirit of God will be here. The blessed Spirit remains not in part, but as a whole. He supports and maintains the service of God -- including the gospel, of course. The gospel is to promote material for the assembly; for the assembly is the prime thought in the divine mind at all times. But then there is the remnant of Israel and presently there will be the apostasy. God is holding His hand against what is current, but there will be an apostasy. That is one of the most solemn things, and although the apostasy is in principle current, it has not set in formally yet, because the Spirit of God is here and He holds His hand against the evil of an apostasy.
Ques. When the Lord Jesus addresses Himself to Sardis, after the complete failure in Thyatira, He speaks of Himself as having "the seven Spirits of God". Is that what you have in mind in the Spirit being here in fulness still?
{4}
J.T. Very good, "The seven Spirits" is the whole idea -- the whole idea of the Spirit.
Ques. So that alongside of that, there is to be maintained the whole idea of the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. God is behind all that; He has been calling attention to His service, and has brought forward ministry for the last hundred and twenty years that is suitable to lead to and support the idea of the service of God. The service of God is the great thought. The word 'service *of God*' -- that is the term or formula that we ought to keep before us all the time, because it is the leading thought at the present time. The assembly is the first thought in the mind of God at the present time, and it will continue so.
Ques. Is this recognition of headship intended to set us free in regard of speaking to God and speaking to men? I was thinking of the way headship is introduced by praying and prophesying.
J.T. That shows that the chapter we have just read has the service of God in mind. The idea is to correct everything that was wrong and to maintain things according to order, for God is said to be the God of order, and the God of order enters into this matter of headship. Headship is the prime thought as conveying the intelligence that belongs to the assembly, especially in view of the Lord Jesus Christ being the Head of it; He is the Head of the assembly.
Ques. Will you please distinguish between the thought of Head of the assembly and Head of every man, as it is in chapter 11.
J.T. I think Christ being the Head of every man would bring out the divine thought as to man. God is dealing with humanity and, of course, the fact that the Son has become Man is to give the full
{5}
thought of it, and to show how important it is in the divine mind. The Son has become Man, and before entering on His full service He is seen as "about thirty years old". So it is full manhood in the gospel of Luke.
Ques. And the highest thought of manhood would be to be occupied in the service of God?
J.T. That is what I think. There are things added, such as meetings of this kind, and the Lord's day afternoon reading to which the brethren usually rally, and which, I think, ought to be fully supported and promoted generally, especially among young people, who should not allow themselves to be diverted by ordinary affairs on the first day of the week. Then again another matter of importance is that God has graciously, or mercifully, granted us these weekends free to have meetings of this kind, and they are very prevalent. Generally, as far as I know, they are very prevalent throughout the christian world.
Ques. Would you say that the idea of the man and woman in their place in the divine economy in the first part of the chapter is in view of that thought being filled out fully in Christ and the assembly?
J.T. That is just what I thought. One has often thought of the man and the woman being brought in in this peculiar way. No other part of Scripture has such a place in Paul's writings, in this sense, and it is because the Lord took him up at the time his service was needed. The Lord took him up, and in due time gave him a leading place, which he retained until the end. Whenever it was that he was martyred, he had that place, and he had a great deal of time, too, in imprisonment, which probably was in the Lord's mind to give him opportunity to develop the truth, even in writing, so that we have it now in our hands.
{6}
Ques. Would you say a little more about the thought of divine order in all these things? Would that assure divine presence?
J.T. See how this chapter opens. The apostle says "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ". That is to say, the apostle followed the Lord Jesus in the service of God, and the idea of imitation is carried through, and all flowing out from Christ as the Head. "Be my imitators", he says, "even as *I*" -- emphatic -- "also am of Christ". So that the idea of imitation is stressed here, showing that the thing is to go through.
E.B.S. Would you mind saying another word on Him being the Head of every *man*, in contrast to woman?
J.T. Well, let us read the passage. "I praise you, that in all things ye are mindful of me; and that as I have directed you, ye keep the directions", showing that Paul is again stressing himself. Notice these words -- "ye keep the directions". It is the idea of order, and then he goes on, "But I wish you to know that the Christ is the head of every man". Well now, I believe that what has been said already is true, that God is going on with humanity. He is not simply going on with judaism; He is going on with man -- humanity; and the service of God requires that headship should be stressed for this. It is a question of man, and that Christ is the Head of every man -- not only in the aggregate, nor of every assembly, but of every man; it is the idea of men.
A.J.G. Does that mean that the intention is that every man should learn from Christ, and then that the woman should learn from the man?
J.T. That is just what I think is the truth here. Again I would say that God is showing that the idea of humanity has the first place with Him in regard of creation. Man is the leader of creation,
{7}
and hence the word was "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness". And then it says "let them have dominion" that word is a plural word, and requires a woman. She is to be with the man, and the man is not to be without her. But the woman is not the first; man is the first and the woman was created for man, not man created for the woman. I believe all that is worked out in this chapter, the service of God being in mind. Man is in God's mind, and He is never going to give it up. He will cleanse the world in the course of time in the sense of judgment, but He will retain man. He will retain man because Christ has become Man and He is not going to give up His manhood; He is to continue in it.
A.C.C. Does the principle of subjection work out in these relations in view of the Supper?
J.T. I think that is the truth. What I quoted from @Genesis 1 is also the truth, and it ought to be noted. "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion" that is the man and woman; they are to be coupled together in dominion. It is the divine way, and God is holding to it and will hold to it. I suppose Israel will have its place in the millennium, and although Israel will have its place, man will be finally the great thought.
Rem. And that much greater than angels.
J.T. Surely, because angels are said to minister, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation". That is to say the angels are our ministers, although they are great servants too. Sometimes you can see that God has put them forward, but He has created them, for the very purpose of service, not to have an assembly of angels -- things are not put that way; it is a question of manhood, including womanhood.
{8}
J.T.S. "The tabernacle of God is with men". Would you say that the headship of Christ continues into the eternal day?
J.T. That is the way, I think, that the chapter should be read in Revelation. It says, "The tabernacle of God is with men", and "the tabernacle of God" will be the assembly. I think the book of Revelation is God asserting His rights to this, that, and the other thing, and among these rights is that man must have the first place.
W.S.S. I was thinking in connection with what you have been saying, would it not bring out the importance of the man on the one hand and the woman on the other hand, each knowing their place in relation to the assembly in order that the service might be carried on rightly?
J.T. Quite so. Woman, in this epistle, is put under restriction as to speaking in the assembly, but she is nevertheless part of those who serve, she is part of the assembly, and her existence really will call attention to the fact that the assembly is a feminine thought.
W.S.S. In the world, woman is seeking a great place and denying the principle that is laid down here. I was thinking of the necessity of accepting this principle if the sisters are to have the great place which belongs to them in assembly exercises and testimony.
J.T. Quite so. The place that women have, of course, has greatly caused degeneration, because she assumes to have the same place as man in regard of rule. Even in regard of voting, in certain countries those who hold the vote include women and they put certain men into power. So that all that is in mind, and yet God says that "He has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed". So that man is kept there and the assurance comes
{9}
from God as to Christ's place. The word 'judge' there would be judgment in the sense of humanity being judged, and the government of God is in the hands of a Man. He will judge the habitable earth, in righteousness; the expression "habitable earth" is just a general thought of humanity.
R.W. In verse 3, it goes back to God, "Christ's head God". So that there is no confusion, but order.
J.T. That is true.
J.S.E. Is there something peculiarly attractive in this allusion to the angels in verse 10 in relation to the woman?
J.T. It would show the place that angels have, although, as I said, they are given to be servants to those who are heirs of salvation. We cannot say how old the idea of angels is, but we do know how old man is, and God has kept back the idea of manhood to the final thought. It is in order clearly that His beloved Son should become a Man and He is now Man, and is the Head of every man.
A.J.G. Does this reference to angels involve that angels take account of the maintenance of divine order in the assembly in contrast to the confusion in the world?
J.T. Just so, and, of course, we know angels have fallen, too; some of them have lost their first estate and the judgment of God overtakes them. At the same time, God has not given up His primary thought in man.
P.L. Is their service as ministering spirits but rendered the more intelligent by what is here afforded to them in the instruction as to divine order in the assembly? Does the observation on the part of the angels here of the covering afford them instruction as to the great thoughts of divine recovery?
J.T. Quite so. Every sister should take account of this. It will not, in any way, decrease her place
{10}
or importance, or service, but she is to take account of divine order, and see that she is answering to God as she is observing what He has ordered in creation. Everything is under Christ in @John 1: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God", and it goes on to say that all things were made by Him, and that nothing was made without Him. So that there is no variation in the divine thoughts by sisters taking account of this matter of the covering, because it honours God and the influence of it extends not only to men on earth but to angels in heaven. It shows how God is regarding His creatures in the sense of man and woman, because He intends to work out the thought of the masculine and feminine in men, and it will come out presently in the millennium; in the meantime everything is worked out in the assembly.
Ques. Is it made attractive in that Christ Himself took a place of subjection?
J.T. Quite so. He was subject even to His parents.
W.S.S. Would you be free to say something about the word 'authority' in the verse we are considering (verse 10). "Therefore ought the woman to have authority on her head"?
J.T. We might well look at the note given at the bottom of the page.
W.S.S. The note says, 'that is, a token of the authority under which she stands'.
J.T. That is, she has something above her.
W.S.S. I think you said sometime ago, that it is like the badge of rank which a soldier wears, and of which he is proud, showing that he is under authority; but being under authority he can speak with authority.
J.T. Quite so. Under authority does not mean that he is rendered inferior by it, but he can speak
{11}
with authority because he is under authority. A corporal is under authority in the Army; he is not reduced on that account, but there is an authority above him.
W.G.C. Does the woman in the ordering of God become the expression of the grace of the assembly as subjected to Christ?
J.T. That is right. In the creation God intended to bring out the great thought of Christ and the assembly. He intended to bring it out, and He wanted to do it, and now He has done it, and the thing is to be worked out in christians, because christians have the Spirit; it is all a question of the Spirit.
A.J.G. And you would say that this verse requires that the woman should at all times have authority on her head, and not simply when we are together in assembly?
J.T. That is what I think is right, and I believe the sisters are coming to see that, and to use the token -- even if it is only a token of the place that she has and the authority she is under.
A.H.G. Has woman a distinctive place in the setting forth of this principle of subjection?
J.T. I would think so. There is no doubt that God is helping us in our households. The principle of the household has come into more prominence than it has been, and I think it is to bring out this very thought, the place that woman has in it, and the place that man has over her and then the place that man has under Christ, and that Christ has under God. It is to bring out the great thought of order; divine order in God -- God being everything.
J.T.S. May not the very fact of the token being worn afford opportunity for testimony; testimony to Christ really?
J.T. Just so; and the household underlies that. That is to say the place that man has, and then the
{12}
place that woman has under man, and the place that man has under Christ, and then the place that Christ has under God. It is remarkable that God stoops or condescends to give us all this instruction, so that He might see His own order in the assembly, and I believe the first day of the week has acquired a greater place because of this, and these meetings that we have, too, on Saturday afternoons, have acquired a place for instruction for all the brethren.
Ques. Is it right to make clear that for formal prayer or prophesying a woman requires a real covering; the token you have spoken of would not be sufficient for that?
J.T. Not in the assembly service, but in the household I believe it is wise to have it.
Ques. To wear the token?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. But when you kneel down to pray for the gospel should the women then have a hat on, or a covering?
J.T. Surely, and, as far as I know, they do.
A.J.G. And in a woman's individual prayer when she kneels down at home?
J.T. I would think so, especially of course if it is a household and she is not the only one in it. The idea of a household is not simply man and woman, but children too. Because God intends children to be brought into it all, for they are the ones coming forward. The Lord is taking one after another and others are taking their place, and the great thing is that they should carry on this great idea of imitation as we have it in this chapter, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ".
Ques. Are not children very observant of order, and do they not take it on quickly, and God helps them?
{13}
J.T. I am sure that is so.
C.H. Is it instructive that after Paul has insisted on the place which the woman has, he says in verse 11, "However, neither is woman without man, nor man without woman, in the Lord", as though they are both necessary in that particular sphere?
J.T. They are necessary. Why should not God have a right to create humanity? He has created others especially angels, but why should He not have a right to do it, and therefore He must have this order carried out in the assemblies, even amongst ourselves.
Ques. Do I understand that the token of authority on a woman's head does not give her the authority to pray or to prophesy? What is the authority?
J.T. Well, the authority is given her; that is to say, God, Christ, man, woman -- four great thoughts. The word 'authority' is a word that God Himself has formed. God has made man's mouth and given him the authority to speak and enabled him, as He did Adam, to name the creatures. So typically Christ named us; we are all under Christ. He knows the name of every one of us, and God has great pleasure in all this being worked out; we are in the period in which it is being worked out, and the thing is to pursue it and make it effective practically in households, and then in the assembly, in the saints, in men and women, and in the children even. God is working in the children, bringing them into the truth; they are getting to know what is meant by it.
C.H. Did the centurion in @Luke 7 understand this principle of authority in relation to the Lord? He asked the Lord to speak the word and his servant would be healed? He says "For I also am a man placed under authority". We might have thought that he would have said 'placed *in* authority',
{14}
but he said "under authority, having under myself soldiers". He seems to have said that in relation to the Lord.
J.T. Quite so.
J.McK. Would you encourage sisters to pray aloud vocally in their own rooms? I mean alone. I am thinking of their communion with divine Persons, that they would not merely pray in silence.
J.T. Well, of course, the silence will not prevent God hearing what they say or think. Take the Old Testament, Hannah, for instance, prayed, and the Lord blessed her, and Samuel was the product. I do not know just what your thought is fully, perhaps you will enlarge on what is in your mind?
J.McK. I wondered if the sisters took up more the thought of praying distinctly and audibly, whether it would help to develop spiritual personality, and they would experience help and development.
A.J.G. It says "Hannah spoke in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard".
J.T. Quite. Now what do you make of that?
J.McK. I would accept that happily. Of course that is a temple setting, is it not? But I wondered whether in the formation of words with the lips the angels would be able to take account of it.
J.T. Oh! they will; that is to say God has made them; they are at our service. They are the servants of those who shall be heirs of salvation, and then He gives them understanding, so that they understand us. It is wonderful that the angels are so intelligent, but while they are intelligent as servants, they are not heirs of salvation, but they are intelligent, and we are the heirs of salvation.
Ques. In the case of a husband and wife praying together, is it proper for the man to voice the prayer for both of them?
{15}
J.T. I think so. Men pray everywhere. It says "I will therefore that the men pray in every place", @1 Timothy 2: 8. What would you say about that?
Rem. Yes, that is what I thought. Sometimes it is suggested that the woman should pray too in the presence of her husband.
J.T. Well, I do not know, I did not think of it in that way. Men are said to pray everywhere, and if there is any prayer being made, I think men are to do it, not women. If men are not there, of course, in the headship, the sisters are to do it with children and servants, and the like of that in the house itself.
A.J.G. It would seem to be in keeping with divine order that if a brother and a sister are together in prayer, that God should be approached through the head?
J.T. That is just what I was thinking.
Ques. Would the idea of the manna in any way link on, the head of the house having to provide for all that were in his household?
J.T. Quite so.
J.A.C. Does Peter in his epistle put the responsibility on the husband in saying "Ye husbands likewise, dwell with them according to knowledge, as with a weaker, even the female, vessel, giving them honour, as also fellow-heirs of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered".
J.T. Very good. Many a time one has thought of that.
A.H.G. Does the adjustment of things in the households in this way prepare the way for the taking of the Supper and for the service of God?
J.T. Well, the setting here is clearly that. We have the culmination of the subject of headship and then the Lord's supper is worked out from verse 17 to the end.
A.H.G. Would perhaps weakness in relation to the latter part of the Supper and the service of God
{16}
be the result of these exercises not having been faced?
J.T. I think that is right. I am encouraged to read this chapter today -- I am encouraged in every moment of it -- because I can see the brethren are concerned about it too. The next reading that we have will be on Ephesians; that is where we get the full thought of Christ *and* the assembly. We do not get that properly in Romans; the full thought is in Ephesians.
Eu.R. Do the types referred to in chapter 10 make it clear that the position in this epistle is a wilderness one?
J.T. Quite so, very good. But it leads up to the assembly, though the assembly is not always seen in a wilderness position; but the assembly involves the land.
Ques. Is all this instruction in the earlier part of the chapter necessary if we are to come together in assembly?
J.T. Surely, that is just what I was saying. It says in verse 17, "But in prescribing to you on this which I now enter on, I do not praise". So that there was something wrong at Corinth, and he is seeking to put it right, and that is what we would seek to do now as to ourselves. So it goes on to say, "I do not praise, namely, that ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse". That is things were not right, and God was getting no pleasure out of them, which is a very humbling thing. Paul says, "first, when ye come together in assembly" -- notice the word here "in assembly". It is not 'in the assembly' but "in assembly", that means it is the character of the thing -- "I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it" and so forth. So the assembly is in mind now in this section and the service of God is clearly seen set there.
{17}
T.W.A. Does that emphasise that there should be no disorder in the assembly?
J.T. Just so; it is not allowed; and the next section (that is beginning at verse 17) shows that. The apostle is very severe in what he is saying, pointing out that there was disorder amongst them.
Ques. You referred earlier in the meeting to "be my imitators". In the close of the previous chapter, he says, "do all things to God's glory". So that if the directions concerning the covering and so on, in the early part of chapter 11 are followed, and the glory of God is considered for, the assembly would be right, would it not?
J.T. Surely. The assembly is the prime thought with God in this matter of His service. We thank Him, too, for the provision made in ministry, and instruction for us, and then in hymns. God has greatly helped the brethren through the hymns that we have. He has provided for us and for his services, in these hymns and they should be pursued, and read and used rightly; not simply that we use one particular hymn constantly for our own purpose, but use them liberally, as God has given them to us. It says, "God, who gives to all freely and reproaches not", and we should thank Him for these hymns that we have, because they greatly augment the service of God and the pleasure that He gets from His people. We are constituted priests unto God, and the word *priest* is used as to Christ, too; Christ has His own priests.
C.H. Would add that flow out particularly from the memorial side of the Supper?
J.T. Well, I would think so. It can be seen from this section from verse 17 to end that the assembly is prominently before us, the word being used twice, and it is to show that the assembly has a great place as a vessel. It is a vessel for the securing of and maintaining the service of God. The Spirit of God is
{18}
in it, and in it as being a vessel. We can see therefore what we are saying is correct, namely that the assembly must have its own place, and it had not its own proper place in the gatherings at Corinth. Therefore if any such condition arises at the present time we have to go over the ground again in this letter, having in mind Paul's place in the assembly. He was the minister of it, and therefore he ought to have the first place, it seems to me, in any matter when we have to deal with the Lord's supper and the service of God of which the Lord's supper is the beginning. The assembly must have its own place, as a vessel, for it is a suitable vessel, in which the service of God can be maintained.
Rem. And it is a very serious thing to despise the assembly of God in any respect whatsoever. It says in verse 22, "do ye despise the assembly of God".
J.T. Quite so, showing that it is possible for us to do that even when we are together. How much also it may be seen in ordinary affairs, and there can be no doubt that chapter 10 is to prepare us for other days of the week. Chapter 10 deals with ordinary days, whereas chapter 11 deals with the first day of the week. It is also seen in @Acts 20 where it says that the disciples came together to break bread on the first day of the week.
J.T.S. Ought we to know something of what is said in @Luke 24 in connection with the breaking of bread? They related how He was made known to them in the breaking of bread.
J.T. It shows the place it has.
W.S.S. The Supper would provide the divinely given basis for the coming together. There cannot be any service without this coming together.
J.T. So that the first day of the week *is* the first day of the week, it is not now the seventh day, it is
{19}
the first day of the week. It is the day for the breaking of bread and for the service of God.
W.S.S. And apart from the Supper the saints cannot be properly set together?
J.T. No, they cannot be convened properly. Of course, we can convene the assembly for discipline, but generally speaking, the full idea is seen on the first day of the week. We have the Lord's supper and the service of God and of course the preaching of the gospel has its own place too. We can understand that, because Paul's word "my gospel" is peculiarly associated with all those thoughts.
Ques. It would appear that matters of eating and drinking are to be ordered in relation to the Supper. It would not be comely for the sisters to stay at home to cook the dinner?
J.T. I would say that fully. It would be despising the assembly, I would think, and despising the rights of God too.
J.A.C. There were other things at Corinth that could well wait until the apostle came there, but this great matter as to the service of God following the Supper could not wait. So that we are to have this ever prominent in our minds.
J.T. That is the idea exactly. Then think of what God has provided for us and brought down to our own times, this wonderful translation of the Scriptures, and the wonderful ministry too, such as the Collected Writings -- all those volumes of them! We may thus be the more grateful to God for all these things, and follow them up fully, and carry them out, and not let them lie idle.
{20}
MANCHESTER -- READING (2)
@Ephesians 1: 15 - 23; @Ephesians 5: 22 - 33
J.T. It seems clear that the epistle to the Ephesians was intended to convey the full divine thought as to Christ and the assembly. It will be noted that in this epistle it is not simply man and woman, but husband and wife. Then there is the great place that Christ has according to this first chapter, and then we have the remarkable passage in the last verse of the chapter, "gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". So that whilst God is in mind, and the assembly is in mind, and the saints are in mind, yet it is Christ *and* the assembly that commands the heart and affords opportunity for us to understand and enter into what is set out in the land of Canaan, for Ephesians has Canaan in mind. It is therefore that part of the land which lies between the Jordan and the Great Sea in which the full thoughts of God are set out. So I suppose we may say freely that we get possibly the greatest thoughts of riches and glory in this epistle. The Spirit of God seems to put everything into it, as if it was the final word as to what God has in mind and what will come to pass in due time as Christ descends and takes us to heaven. We are to be prepared for it already in view of that great event, I thought it would be worthy of an occasion like this to come to Ephesians, for it is our own proper heavenly portion, and I thought it right to begin at this verse of the first chapter, "Wherefore *I* also". Paul is thinking of himself and his service, "having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is in you, and the love which ye have towards all the saints, do not cease giving thanks for you, making mention of you at my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus
{21}
Christ, the Father of glory" -- these are wonderful expressions -- "the Father of glory, would give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation", it is not simply 'words' or 'letters' but the *spirit* of wisdom and revelation, "in the full knowledge of him, being enlightened in the eyes of your heart", it is not simply your minds, "so that ye should know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of the might of his strength, in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead, and he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly" -- notice that -- "which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". So that Christ is supreme, and the assembly is with Him joining in it, for the assembly is seen here as having part in the headship.
A.H.G. Would you develop a little more what you emphasised, "head over all things to the assembly"?
J.T. It is just to bring out the greatness of this vessel called the assembly. It has to be remembered however that it is a creature. The assembly is not divine, and yet it is wonderful that the creature should be the bride of Christ and body of Christ. But it is a mystery, and we do well to think of that. So that in chapter 5 he says "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". He is speaking of the husband and wife, but he halts, as it were, to say "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". It is as if he would set us on the way to enter into the heavenly things.
{22}
Ques. Do you mean that he is not Head *over* the assembly here, but that the assembly has part in the position in which He is?
J.T. That is what I understand. It is "head over all things to the assembly". It is not *of* it, but *to* it.
A.J.G. Does that involve that the influence of His headship over all things is exercised by means of the assembly?
J.T. That is what I would think. It is by means of it, as you say, showing what a marvellous thing the assembly is. It says "Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it". You could hardly think of anything greater to be given. He gave *Himself* for it.
W.S.S. The assembly would be in the intelligent understanding of the universal headship of Christ.
J.T. Just so, that is good.
P.L. So that the glory of these reciprocal relations between Christ and the assembly will give tone and character to all that is beneath.
J.T. I would say that. The word *over* is used, "head over all things to the assembly". She is thus really brought into the headship.
J.S.E. Was the type in @Genesis 2 approached by the Spirit from the angle of rest?
J.T. Well the word is that the rib was *built*. It says "Jehovah Elohim built the rib that he had taken from Man into a woman". It is an immense thought.
Ques. Would it be right to say that Adam as set over all things and Eve as associated with him correspond to what we have in @Ephesians 1?
J.T. Just so. And we had better read again from verse 22 of chapter 5, because it is such a wonderful passage as to what we are dealing with. Now it is to be noticed that whilst the apostle is speaking of much in the way of truth, yet he turns aside in
{23}
verse 32 and says "This mystery is great", which is a matter we all should notice, and then he says "but *I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". He turns aside to speak of the great thought of the mystery -- Christ and the assembly. It is as if he was so full of it that he must turn aside, even although they were great things of which he was speaking.
Ques. Why do you think the "Saviour of the body" comes in in this remarkable passage?
J.T. I think it is a question of our bodies, which are weak and subject to illnesses and the like. We can count on the Lord to save us instead of trying medicines and the doctor. Of course, I am not saying a word against that, but it is as if everything is superseded in his mind, in the light that *He* is the Saviour of the body. So we can count on that; it shows the preciousness of a saint as a member of the assembly.
Rem. The wonderful thing being that in these bodies of ours we are given the privilege of being descriptive of what is proper to the assembly.
J.T. Just so. He says "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". It is as if that diverted his mind, because the thought was so immense in his mind, so delightful, I should say glorious, that he should turn aside to say that.
J.P. Is there something to be learned from the way the passage says "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly"? He seems to draw attention to what is in the assembly.
J.T. There are more words devoted to what is in his mind than necessary, so to speak, because the subject is so great and lovely and glorious. I believe that is the idea, and that we should learn to read Ephesians from this point of view. It is not simply a man and woman, but a man and his wife -- husband and wife. Then the word 'own' comes in. "Husbands, love your own wives", and also, "Wives, submit
{24}
yourselves to your own husbands"; it restricts the word fully to its object.
W.S.S. I suppose that expression, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly" would really cover all Paul's ministry?
J.T. I should think so. He reduces it to one great and glorious thought; that is what Ephesians really implies.
Ques. You emphasised, in the reading of the scripture earlier, the expression "the Father of glory". Were you thinking of the particular glory, attaching to Christ and the assembly and how we can come into the light of that glory as understanding, and as being filled with the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of Him?
J.T. It is a wonderful passage -- "the Father of glory". Elsewhere, we have "from glory to glory", but this passage is wonderful really, it is overwhelming if we had heart for it. It is what we are coming into and that is what we are now by the Spirit, because the fact of the Spirit being in the assembly is wonderful. He is the Spirit of glory, but then we have the "Father of glory", and that is the thing that strikes your mind peculiarly.
W.S.S. Another word you emphasised was "the spirit of wisdom and revelation" -- not merely the knowledge of things in terms, but the joy of it in the heart and soul.
J.T. Just so. It is what we come into, even ourselves this very day, the Spirit being here, makes everything real to us. It is not mere knowledge, but reality in the power of the Spirit.
Ques. Is that why it says "enlightened in the eyes of your heart"?
J.T. Just so. The heart is the seat of the affections, of course, and the eyes are to work out what is in the heart.
{25}
J.S.E. You made a short remark this afternoon on the value to us of Paul's imprisonment in view of his ministry.
J.T. I think that is to be noticed too, because we might all profitably go over the ground of his imprisonment and how many years of imprisonment he spent. The Lord had said previously "*I* will shew to him how much he must suffer" (@Acts 9: 16), which shows that the Lord had taken him up for suffering. He was intended to represent the Lord in his sufferings, and to bring the sufferings of Christ so near to us in a man, in Paul.
Eu.R. He tells us it was on our account: "For this reason *I* Paul, prisoner of the Christ Jesus for you nations", @Ephesians 3: 1. It is really our glory, is it not?
J.T. It is well to connect other passages with that because the field is so rich; and so chapter 4: 1 would enhance all that, "*I*, the prisoner in the Lord, exhort you therefore to walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called ..." It is the enlargement of what you see in the first verse of the third chapter. The epistle to the Ephesians is so full of spiritual riches and glory.
Ques. What is in mind in relation to verse 30 where it says "We are of his flesh, and of his bones"? In @Genesis 2: 23 it is in the reverse order.
J.T. The passage really begins with verse 28, "So ought men also to love their own wives" -- notice that it is not simply 'their wives', but "their own wives as their own bodies: he that loves his own wife loves himself. For no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ the assembly, for we are members of his body; [we are of his flesh, and of his bones]". That portion in brackets is, of course, questionable, but anyway there it is. "Because of this a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be united to his wife, and the two shall be one
{26}
flesh. This mystery is great, but *I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". That is the end that I thought we should see the epistle is devoted to. "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly".
Ques. Would you say a word regarding the distinction between the assembly as introduced in the first chapter in connection with the operations of God in resurrection and exaltation, and as in chapter 5 where it is brought in in connection with the operations of Christ Himself in love?
J.T. Well, it seems to be the greatness of the assembly and how it is linked up with Christ as His body, but we should not overlook that God is in the whole matter. We ought to remember that the Lord Himself sent letters to the assemblies, and so His idea is to bring out what the assembly is to Him. That is really what it is, and now we should follow the thing up; so that we have what the *Spirit* says in addition to what the Lord says. "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". That is, there is the double thought in it, what the Lord says by Himself, and then what the Spirit says, and the word is added to that, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says". It is as if there is the idea that the Spirit's speaking is in a certain sense more important for us to follow up than even what Christ says. The importance of the Spirit at the present time cannot be over-stated because it is a question of the ending of the dispensation, and the Spirit coming into what belongs to Him, as a divine Person. He has always shown Himself so lowly in everything that the Lord's word in Revelation is "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says".
Eu.R. It greatly helped me some time ago when you said that the spirit of revelation involves that the believer has the spirit of all that is revealed and thus ability to take it in.
{27}
J.T. Quite so. One is trying to impress the dear brethren who are here today that we all may pursue the thought of the book of the Revelation. John is the writer of the Revelation, "I John", he says. The other apostles, of course, have their own part in the service, but John has a peculiar part. He was not however a minister of the assembly, as Paul was, and it is Paul writing to the Ephesians here, so that Paul comes first in all this.
A.J.G. Would you say that the Spirit is labouring at the present time to bring the assembly into the consciousness of her own distinctive place in the affections of Christ?
J.T. I think so. That is, she should suitably meet Him, because He is coming. It says in @1 Thessalonians 4, "the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord". It is the Lord Himself -- those words should be taken into account -- who shall descend from heaven with an *assembling* shout. The word *assembling* is enlarged in the sense of its governing the word *shout*. We are all coming in for that; we ourselves are the ones that are coming in for it, for we are of the assembly. It is a question of the assembly; it is not an Israelitish shout. The Lord will have great feelings for Israel too; but it is not an Israelitish shout; it is an assembling shout.
Ques. And does that really involve absolute love towards all the saints?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord's own affections. It is an assembling shout.
W.S.S. I would like to ask in connection with your reference to the Holy Spirit, whether the service
{28}
of the Spirit would be involved in verse 26 of chapter 5: "in order that he might sanctify it, purifying it by the washing of water by the word"?
J.T. Quite so, it must be. It is the Spirit of God, of course, but then the Spirit is a divine Person. We do not say that in the economy He is equal to the Father positionally; at the same time what was before? The economy is, as you might say, limited, and introduced in time. There was something there before that we do not understand, it is mystery; it is beyond our understanding. There is the economy into which we have come, the power is in the Spirit, but there is something more than that, and we have to remember that there is such a thing as mystery, and things that one can hardly put into speech now. But there it is, that there is such a thing as mystery, and that the assembly is the theme as the vessel of the Spirit. That is what strikes the mind more than anything else -- that it belongs to us because we form the assembly, and I would say without hesitation, Ephesians, in that sense, is the greatest epistle; it is the greatest communication from God that we have.
J.S.E. As the Lord makes Himself known to us in the breaking of bread, does this give the Spirit an opportunity to help us in the joy of these relationships so preciously set out here?
J.T. So we value the Lord's day morning, because, as we have said already today, the first day of the week is the greatest day; it is the day of the assembly: "The first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread". That is the great day of the assembly because it is the day on which the Lord's supper is celebrated, and so in the chapter we had this afternoon, the apostle says, "It is not to eat the Lord's supper". It ought to have been, but it was not; they were defective in what they were doing, they were not doing it in order. Therefore we must be on our guard as to whether we are
{29}
doing things rightly, that is doing them in order, for God is the God of order.
Ques. Would you encourage the saints to pray about these great features of the truth? I am thinking of the weight of these two prayers of Paul.
J.T. I would say that. To illustrate it, if a great crisis comes on among the brethren as it may at any time, what we would do would be to pray; maybe we would come together specially in any given locality to pray about the matter. But what can there be greater than what we are dealing with now, that is in this epistle, and there should be prayer about this matter because it is so great.
Rem. We do not often hear prayer along these lines.
J.T. I am sure that is true, but do you not think it is so?
Rem. I do.
J.T. If any crisis arises, and one is apt to arise any time, not that I would be foreboding; one would just wait on God. But at the same time, things may happen, as things have happened before and a crisis may arise, and then, of course, we pray, but why should we not pray about this matter and make a special thing of it, that we should come into the fulness of what is called Canaan. God speaks of having espied the land, espied it Himself for His people. He says, it is "the ornament of all lands". It was a land flowing with milk and honey (@Ezekiel 20: 6).
Rem. Caleb says, "Moses the servant of Jehovah sent me from Kadesh-barnea to search out the land; and I brought him word again as it was in my heart", @Joshua 14: 7.
J.T. That is just exactly what I was thinking of.
Rem. And he goes on to say, "And my brethren that had gone up with me made the heart of the
{30}
people melt; but I wholly followed Jehovah my God".
A.H.G. Is the understanding of the glory of this essential if we are to take up the service of God intelligently?
J.T. Exactly, that is what we are trying to get at this evening, this great thought of the epistle to the Ephesians.
H.C. It says of Moses in @Deuteronomy 34 that Jehovah showed him the whole land from the top of Pisgah. Would that link up with what you are saying?
J.T. That was a great privilege that Jehovah gave to Moses before he died, and no one knows where he was buried. How great an honour to be put upon the mediator!
J.T.S. You spoke in London of Paul presenting the assembly as the body. Have we the greatest thoughts of the body in this letter?
J.T. I think so. As I said, I do not know any greater passage, in a sense, than the epistle to the Ephesians. It is a peculiar epistle; it is the assembly's epistle, and it deals with Christ and the assembly. Of course, God Himself comes into it, for we can never forget what God is and what His portion is, but there is such a thing as something special as to Christ and the assembly, and that is in Ephesians.
Ques. In verse 23 of chapter 1, it says "the fulness of him who fills all in all". To whom does the word *him* refer?
J.T. First of all it says, "Power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". That is Christ; what do you say yourself?
{31}
Rem. I do not know that I could say very much; but it is such a marvellous statement as to the assembly's place that we can hardly take it in.
J.T. I think the wording that has been re-read would show that what is in mind is Christ and it works out in chapter 5. If you will allow me, I would like the whole passage from verse 15 to the end read again, because it is so magnificent. We ought to get this whole passage into our minds and hearts, "raising him from among the dead", that is Christ, "set him down ... in the heavenlies" -- that is Christ again. It is clearly Christ who is in mind in that passage.
W.S.S. Would it help to refer to verse 10 of chapter 4, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things"?
J.T. Well, just so.
D.L. And verse 10 in chapter 1, "To head up all things in the Christ".
J.T. Well, that is right, of course.
A.J.G. Does not this expression "the fulness of him who fills all in all" give a striking testimony to the deity of Christ?
J.T. Quite so.
E.J.B. Is the greatness of the assembly stressed in the fact that after all these glorious things are spoken of that God has done with Christ, the assembly is brought in as the crown and completion of it all?
J.T. Quite, but then we must not forget God. God must be excepted in all these things. It says in @1 Corinthians 15, "except him who put all things in subjection to him", that is God. God had done this. In the passage from verse 20 onwards, it is what God has done and does.
Ques. Can you help us as to the expression "fulness of him"?
{32}
A.J.G. Could you amplify that a little as to what we are to understand by it?
J.T. Well, we have such an expression as the fulness of God; that is a question of God. It may be the fulness of God, and sometimes the divine Persons are interchanged, and it might be the fulness of Christ. It is a question of words and how they are used and their context.
P.L. It is a scene of glory, "the fulness of him", is it the outshining?
J.T. Quite so, it would be that.
J.S.E. Is it the Holy Spirit's peculiar emphasis on the distinctiveness and glory of the assembly as suited to Christ?
J.T. I would say that is quite right.
A.J.G. And does it involve that all that can be known of God by the creature shines out through Christ and the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. All that can be. It is good that a modifying word should be used, because we might just as well come back again to what is abstract, for there are abstract things. Take the Godhead; we have in @Colossians 1, "all the fulness ... was pleased to dwell", and then in the second chapter, "in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily". Well, both these things have the same meaning, but where we have "all the fulness" it seems to accentuate more the thought that it is Christ in His greatness and glory; it is Christ Himself, "In him all the fulness ... was pleased to dwell".
A.H.G. Would this thought of "the fulness of him" be the result of what is spoken of earlier "and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly"?
J.T. I would say that. But I think we had better go on to chapter 5 again. How much God is thinking of His own thoughts now in this book as compared with 1 Corinthians. He has His own thoughts
{33}
before Him, what He has in Christ and the assembly. So it is that we have in verse 22, "Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands, as to the Lord, for a husband is head of the wife, as also the Christ is head of the assembly". Then again "*He*" -- it is emphatic -- "is Saviour of the body. But even as the assembly is subjected to the Christ, so also wives to their own husbands in everything". So now what came to my mind to be enlarged on is that He is Saviour of the body, and then again "even as the assembly is subjected to the Christ". That is to say the assembly is not simply subject here, although it is subject, but the question is what God's mind as to it is. That is to say it is subjected to Christ, not simply subject, but subjected. It is God's mind, and that always has to be kept before us. The attitude of the assembly is that it is subjected to Christ. It is God's mind as to it as in the whole realm of creation. God has His mind, and He has got His mind in this point that He has subjected the assembly to Christ.
J.T.S. Would it be worked out in the way of love?
J.T. It would be, surely, nothing less than love will fit here. But still we have to keep in mind that there is such a word as 'subjected', not simply 'subject' but 'subjected'. It is God's mind as to the assembly, and that would work out in being subject.
C.H. Can you help us as to the aspect of the assembly in chapter 1 where she is seen as wholly of God and in this chapter where there appear to be blemishes which call for the service of Christ?
J.T. It is not said there are spots or blemishes, it is just what is required in the mind of God.
J.S.E. Does the note relative to those words help in that connection? It says that these words: 'loved', 'delivered', 'sanctify', 'purifying', may be coincident
{34}
or consequent one on another. They could be taken either way.
J.T. Spots and wrinkles and such things are all possible. These words are to prevent them, because they are possible in our histories.
Ques. Is the great thought the words, "having no spot, or wrinkle, or any of such things"?
J.T. Quite so, it is the idea of prevention. The assumption is not that the spots or wrinkles are there; but that they are prevented. We know ourselves they are possible to any one of us.
Rem. So that at any given moment the assembly is perfect in the mind of God.
J.T. Exactly. It can be taken up to heaven at any time. Viewed in the abstract way, it can be taken to heaven at any time.
Eu.R. Does not the last part of the verse make that very clear, "but that it might be holy and blameless"? The same words are used of the sons in chapter 1.
J.T. It is in order to prevent anything of the kind, because it is possible to happen.
Eu.R. But you are applying that to those who form the assembly rather than to the assembly as such?
J.T. I do not think it would be right to apply it to the assembly as such because, viewed in the abstract, the assembly is at all times ready to be taken up to heaven. To learn how to view things abstractly, is one of the most difficult things we have to do.
Rem. A pearl is a pearl, and in that light the assembly has no spot or wrinkle that has to be removed from it.
J.T. I suppose so, I do not know enough about pearls; but I can see that there are things that are liable to mark us but not attaching to the assembly in a concrete sense as altogether according to God.
{35}
Ephesians means that; the language is anticipative.
A.J.G. Would you say that there is something that corresponds with this service of Christ when we are together in assembly to enable us to take up the abstract thought in our own minds?
J.T. That is true; how could we dare to bring in such thoughts otherwise? We must remember there is such a thing as abstract. Scripture is full of that, especially John and Paul. The assembly is always viewed abstractly as perfect.
J.T.S. Would the Lord say, in that abstract view, "Thou art all fair, my love; and there is no spot in thee"? @Song of Songs 4: 7.
J.T. Very good, that is right.
P.L. The Holy Spirit being the great power for abstraction?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Does chapter 5 bring out the correspondence between the humanity of Christ and that in which the assembly has part? I am thinking of the words "no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ the assembly".
J.T. Quite so. It is to bring out what God has ordained in humanity in the creation of it. Then if we suppose we are just about to be caught up to heaven, and we shall be presently, our mortal bodies are changed by the Spirit. Then we are perfect and ready for heaven, and so shall we be for ever with the Lord. We are going to be perfect as the One who is perfect and who is up there. It is a marvellous thing to have an abstract idea of the things of God before us.
A.J.G. And that can take place in the twinkling of an eye.
J.T. Yes, that is what it says.
Ques. Could you please clarify for some of us the expression that has just been used, that the Spirit
{36}
will bring in the change, and @Philippians 3 where it says, "we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation"?
J.T. We should read both those passages, "But if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you", @Romans 8: 11. "We await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory", @Philippians 3: 20, 21. That is to say it is the Lord's own action, but then it is also the Spirit's action.
A.J.G. Do you mean that the Lord uses the Spirit for that purpose?
J.T. Yes, quite so, "on account of his Spirit which dwells in you".
W.S.S. Is it not speaking of the abstract? You referred to the abstract, and is it not our great privilege to contemplate things in the abstract?
J.T. Yes, I am sure it is. As soon as we move from the earth by the power of Christ and the quickening power of the Spirit, everything is perfect to go into heaven.
Rem. "Into conformity to his body of glory".
J.T. Quite so, the Lord is going to make us after His own pattern.
Ques. Are the two operations in that way brought together in @1 Corinthians 15? It says, "the last Adam a quickening spirit", and then later, "We shall not all fall asleep, but we shall all be changed", as though the two Persons of the Godhead operate in view of that change.
J.T. The last Adam is Christ, and the Spirit is the Spirit, and He is the One who quickens us according to @Romans 8: 11, "on account of his Spirit which dwells in you". If you read it again, you will see the point of it.
{37}
Eu.R. The change is only with regard to the body.
J.T. The mortal body, that is, we are taken up to life as quickened by the Spirit.
Eu.R. That involves that the believer is ready for it now and consequently can function in the service of God.
J.T. We are if we are. When we are ready, when we are caught up, all is finished. I mean to say, it is one of the actions of the Spirit to do that. We are not ready for it until we are ready, and when we are ready the thing will happen.
P.L. And that will be the crowning service of the Spirit.
J.T. It is a great finish to a great work, but then the Spirit's work is not over because He will be here operating in Israel in a millennial day. There is a great work to be done yet; but the assembly, is being taken up first and finished, and we are waiting for the finish because we are not all ready. It is a question of time to be perfected.
{38}
MANCHESTER -- READING (3)
@John 20: 1 - 31
J.T. It is thought that the first day of the week ought to be signalised by what relates to the service of God. This chapter is therefore suggested, having in mind the idea of the Lord's coming to us as seen in the chapter. It is not that He is with us all the time, as we see in @Matthew 28. There is no reference to His ascension in Matthew, but John stresses the idea of ascension, and the chapter indicates that the thought of this enters into the service of God. The fact that Mary Magdalene is prominent seems to suggest that the assembly is portrayed somewhat in her according to the message that the Lord sends by her, so that there is a certain liveliness which should be before us on the first day of the week, in view of the place the assembly has in the divine economy. It is not a monthly idea now, but a weekly idea. In the old economy the monthly thought was more prominent, whereas in christianity it is the first day of the week; it is a weekly matter. The place that sisters have in the economy, I suppose, is also suggested in Mary, and she is selected by the Lord to take a message, and such a message as is indicated here, that is, the ascension to the Father and to God.
Ques. Would it be right to say that she is trustworthy as a vessel and comely as a sister?
J.T. That is good. She must have commended herself. She is spoken of as one from whom the Lord had cast out seven demons, so that she must have been greatly indebted to the Lord for the sense of relief that He had brought to her. It would indicate that the grace that is brought to us and works in us is in mind; it ought to affect us in regard of what God receives from us, and what the
{39}
Father receives from us. Here it is the Father and God: "My Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". The position of the disciples is thus established in relation to God. Then, on the other hand, Thomas is discredited at first because he is not believing; he wants to see things instead of believing. It is not the time of sight; it is the time of faith at present. The Lord says in verse 29, "Because thou hast seen me thou has believed, blessed they who have not seen and have believed". I suppose the future dispensation of millennial blessings will imply what is seen, whereas now it is the time of faith.
W.S.S. Is ascension the dominant thought here?
J.T. I think so. The burden of the message through Mary is ascension to the Father and to God.
W.S.S. Does that bring us into the true christian position?
J.T. I think so, although of course we cannot say that the full christian position is in the gospels. We must wait for the Spirit and for that we must wait for the ascension.
W.S.S. I remembered you emphasised at Glasgow that resurrection is not the true christian platform.
J.T. Well, that is true; we must have ascension, and the message through Mary implies that; in fact it is the burden of it. Then added to it is the thought of the address to the brethren and the references to Christ's Father and our Father and to Christ's God and our God. That is to say the full result in the view of this gospel is not only resurrection but ascension. The truth of the resurrection is the guarantee of the solution of the question of power. The power of God is by the resurrection, but there has been considerable thought as to the Lord being here all the time. Some years back it was a great point that had to be contested about. We have the
{40}
idea of His coming *to* us as well as coming *for* us. His coming for us is still a future thing, but coming to us is a present thing. We count on it on the first day of the week.
Ques. It is not stressed that He ascends to heaven here, but to the Father and to God. Does that call attention to the Person of the Father?
J.T. Would you not say further, to family relationships between the saints and God. That is to say, His Father is our Father.
Rem. I mean it is not the idea of a place here, so much.
J.T. Just so. It is to a Person.
W.L. Why does the Lord mention the Father first? We often say 'Our God' and then 'Our Father'.
J.T. I suppose the best answer to that is because this chapter speaks of it so definitely. The message is that very thing. He says in verse 17, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". That is to say, we have the identity of the relationship between the Father and Christ, and between the Father and ourselves, so that the position is very intimate and very glorious too. The chapter is wonderful in that sense, as establishing the intimacy between Christ and the Father and between us and the Father. It shows that there is no discrepancy between the Lord's relation with the Father and our relation with the Father.
Ques. Would it be right then to say that family relationships are to dominate the position?
J.T. I would say that fully, and of course Matthew would suppose too that in some sense it would mark the coming dispensation. Matthew would indicate that, because the Lord says, "Be *ye* therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect".
{41}
A.J.G. Is it the case that every family is named of the Father, and thus has some relationship with Him, but that the assembly's portion is distinguished by the Father being known as Christ's Father and our Father?
J.T. I should think so. It brings out the identity of the Lord's relation with His Father and our relation with His Father. It is wonderful, I think, that it should be so presented; that the relation between Christ and the Father is identical with that between the saints and the Father. I think it is one of the most remarkable things in Scripture, and shows the wonderful relation in which we stand to the Father in christianity, as compared with what will be in the millennium, because that will not be on the same ground. We are the first family in the whole universe, indeed the greatest family.
P.L. The only family indwelt by the Spirit of God's Son?
J.T. I would say that. So we have also the thought of indwelling in the first chapter of this gospel, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth". It seems to me that we should accustom ourselves to the thought of distinguishing the first day of the week and all that enters into it in this sense more definitely. "And on the first day of the week Mary of Magdala comes in early morn to the tomb". It is not the first day of the month, but the first day of the week; and so it is in @Acts 20 where the disciples were assembled to break bread.
A.H.G. Do you mean that on the first day of the week we enter into these matters in a peculiar and distinctive way?
J.T. I think so, and surely the difference between Sunday and Monday, as we call it, should be observed. The Lord's day has a peculiar place
{42}
among the days of the week. I am afraid that saints take too much liberty in doing things on the first day of the week as if it were the same as any other day.
Eu.R. It stresses it again in verse 19, "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week".
P.L. "This is the day that Jehovah hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it", @Psalm 118: 24.
J.T. Just so. Why should we not? He has distinguished it Himself, and why should we not distinguish it and honour it, more than the other days.
Ques. And if we do not take full advantage of our privileges would you say we become like Thomas who was sceptical?
J.T. Just so. We are dealing with the first day of the week, particularly as seen in this chapter, and it says in verse 19, "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came" -- notice that, He *came*; He was not there all the time, He *came*, "and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you". Then He proceeds to do things and to show them the greatness of their portion. "And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord. Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you: as the Father sent me forth, I also send you. And having said this, he breathed into them; and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit, whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". And then we have Thomas introduced, showing that he was unbelieving; he had lost ground.
J.T.S. What is the significance of the Lord showing to them His hands and His side?
{43}
J.T. I suppose the hands would indicate what He did for them, but then the side would be the actual giving up of His life. His death is involved in that.
J.S.E. Does this allusion to His side give some inkling of what is in @Ephesians 5? He "loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it".
J.T. Just so. He gave Himself for it.
J.T.S. Would the Lord detain us a little in this relation after the actual breaking of bread? I am thinking now of the place that the assembly is to have with Him and to Him.
J.T. Therefore you have the idea of brethren. Is that what you have in mind?
J.T.S. Yes, and the assembly.
J.T. Just so. Well, the message through Mary implied that: "Go to my brethren".
J.T.S. What is in my mind is perhaps the tendency, after the breaking of bread, to move quickly to the Father.
J.T. I have noticed that, and I am not so sure that we did not have it today in our meeting. I think the same thing happened, and we proceeded too quickly. We did not give full time for the thought of the brethren, but would you say more what you observe, have you observed that?
J.T.S. Yes, I think one has been in different meetings at different times and perhaps there is not just the definiteness always that there might be as to the place brethren are to have, and then particularly the place that the assembly is to have in her marital relations with Christ, before we move forward.
J.T. Just so, very good, so He calls it "my assembly". He says to Peter, "*I* also, I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly". He is left with this special communication, "on this rock I will build" -- not God's assembly but -- "my assembly".
{44}
Ques. It is quite a frequent thing for the thought of the brethren scarcely to be alluded to after the breaking of bread. Should that thought come in prior to proceeding to the thought of Christ and the assembly?
J.T. I do not just follow what you are saying. Can you illustrate it by what you have seen amongst the brethren? Did you see it this morning in our meeting?
Rem. I think so. There was very little reference to the brethren before the marital thought was taken on, and I think you have stressed the importance of understanding that only those who are kindred to Christ as His brethren can be united to Him.
J.T. I think that is perfectly true, I suppose it might be seen in the type in @Genesis 24.
Rem. You have illustrated it previously from that section of Genesis.
A.J.G. Does not the thought of the brethren from one point of view go right through the service, because the Lord says in relation to the brethren, "I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2: 12.
J.T. I think that is good. Will you enlarge a little more on it?
A.J.G. I fully went with what our brother was saying, but I was just enquiring whether the thoughts of the brethren and the assembly do not go on collaterally right through, so that in Hebrews the Lord seems to take pleasure in them, as those who are worthy of Him, and then the response to the declaration takes form in this dignified vessel, the assembly.
J.T. Just so.
J.T.S. Would the passage in the Song of Songs, chapter 4, set it out, "Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse"? And then we have later
{45}
another reference, "How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse!". Are the two thoughts of what is kindred and what is marital there?
J.T. It is quite clear; we have often had it before. A person must be a sister before she can be a wife. She must have the sisterly quality and relation before she can have the wifely quality and relation. That is as clear as anything can be in the scripture.
E.J.S. Do we see the two thoughts in @Psalm 45: 7, "therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions", and then in verse 11, "And the king will desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him"?
J.T. Quite so, "He is thy Lord and worship thou him", but let me get a little more fully what is in the Psalm as to marital relations. In verse 9 we have "Kings daughters are among thine honourable women; upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir". Well that is it; that is very full, and confirms what we have said. It says, "he is thy Lord, and worship thou him", but her beauty is to be observed. He observes her beauty.
Eu.R. In @Genesis 24: 27 the nameless servant gives thanks, "I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren". That seems to be the basis of everything in that chapter? Rebecca is before him, but he does not at this moment give thanks for her, but that he is brought to the house of "my master's brethren", I wondered if that did not suggest what you are saying, that we need to clothe ourselves with this great thought of Christ's brethren before we could move on to the marital relationship with Him.
J.T. That is quite right, I am sure. I do not know that we need to proceed further on this point in our chapter.
E.B.S. I was going to ask you whether you would say something more on our distinguishing the first
{46}
day of the week. Is it that our behaviour outside the meetings, as it were, is going to have a bearing on the meeting as we come to it? Would you mind saying a little more on what you meant?
J.T. Well, I tried to show that we are not distinguishing sufficiently the first day of the week from the other days, because the first day of the week is distinguished in this chapter we have just been reading and then in @Acts 20. Perhaps if we read @Acts 20 it will make it clear to us.
E.B.S. "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed to them, about to depart on the morrow. And he prolonged the discourse till midnight".
J.T. Notice the word 'assembled' too. It is to be noted. The word 'assembly', is implied, but then the assembly is a vessel in a marital relation.
W.S.S. Should we understand this thought of brethren better if we had a better appreciation of what they mean to the Lord? It must have been a wonderful moment, for Him to say, "Go to my brethren".
J.T. Yes, and that is what gives great distinction to @John 20, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". Well, that is great distinction, I would say. It gives very great distinction to the first day of the week, that the message is sent on that day, as the word is at the beginning. "On the first day of the week Mary of Magdala comes in early morn to the tomb". It was the first day of the week, so that that day has peculiar distinction above all the other days, and I do not know whether the brethren recognise that fully. There is a spiritual obligation, not to place the first day of the week on the same level as the other days.
Ques. And does Mary therefore outshine the disciples, and does she receive a greater message?
{47}
It says in verse 10, "The disciples therefore went away again to their own home. But Mary stood at the tomb weeping without". I was wondering whether the disciples in going away to their own home, missed something of what was happening on the first day of the week.
J.T. Mary did not go to her own home, but the others did and I think that ought to be mentioned too, that they did not maintain the full thought of the first day of the week. Of course, they had not got the Spirit yet, but still the principles of the Spirit are supposed to be in this chapter.
A.J.G. So that John would have in mind to distinguish the first day of the week, when he said, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day".
J.T. Quite so, and so here it says in verse 22, "And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit" and so forth. That happened before Pentecost and we have to distinguish between Pentecost and this chapter, because the Lord said, "Receive the Holy Spirit". There are two ideas, the one in Pentecost in @Acts 2 and the other one here.
A.H.G. Would the Holy Spirit seek to energise us in a special way on the first day of the week?
J.T. I think He would. I think the Holy Spirit would not be behind in the actual features taught, especially this particular feature, as it says, "Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you, as the Father sent me forth, *I* also send you. And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit" -- or 'Receive Holy Spirit', as it is literally -- "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". The Holy Spirit Himself is involved in all this, so that, I would say, He would afterwards always distinguish the first day of the week, in view of all the services that are entering
{48}
into it. We lose a great deal as to the dispensation if we do not do this, because the Spirit of God speaks of it, and the Lord Himself shows that He has it in mind too.
Ques. Do the appearings of Jesus give fulness to the thought of the first day of the week, along with the Spirit's activities? The appearings of Jesus seem to come in distinctively on the first day of the week; in @John 20 and also in @Mark 16 it says, "the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary of Magdala".
J.T. I think so. That is just what I am trying to say, because it says here, "Receive the Holy Spirit". That is said by the Lord in verse 22, "And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit". I do not know that we could get anything more distinct or more definite than that, as to the place the first day of the week holds in the economy. Of course, the devil would destroy it all by the way the first day of the week is treated in the world. All sorts of things that are done on any other day are done on the first day of the week, and I am sure the saints should be a rebuke to all that.
A.J.G. Do you mean that this would have in view our being enabled to move in heavenly grace on that day?
J.T. Quite so, I was just going to add "in heavenly grace", and that our first day of the week implies that we are going to heaven. We are apt to go there any moment, and the first day of the week should distinguish us to that extent.
Ques. We would like to see as many out to the Lord's day afternoon reading as there are to the breaking of bread?
J.T. It is pretty well the same here now as I see! Very good indeed, I thank God I can say in New York we have the Lord's day afternoon specially set
{49}
apart for readings and we are greatly encouraged by that fact.
Ques. In the Lord's day afternoon reading, would you have in mind that it is very suitable to take up something related to the service of God or our heavenly place?
J.T. Well, I used to do it myself whenever I had opportunity to lead in a reading. I would say we should have something suitable for the first day of the week, and I have been encouraged to do that this very day. This chapter came before me and I ventured to have it read because we have already had a brief word on it this morning, and I think it is enlarged on now whilst we are talking about it and I hope it will continue to be enlarged in our minds.
Rem. Sometimes the brethren are reading a book, perhaps from the Old Testament, that does not exactly bear on this.
J.T. Well, quite so, but you would not say very much. One would not like to criticise the brethren for a thing like that, for Scripture is Scripture, and every Scripture is inspired of God and has to have its place.
Rem. I was thinking of what you started with, that on the Lord's day we would expect to be capable of *better* things than at other times.
J.T. Very good, better things; the Lord Himself gives a suggestion of that when He says "Thou shalt see greater things than these".
H.C. Would verse 16 bear on that? It says "Jesus says to her, Mary. She, turning round, says to him in Hebrew, Rabboni, which means Teacher"?
J.T. Jesus says to her "Mary", calling her by name, but before that He called her Woman. Well that is to be noted too, that the Lord comes to the thought of calling Mary by name. It is a beautiful thought and the Lord sends a message by her immediately after that.
{50}
H.C. And Mary speaking to Him addresses the Lord as Teacher, that is what I was wondering. Is there in that a suggestion as to readiness for fresh light and help in relation to this heavenly thought of the ascended Man and the service of God?
J.T. Quite so, I think that is another point of great importance that she calls Him "Rabboni", which means Teacher. The Spirit of God goes to the pains of saying "which means Teacher", not only Rabboni, put in Hebrew, but we are told by the Spirit of God what it means. All that is mentioned in this chapter.
A.H.G. Would the taking up of readings of this character on the Lord's day test our faith?
J.T. Quite so, and test our love too, I think. It would test our love for the Lord, as well as respect for His directions. Paul praises the Corinthians because they kept the directions (@1 Corinthians 11: 2) and in that chapter he says, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ", so that Paul is in line with Christ.
Rem. What our brother referred to touches an exercise that arises constantly amongst the brethren as to whether on the Lord's day afternoon we should expect the reading to develop out of what has engaged us in the morning or whether we should read a book regularly.
J.T. You think what we are doing today is right?
Rem. What we have done today, as you have just remarked, is the development of something that was alluded to in a word in the meeting this morning. Some brethren have felt that we should be equal to that spiritually on the Lord's day afternoon rather than reading a book, which, as our brother says, may often touch on things that are not very much related to the service of God.
J.T. Just so, and I think you could enlarge a little on what we had this morning as to the liberty,
{51}
at the particular time in the meeting, that is to be seen between the Lord and the assembly, and between the assembly and Him. I think that was a point of importance.
Ques. Do you think if we relied more upon the Spirit, we should be more equal for this on Lord's day afternoon?
J.T. Just so. The fact of the matter is I think that the Lord intends to make something of the first day of the week as bordering on ascension to heaven. It is a question of ascension as it says "I ascend", the word 'ascend' is to be used and it bears on our ascension to heaven and that is imminent now at any time.
A.C.S.P. Is it significant that the passage oft quoted in @2 Corinthians 3 about looking on the glory of the Lord and being changed, comes at the end of a chapter where the contrast is drawn between what had gone before and what we have now in christianity?
J.T. I think that is good. Would you kindly read that whole passage in the second epistle as to what is said of the Lord Himself in the chapter?
A.C.S.P. "Now the Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit".
J.T. Well, is not that bearing on what we have been having?
A.C.S.P. I thought so and I wondered if it linked with the first day of the week as starting something entirely new in contrast to all that had gone before?
J.T. "But *we* all" -- that is a very beautiful expression -- "looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory". I think it is
{52}
beautiful, "transformed ... from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", and I think it helps too, as to the place the Spirit is acquiring Himself in the recent ministry.
R.H. I would like some help as to the way headship comes in at the Supper and the service of God. It says Christ is the Head of the body, the assembly, and I was thinking of this matter you have been referring to, as to the opportune moment when the Father should be before us.
J.T. I should think what has been said is true, that we should not be too quick in dropping the idea of the Lord's brethren, "Go to my brethren". We should not be too quick in just leaving that. We should proceed with it and give good time for it, and then we have further, of course, what has been said as to @Hebrews 2, "In the midst of the assembly". I meant to bring that forward too, in relation to what you are saying.
Ques. Is it helpful to think that there is glory connected with the brethren too? All is glorious. So that we move "from glory to glory"?
J.T. There must be glory, for the brethren are sons. They are the same persons. God is bringing many sons to glory. Well, they are the brethren. "In the midst of the assembly" also points to the same thing, so that the brethren must have their place and their full place too. But then sonship is another thing as to it. It is a synonymous idea with brethren. It says, "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings". It is showing what place the brethren have. The word *brethren* is there too.
A.J.G. It leads on to the thought of brethren: "For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are
{53}
all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren".
J.T. Quite so. That is what I thought.
E.J.B. Would you say a little as to the two thoughts, or stages, in verse 17, "my Father and your Father" first of all; and then, "my God and your God". I would like to understand more what was in mind; the Lord has the term 'Father' in mind first, and then the thought of God, and He connects the disciples with both, as the Father and God are connected with Him.
J.T. It is to bring out, I think, the great place that divine names have, the Father being the family term, God being a creative term. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". The great ultimate of everything is God, not the Father, but God. "The Father" is a family name, and a name of the most precious relationship we can speak of. So that I think we ought to keep in mind that God is God, and He is the ultimate of everything, and He comes in after the Father. He is the ultimate of all, as has been said.
E.J.B. In thinking of God you would not exclude any of the Persons of the Godhead?
J.T. No, not at all, because 'God' may cover them all, in some sense. In @Matthew 28, we have "the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". It is not 'names' but "name", the one name covering them all.
Ques. Would you distinguish for us between the Holy Spirit here and in @Acts 2? Would this be a matter of inward feeling, and @Acts 2 public testimony?
J.T. Well, just so. @Acts 2 is public testimony. @Acts 2 says that there was a blowing; if you will just read it please.
Rem. "And when the day of Pentecost was now accomplishing, they were all together in one place.
{54}
And there came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared to them parted tongues, as of fire, and it sat upon each one of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth".
J.T. So that this is God Himself. It is God that is in mind, and His action, "The day of Pentecost was now accomplishing, they were all together in one place". And then it says, "there appeared to them parted tongues, as of fire, and it sat upon each one of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth". That is to say, God was there by the Spirit. Well now, in @John 20, it is really a lesser thought, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you. And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit". It is presented in a less important way, although, of course, it is important. It is important, but still @Acts 2 is the great general, official thing (as you might say), that has happened universally, and it remains.
A.C.C. In @John 20 would it be the Spirit personally or would it be the power of Christ's life in the power of the Spirit? Would it be the Holy Spirit personally, as in @Acts 2, or is it characteristically?
J.T. I would say that it would be God. Of course, it is the Spirit of God, and it is the Spirit of the Father, but I would say that @Acts 2 is, so to say, the official thought of the Holy Spirit coming down, being sent down from heaven, I am using the word, 'official' to make the thing simple. It belongs to the great system in which God is operating in this dispensation.
Ques. And would @John 20 convey the feelings of forgiveness, as in the Lord's own heart?
{55}
J.T. Very good. As to the Holy Spirit and the forgiveness of sins and so forth, they had power to do it, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted". They had power to do it.
A.J.G. Do you regard this in @John 20 as something more than pattern?
J.T. I do not think it is any more than pattern. It is not the official thing so to speak.
A.J.G. That is what I thought, and what I wanted to make clear, because the Spirit was not yet because that Jesus was not yet glorified.
{56}
COVENTRY -- READING (1)
@Acts 10: 1 - 33
J.T. I have been thinking of the introduction of the gospel to the nations and especially as connected with the work of Peter. The Lord had said that to him He would give this service, and the thought now is to look at @Acts 10 which leads to it and gives us the work among the gentiles. The preciseness with which facts are stated will strike the brethren as we look into what is said, and that, of course, is of great importance in the study of Scripture, especially as we study it together. Peter was told by the Lord that He would give unto him the keys of the kingdom of the heavens -- "Whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens". And now the gentiles are in view here; the Jews, of course, were in mind in the first introduction of the truth in the book of Acts, but the gentiles come in here, and we have to bear in mind that there are very few Jews in the truth now; very few indeed. At the same time the truth requires that we should look into the facts of the introduction of both the Jews and the gentiles. This very thought would be in mind throughout the whole of the book of the Acts, and we can verily look into the length of time that Paul was used; how much time he spent in suffering in the sense of imprisonment. So that he becomes a peculiar ideal for us to consider, as he says himself: "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things". Now in the passage before us it is striking the regard with which Cornelius is held in heaven. He was building up something in heaven. It says, "A certain man in Caesarea -- by name Cornelius, a centurion of the band called Italic, pious, and fearing God with all his house, both giving much alms to the people,
{57}
and supplicating God continually ..." That is a good word for all of us, especially in view of the need for looking into Scripture carefully. This chapter therefore might well be compared with the second chapter. That chapter points to the position of the Jews and the favour in which they were, but now it is the gentiles. The persons mentioned in @Acts 2 are the pious Jews, drawn from every nation, but here the point is that it is a gentile centurion -- a military man, showing that God is not restricted in dealing with men. It is a question of men, whether they are Jews or gentiles. We have the selection of the minister that is to be used, and Peter tells us later that God had shown him that he is not to be restricted, and that men are in mind; it is not to be specially Jews, but *men*.
H.P.W. Do you think that God is very actively taking knowledge of everyone who wants to walk before Him and glorify Him?
J.T. That is in keeping with what we have said as to man. It is not simply Jews, but *men*, as it is said. "who desires that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth".
H.P.W. God notices everything, does He not?
J.T. Quite so. As it is said of Enoch: "he has the testimony that he had pleased God". Some of us have been greatly encouraged, and at the same time concerned, that the youth might come into the truth, I gather a good many of them are here today.
A.J.G. It would seem from both chapter 2 and chapter 10 that piety is a basis necessary for the building up of what is spiritual. In chapter 2 in verse 5 it says: "There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, pious men", and then in regard of Cornelius it says that he was "pious, and fearing God with all his house", and piety seems to mark Simeon in @Luke 2 before his spirituality is enlarged upon.
{58}
J.T. It is remarkable that the early verses of chapter 10 give a clear indication of the character of the man -- the centurion -- Cornelius. It says: "Cornelius, a centurion of the band called Italic, pious, and fearing God with all his house" -- notice that -- "with all his house". So that we have to consider in the light of this as to conditions in our houses, old and young in the houses: "With all his house, both giving much alms to the people, and supplicating God continually". So that the idea of piety certainly is one of the first thoughts in connection with christianity. And, of course, the household includes everybody, in fact we might say servants, but especially children and young people; the household includes all. So it says further as to Cornelius that an angel appeared to him, and that is another thing to notice. It says: he "saw plainly in a vision, about the ninth hour of the day". Notice the accuracy with which things are stated, "About the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming unto him, and saying to him, Cornelius. But he, having fixed his eyes upon him, and become full of fear, said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God". That is, Cornelius has established a memorial in heaven, before he is brought into christianity, which is a very remarkable thing. So that evidently the thought of alms, or giving, is one of the leading things too, as to christian practice; as to christian customs and walk.
Rem. A little later on he speaks of "fasting unto this hour". You have several times referred to that during the past weeks.
J.T. Quite so, it has been in one's mind, that there is considerable prayer, thank God, and answers to prayer too, but perhaps not much fasting. There is perhaps very little fasting, and it is something for us to look into as it is now brought before us.
{59}
Rem. There was evidently something very special coming into his life, and you remarked a little while back that at a crisis or a special time fasting would give us power.
J.T. The Lord Himself says. "This kind" -- in the casting out of the demon, in fact it was a lunatic -- "does not go out but by prayer and fasting", showing that lunacy or mental conditions are the most difficult in relation to illness. We should therefore have recourse to fasting if there are such conditions in our houses.
A.E.M-o. Do you mean literal fasting?
J.T. Surely, I certainly do. It is not what may be practised at the time of Lent by certain religious people, but literal fasting in the sense of denying oneself of what one is entitled to, or of what one has a right to. It is for the sake of the truth and for the sake of power that comes in through fasting, for there is power attached to it. "This kind", the Lord says; it is a question of the kind of the disease, and the kind of power that is needed to cast out the demon. Whatever it may be that besets us, in the sense of sin or other things, the power of fasting is in mind.
H.W. Is it significant that the Lord Himself when here in manhood fasted forty days and forty nights prior to the temptation?
J.T. Quite so. It is the idea of anything that augments power for the overcoming of evil in households, and, of course, in individuals as well. In connection with the incident referred to in @Matthew 17, the Lord Himself points out that that kind, it was lunacy, goes not out but by prayer and fasting. It was a certain kind of disease, and there is a means of overcoming it, and that means is fasting.
Rem. You alluded, in your prayer, to conditions that may be in a district. Would you encourage the brethren in meetings where there are difficulties,
{60}
perhaps long standing, to engage in fasting to gain power to deal with them?
J.T. Quite so, and any governmental conditions and industrial conditions that tend to promote sin can be met by fasting.
A.W.R. Paul in @2 Corinthians 11 uses the expression, "in fastings often". It is not simply an exceptional thing. Is that important?
J.T. Just so. We would do well to point that out more particularly -- "fastings often".
H.P.W. There are times in which we feel our desire is to draw near to God. Do you think that that is really what it means when it speaks about drawing near to God? We draw on Him in all His resources.
J.T. And another word as to that is "the Lord is near". So we are encouraged to count on Him being near, and to draw near corresponding to that. If God is drawing near to us, let us be sure to draw near to Him and not to show any sign of diversion in ourselves from what is good. I would say to anyone that feels overcome by any particular tendency to sin, that it is a wise thing to have recourse to fasting if he wants to overcome. It is assumed that normal christians, certainly if they are real christians, ought to have the desire to overcome evil, and then to encourage purity in themselves and in their houses too, of course. This thought of fasting is of prime importance, because God helps us through it.
A.C. Is it connected with spiritual liberty in @Acts 13? It says, "as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them".
J.T. There is something there to indicate, as we have been saying, that there is special advantage in fasting. There is more than that said, is there not?
{61}
A.J.G. It says, following on that: "Then, having fasted and prayed, and having laid, their hands on them, they let them go". So fasting is mentioned twice in those verses.
Ques. Have you not said that prayer brings God in and fasting keeps what is of man out? Is that why they are both connected together so often?
J.T. So that prayer and fasting are, you might say, taken together, the great remedy. The great remedy for overcoming sin, and, of course, we need to overcome sin, because it will not go of itself. We have to be energetic in dealing with anything that we know to be sinful, or tending to sinfulness. To have recourse at once to the remedy, and that remedy is prayer and fasting. I remember that came up in Australia and I was very struck with the thought. They had large prayer meetings at that time in Australia, and the thing came to me very forcefully as to fasting. We had large prayer meetings and good attendance but what was the amount of fasting?
A.E.M-o. What would you consider fasting really to be now, so that we may all take up the exercise practically?
J.T. What specially comes in now in the present phase of our exercise, is denying oneself of things that are legitimate. Many go in for what is legitimate and, in itself, perhaps is not evil, but we go in for the habit too much; we take shelter in the fact that in itself it is not evil, but at the same time the tendency would be sinful unless we judged ourselves: That is to say that the word 'judgment' would be *intelligent* understanding of what is in mind, because Scripture gives us intelligence. Paul says, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say". That is the remedy I would say, to apply to all this that is coming under our notice.
{62}
Ques. Would you say that there is perhaps a greater danger with what is legitimate than with what is illegitimate?
J.T. That is right. Something that is legitimate and yet in itself is literally not right; yet we ignore the facts relating to it -- facts that we should have if we were intelligent. We have the means of intelligence in the Scriptures, and the Spirit of God is here to help us in intelligence.
Ques. Would true fasting bring us to a right judgment as to what is pleasing to divine Persons?
J.T. Very good, I would say that. So we have already alluded to Enoch, and he is said to be the seventh from Adam, meaning that a certain time elapsed, but it is said of him that he had this testimony, that he pleased God. He must have known in his own secret exercises and practice what pleased God, because God had afforded some knowledge there of the truth as to what pleases Him. But he is the seventh from Adam. Very few generations have come into such strength after the flood as they did before. So that Enoch was before the flood, but he was the seventh from Adam. He was almost the beginning of humanity, you might say, yet he learnt then how to please God. So that in our lives, we who are in the twentieth century and in the light of christianity, ought to know what pleases God. The thing then is to practise what we know in that sense and to make a habit of it.
Ques. Enoch's name means 'discipline'. Would that involve self-discipline?
J.T. That is right; just so.
Ques. Would the power to take up fasting issue from our presenting our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God?
J.T. I am sure it would, "Present your bodies a living sacrifice". They could not be evil if they were living.
{63}
Rem. Daniel set his face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and fasting. He was one who felt things and sought a divine answer as being a man greatly beloved.
J.T. So that Daniel became an example in that sense, as to what we are speaking of -- "a man greatly beloved".
W.J.T. Could you help us as to why the Lord says: "anoint thy head and wash thy face, so that thou mayest not appear fasting unto men, but to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father who sees in secret shall render it to thee", @Matthew 6: 17, 18.
J.T. It is a question of reality and not merely show. That is what God looks for. He looks for reality in us in what we are practising.
J.E.B. In the Old Testament we get the expression "afflict your souls". Would that be akin to fasting?
J.T. I should think so. But we must proceed now with Peter, because the lesson we have is worked out in Peter. So the angel says to Cornelius: "Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God. And now send men to Joppa and fetch Simon, who is surnamed Peter" -- notice the natural name is given as well as the spiritual name. "He lodges with a certain Simon, a tanner" It is another kind of work he is going on with. "And when the angel who was speaking to him had departed, having called two of his household and a pious soldier of those who were constantly with him, and related all things to them, he sent them to Joppa. And on the morrow, as these were journeying, and drawing near to the city, Peter went up on the house to pray". So that we can see how the servant is already in the way of dependence on God, but he has got something yet to learn, and so it proceeds:
{64}
"about the sixth hour. And he became hungry and desired to eat. But as they were making ready" -- that is, making the meal -- "an ecstasy came upon him: and he beholds the heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending, as a great sheet, bound by the four corners" -- notice there the four corners are bound -- we get peculiar detail -- "and let down to the earth; in which were all the quadrupeds and creeping things of the earth, and the fowls of the heaven" -- a large variety, but it is a question of God's creatures, God's creatures that we are not to despise. "And there was a voice to him, Rise, Peter, slay and eat. And Peter said, In no wise, Lord". Notice how quickly he sets himself against the word of God; which is a matter to be noticed, peculiarly. And then he adds, "I have never eaten anything common or unclean. And there was a voice again the second time to him" -- showing heaven's interest and incessant desire to get the truth out and practised, "What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common. And this took place thrice, and the vessel was straightway taken up into heaven". So the facts are very remarkable, and that is why I proposed to read them, because I think the brethren will all get help. If we read this chapter and the following chapter carefully, and prayerfully, we shall all get help, and that is what these meetings are intended for by the Spirit of God.
A.J.G. Would you say why all this detail is gone into, as to the occupation of Cornelius and Simon, and all these other matters.
J.T. I think it is because of the extraordinary value of what God was doing. It is a matter really of having things worked out in us, but, before that, you want to know why you are doing it, to have a good reason in your own mind why you are doing it, and then, if necessary, give a good reason to others.
{65}
Eu.R. God was preparing the servant and preparing the persons to listen to him.
J.T. So that in our ministry we want to get interest and the like in what one is doing. In a reading where we are speaking of things as we are doing now, we have to pay attention and be strictly careful of what we do. The thing is to do it well; what we do, do well. Very likely you have something more in your mind?
Eu.R. Only how everything depends on God's orderings and God's workings. We have to apply that to our day just as strongly as to the day of which we are reading. It is what God is doing in the place, is it not, and then the kind of ministry that would help the conditions in that place.
J.T. Just so. As we are here today, able to help the Lord's people, we have to take account of the district, the district of Coventry and the neighbourhood. It is an industrial neighbourhood and we have to think of industrial conditions.
Ques. Do we have to think of all that is transpiring in a circumstantial way in view of the development of the work of God in any given locality?
J.T. Quite so, but there are certain districts that have certain features. We ought to take into account what these features may be, if we are working in them, to promote the service of God. That is all that is in mind. Whatever there is in this district, we have to pay attention to that. Of course, the truth is worked out generally, so that in another sense there would be the same everywhere, but there are certain things in certain districts that have to be noticed. If these things are against the truth, pray against them and speak against them and bring forward the truth from the Scriptures, that would tend to overcome them.
{66}
A.G.H. Does the word to Peter, "Rise, Peter, slay and eat", mean that we are to learn to appropriate persons?
J.T. That is the idea; fellowship includes the appropriation of the brethren. We say that we had a good meeting, or that we were at a certain house at a certain time, and we had a profitable time; but why was it profitable? It was because certain persons were there; we were appropriating each other. The truth has to be appropriated, but persons involving what the truth represents have to be appropriated. So that the animals in the Old Testament types are just types of men and women and children, and it is a question how we appropriate them and why we appropriate them.
Eu.R. You mean the clean animals that we can eat are all suggestive of persons. "What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common".
J.T. So a young person may say, I would like to get to know this other young person. Well, then, the first thing is, is that young person godly or does he persecute the truth? If he does that, then you do not want to know him, except to save him if he is lost, but you do not want to know him otherwise. You do not want to make companionship of people who are sinful or tend to worldliness.
Ques. Would that be the import of the word "slay and eat"; that is, our links with one another are not on natural lines?
J.T. Just so. The slaying and the eating, of course, would not be persons; it is just a figure of what is needed to bring meat, animal meat, into use, making it useful for food.
Ques. Would this have been seen pre-eminently in Simon the tanner? There would be death, I should think, surrounding his circumstances, so that the skins might be available.
{67}
J.T. The fact that he was a tanner, you mean? There would be skins that he was making use of for pairs of shoes and the like. That would be the idea.
Eu.R. That would involve that they had to go through a certain process.
J.T. If you are a shoe dealer you have to get raw material, and that raw material has to come from animals. So that what has been said is quite right, that Simon the tanner would be likely to be affected by these skins that he would be obliged to use. The idea of intelligence thus comes into all these things, because God is pleased to give us minds that can be instructed. But we will have to proceed a little further now. We have been dealing with Cornelius, and it goes on to say (verse 19): "But as Peter continued pondering over the vision, the Spirit said to him ..." -- notice that it is not said to be the Spirit of God, it is just the Spirit Himself -- "the Spirit said to him, Behold, three men seek thee; but rise up, go down, and go with them, nothing doubting, because *I* have sent them". That is to say, the Spirit of God comes in personally, and He is the Sender at this time of Peter to this great service that is in mind. It is the Spirit of God by Himself.
A.J.G. It says here, "*I* have sent them"; the sending of the men here is also attributed to the Spirit.
J.T. Just so. Then the three men that are sent to Peter give an account of Cornelius, and they say (verse 22), "Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man, and fearing God" -- notice that, "fearing God" -- "and borne witness to by the whole nation of the Jews, has been divinely instructed by a holy angel to send for thee to his house, and hear words from thee. Having therefore invited them in, he lodged them". Peter lodged them; that is to say, Peter had liberty to lodge people in another man's house, which is another great feature of love. As I am here now in
{68}
Mr. M.s house I can invite somebody else in. He invited them in and lodged them, it says, meaning that he would give them a bed or give them food; he had liberty to do that, which I think is a point to be noticed. "And on the morrow, rising up he went away with them". So that Peter is obedient; he goes away with the messengers: "And certain of the brethren from Joppa went with him". We shall see later that there were six of them who went with Peter, and they were there as witnesses. "And on the morrow they came to Caesarea. But Cornelius was looking for them". Cornelius too is in the whole matter; he is thoroughly in it. He was looking for them, "having called together his kinsmen and his intimate friends". So we are to learn how we are to go on with the work of God in regard of our relatives. If we can use them, use them, but if we cannot they may damage us.
H.P.W. You spoke of the intimacy in which the Spirit desires that we should enlist His help in everything. Is that a very great thing with all of us, to be intimate in our relations with the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Quite so. You will notice that it is the Spirit by Himself. It does not say "the Spirit of God" but the Spirit Himself -- "the Spirit said to him".
Eu.R. Would you say something as to the distinction between the Spirit Himself and the Spirit of God?
J.T. The Spirit is a divine Person, the truth of which the Lord has stressed amongst us, making it clearer than it had been hitherto. The Spirit is a divine Person, as the Father is, and as the Son is, and the Spirit is mentioned as the third of the three divine Persons; that is, we are to consider the abstract idea of divine Persons. We cannot say what relations they stood in before the economy, because they are presented as equal, but in the
{69}
economy it is the Father, and the Son and the Spirit. It is the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Spirit. That is, the order is, one, two, three, and they are divine Persons, but abstractly they are clearly presented as equal.
A.E.M-o. You emphasize then that it is not the Lord speaking by the Spirit, but the Spirit Himself. We have been rather inclined to turn to the Lord for guidance, have we not, and receive it by the Spirit? Now you would turn to the Spirit for guidance, would you?
J.T. Just so. You would agree with that, I am sure.
A.E.M-o. Yes, I would.
J.T. The Spirit is presented in the Acts as in charge of the position down here, but at the same time He has been ignored in certain ways. So in @Numbers 21 they sang to the well. It says, "And from thence to Beer: that is the well of which Jehovah spoke to Moses, Assemble the people, and I will give them water. Then Israel sang this song, Rise up, well! sing unto it: Well which princes digged, which the nobles of the people hollowed out at the word of the lawgiver, with their staves" @Numbers 21: 16 - 18. That passage is the confirmation of what the Lord has helped us on in recent times; that the Spirit of God can be spoken to. It is not only that He can speak to us -- of course, He does -- but He can be spoken to. Typically they sang to Him here.
Ques. Does the thought of accuracy enter into the message which is conveyed to Peter by the three men?
J.T. I think so, and then that he took others, because in the next chapter we find that there were six men as witnesses.
A.J.G. It says, "There went with me these six brethren also".
{70}
J.T. Showing how concerned God is as to testimony in the sense of witnesses. We constantly use the word testimony, and it implies witnesses; it is what is testified to, what the witness would say or do to establish a fact.
J.S.E. May I ask a further question as to this matter of fasting, and the way the Spirit comes into the happenings here? I was thinking of the allusion to Cornelius and the interest that heaven was taking in him, when it says: "As Peter continued pondering". He was not exactly occupied with the meal that he was originally concerned about, but he was *pondering*; that is, he was engaged with the matter in hand, and so the Spirit comes into the matter sympathetically and speaks to him directly and personally.
J.T. Would you not say that God was over the fact that he should be hungry, because all this was the outcome of it. God was over it and so the vision came to him, that is, what he saw coming down from heaven. There is the vessel as a great sheet, bound by the four corners. The four corners are a universal idea, and this is to be brought into his mind, meaning that he was to be ready, through this process, to listen to what was to be said about the gentiles coming into the truth.
P.L. Would his experience help him to be found in sympathy with divine hunger for the gentiles?
J.T. Will you explain to us 'divine hunger'?
P.L. I was thinking of @Luke 15 -- the hunger of love in that way, and also chapter 14, "That my house may be filled".
Ques. Does the reference to all the quadrupeds and creeping things suggest that there is going to be a quota from every nation -- every class, you might say, of the gentiles?
{71}
J.T. Just so. There are certain kinds of men that are somewhat in disrepute in the minds of the so-called white people in the West. You have that in mind?
Rem. I did; I had never noticed it before, but it seems as though they must have covered every kind -- "were all the quadrupeds and creeping things".
J.T. So that God's mind would stretch out to the coloured man. We know them in New York, and that God is blessing them and He is overcoming the disadvantage of colour.
Rem. So that if we are to be true to our assembly instincts we must get away from respect of persons and come into God's view of them all.
J.T. So that we have in verse 26: "But Peter made him rise, saying, Rise up: *I* myself also am a man. And he went in, talking with him, and found many gathered together. And he said to them, *Ye* know how it is unlawful for a Jew to be joined or come to one of a strange race". We should notice the word 'race' there; that covers the whole idea of humanity. The word 'race' is not applied to angels; it is applied to men.
A.M. Was not the collection of brethren in @Acts 13 a remarkably varied one in that connection? I mean there was Barnabas, and then Simeon called Niger, who would presumably be a coloured man; there was Lucius the Cyrenian, and the foster-brother of Herod, and then there was Saul.
J.T. Well, that would bear out what we have said, and you had in mind the word 'Niger' specially, did you not?
A.M. I was thinking what a mixed company they were, and how grace worked with Barnabas, for instance, and Saul, to sit down in such company as that.
J.T. So that this idea of nations comes into what we are saying (the word 'nation' is used in this section
{72}
of Scripture) but we have to make allowance for detrimental things. I would not like to say things that would cause offence to anybody, but we cannot ignore the fact that certain conditions do exist that imply reproach on certain persons. So that we have to overcame that, and Peter had to overcome it. He said he *had* overcome it and we have to overcome it too, so that we do not look down on people, so to speak, because of certain conditions, because I am sure God is not pleased with that at all. It is said of Enoch, that he pleased God, which means that he did please Him, and he did the things that were suitable.
Rem. Peter says: "To *me* God has shewn to call no man common or unclean".
J.T. Quite so. God had showed him, and that indicates that Peter had taken it in; the vision had done its work with Peter. I do not think we see that he was at all hungry afterwards -- there is no word that he wanted to eat afterwards; it is as though the hunger was in order to bring about the results that we are now dealing with. So that we have got to watch in our ministry not to have disrespect for certain persons. It may be because they are poor -- in lower conditions than we may be, but we have to think of them as men; "the mediator of God and men". It is not their colour, but *men*. It is humanity that is in mind.
Ques. Would there be help in relation to that in what Peter says about this matter in chapter 15? He refers to the fact that he had been given the commission from the earliest days to bring the nations into this matter, and he referred to God as "the heart-knowing God".
J.T. Just so. Two of them spoke in that extraordinary chapter. Peter was the leading speaker, and then there was James. God had honoured them in that sense and Peter was honoured, you can see
{73}
particularly, because of the way he had been educated in chapter 10.
Ques. Did the Lord have this sheet in mind in the end of Matthew's gospel when He said, "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations"?
J.T. Just so, showing that it is all the *nations*. It is not simply all men, but all the nations; the division into nations is involved, and that is governmental on God's part. They are called into it in @Matthew 28.
A.C.S.P. Is what we are saying borne out by the verse in chapter 2. "pious men, from every nation of those under heaven", and then Peter's own expression here, "*I* myself also am a man".
J.T. Very good.
A.E.M-o. I suppose the systems around you in New York do make a distinction. They have separate buildings for those who are coloured; but those walking according to assembly principles would receive a coloured brother as warmly as a white brother. You have many coloured and white mixing together in the same meeting.
J.T. We have, indeed. In New York we have about half and half, and there are about five hundred altogether.
Ques. Does verse 35 of this chapter help us? "But in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him".
J.T. It says, beginning with verse 34, "I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him. The word which he sent to the sons of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ (*he* is Lord of all things,) *ye* know; the testimony which has spread" -- notice "has spread", it is the fact -- "has spread through the whole of Judaea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism which John preached -- Jesus who was of Nazareth" -- notice
{74}
that too, who *was* of Nazareth. He is not that now, but it is what He was -- "how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power; who went through all quarters" -- notice that, all quarters -- "doing good, and healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him". Then it says further. "*We* also are witnesses of all things which he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they also slew, having hanged him on a cross. This man God raised up the third day and gave him to be openly seen, not of all the people, but of witnesses" -- notice that again -- "who were chosen before of God, *us* who have eaten and drunk with him after he arose from among the dead". So that the idea of humanity is greatly stressed in all that. It is a question of man.
Ques. When Peter says: "*I* myself also am a man", has he overcome any thought of religious superiority? He does not say, 'I am a Jew', but 'I am a man'.
J.T. I think so. But I think we ought to include other remarks before we close, and particularly that the Lord Jesus became a Man, for that is the basis of everything. It is not simply that it is that kind of creature, but the basis of everything is that the Lord Jesus Himself became a Man -- "the Man Christ Jesus".
A.J.G. So that man is now greatly elevated in the thoughts of God?
J.T. Quite so. I believe that is why christianity is brought in, because God intends to take out the very best, and He knows it, and the very best is the assembly. The assembly is the greatest of all families.
Ques. Should there be a readiness on the part of the evangelist not only to preach the gospel but to link himself on, or identify himself, with those converted? I was thinking of Philip and the eunuch.
{75}
J.T. Quite so. It says, "they went down both to the water". He took the same level as the eunuch, and the eunuch was probably a coloured man. Philip went down with him into the water; that is to say, he accepted the equality of man, although we should not go the length of President Lincoln who said that all men were created equal, for that is not true either. We have to avoid that too, for we want to be sure that we are saying the truth.
E.J.B. Is there a link with @Ephesians 2 in all this, particularly where it says: "That he might form the two in himself into one new man, making peace".
J.T. Quite so. The 'one new man' is another matter altogether; Christ is the expression of that. It is not that Christ is a new Man at all, because He is not; He is not so regarded, but it is the kind of man that is formed in ourselves, that is called a new man -- it is a quality; that is what is meant. It is seen in Colossians and Ephesians.
{76}
COVENTRY -- READING (2)
@Acts 10: 34 - 48; @Acts 11: 1 - 18
J.T. Someone was speaking as we stopped this afternoon. Perhaps you would repeat what you said then.
E.C.T. I was going to remark that we should all be desirous of being in keeping with the Holy Spirit of God in relation to what He might be doing at any given time, as indicated in this book of Acts.
J.T. Yes. One might cite many instances of special ministry during the last fifty years at least, such as the sonship of Christ, and now again, the ministry as to the Holy Spirit Himself. This latter is the most important phase that is treated of in recent times, and I might say that, in some measure, it started from @Numbers 21, but other scriptures might be cited, and not the least what Peter said here.
J.P.H. Is attention to the ministry and obedience to it important? I was thinking of verse 29 in chapter 10, where Peter says "Wherefore also, having been sent for, I came without saying anything against it". He did not speak against what was said to him by the Spirit. He is quickly adjusted and from the moment of the Spirit speaking to him he is steadily going forward.
J.T. Quite so, and so he says further in that same verse: "I inquire therefore for what reason ye have sent for me", and then Cornelius answered, showing that he was a veritable evidence of the work of God for the moment, leading up to the great truth that is being opened up as to the Spirit.
Ques. Would speaking against this truth as to the Spirit be lawlessness now?
J.T. Well, now there is the word as to anyone speaking against the Holy Spirit, that it shall never
{77}
be forgiven him. In @Matthew 12: 31, it says: "For this reason I say unto you, Every sin and injurious speaking shall be forgiven to men, but speaking injuriously of the Spirit shall not be forgiven to men. And whosoever shall have spoken a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor in the coming one". That is one of the most solemn things to be thought of as to our subject.
W.B.H. Does the fact that that is repeated three times, in Matthew and in Mark and in Luke, emphasise that?
J.T. Quite so. There are certain things that are omitted in some of the gospels; for instance, Matthew does not record the ascension, so that we have to watch that and see what is recorded and what is not recorded. What is recorded three times is certainly to be noted specially.
Now Peter here in verse 34, opening his mouth, said, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him. The word which he sent to the sons of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ (*he* is Lord of all things, ) *ye* know; the testimony which has spread through the whole of Judaea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism which John preached -- Jesus who was of Nazareth: how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power; who went through all quarters doing good, and healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him. *We* also are witnesses of all things which he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they also slew, having hanged him on a cross. This man God raised up the third day and gave him to be openly seen, not of all the people, but of witnesses who were chosen before of God, *us* who
{78}
have eaten and drunk with him after he arose from among the dead. And he commanded us to preach to the people, and to testify that *he* it is who was determinately appointed of God to be judge of living and dead. To him all the prophets bear witness that every one that believes on him will receive through his name remission of sins". Now Peter in @Acts 2 speaks of remission of sins and then the gift of the Holy Spirit is added. It would seem as if the Spirit of God intends that certain features of the truth may be stressed at one time and certain others at another time.
C.H.G. Does verse 43 show that the same gospel is now available for all men, including the gentiles? "The prophets bear witness that every one that believes on him will receive through his name remission of sins".
J.T. Quite so. So that what we were referring to this afternoon may well be stressed again; that is, the idea of so-called coloured persons especially in the American continent. The coloured race is probably ten millions, showing that God is not passing over the race that other sections of humanity despise. God is dealing with them in the gospel and many of them are not only converted, but are in fellowship, actually in fellowship in the truth, and having gift, too, to preach the gospel and minister the word.
Rem. It has often been noticed that in those parts of America where the colour bar is so strictly enforced the testimony has not taken root.
J.T. That is quite true. In the southern part of the United States, for instance, the truth has never taken very much hold, whereas in the north and west it has.
P.L. So that the experience as to the sheet is to make us humbly thankful that God selects our company for us and we embrace all He gives.
{79}
J.T. Yes, so that while the race is in mind, as we see here, that is to say men, as such, are in mind, yet the fact remains that there are differences that it is wise to observe. There is not the same effect from the gospel in sections of the world such as Japan and China, besides the coloured races of the south. There are these differences, and if we are seeking to minister the truth we had better just observe that, and God would help us to do so; the Spirit of God is here, He is not only in heaven, He is here, and *sent* down here to help us in all these matters, so that we had better consult the Spirit. Of course we consult God as such, and the Lord Jesus, but consult the Spirit as to what especially would be supported in the truth.
Ques. Does the apostle's word to Titus bear that out: "One of themselves, a prophet of their own, has said, Cretans are always liars" and so on?
J.T. Quite so -- "always liars". Well, then you had better avoid that class because God has written down a word for us and we should be guided by it. Paul is the author of that passage, and we are dealing now with the gentiles, and how the truth has come to them. Paul, of course, is, you might say, more available and amenable to the Spirit of truth, not indeed that I would say a word against any of the others, but at the same time Paul is a speciality. The Lord speaks of him as special to Himself.
J.S.E. Why did you draw a distinction between the allusion to forgiveness of sins in the early part of the book and what he said here? You made a reference to the fact that the gift of the Holy Spirit is not added here.
J.T. Well, it is not said here, and it is a question of the wisdom or the differentiation that you get with the Spirit's ministry. We do well to follow His guidance in that sense, but truth is truth. We shall see in chapter 11 that Peter differentiates certain
{80}
things from chapter 10, which we might easily look at.
Eu.R. Immediately following "every one that believes on him will receive through his name remissions of sins", we have "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word".
J.T. Quite so. Now I think we should go on to the main subject from the chapter where we began to read.
Ques. In verse 35 of chapter 10 is Peter looking out for any feature of the work of God, wherever it appeared?
J.T. I am sure he is. At the same time the Spirit of God knows; He is God, and He knows what is to happen, as well as what has happened. We can thus count on Him and be guided by what He says or does not say, and then if we need to compare and get help from the comparison, we might well look into each detail of the matter, and make a comparison. So that we have in this verse, "But in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him", showing that the fear of God and the working of righteousness is to be observed, and then again: "The word which he sent to the sons of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ (*he* is Lord of all things, ) *ye* know". Notice the word 'word' there. Sometimes you may have 'words', which would mean detail of language, but sometimes you have 'word', which is a general idea, as we say 'preach the word' -- the word is one whole idea.
Ques. You drew attention this afternoon to the word 'witnesses' in verses 39 and 41. Had you something further to say as to that?
J.T. "*We* also are witnesses of all things which he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they also slew, having hanged him on
{81}
a cross. This man God raised up the third day and gave him to be openly seen, not of all the people, but of witnesses who were chosen before of God, *us*" and so forth. Well, now God there has to be regarded in the full light of the word 'God'; that is God, including sometimes the three Persons of the Godhead. Sometimes it is that but not at all times; so that we have to be careful in making comparisons.
N.K.M. Is the "*us*" in verse 41, which you stressed, apostolic?
J.T. I would think that is what Peter means, although the apostle Paul was already selected, you know.
Ques. Is it to be noted that those who accompanied Peter were designated the faithful of the circumcision? Do we see by that that they were morally fitted to accompany him on this great mission?
J.T. Just so; there were six mentioned afterwards. I would think what you say is right. So that the Spirit of God is careful to give credit where credit is due, and to bring to light the persons in whom God is working. When we say God -- you might say it is God in the full sense. In chapter 8 of 1 Corinthians it is said "to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things ... and one Lord, Jesus Christ". The Holy Spirit is not mentioned in that category. We can add that very evidently, but we need not because the Spirit of God does not add it Himself.
A.J.G. Have you anything in your mind as to why the Holy Spirit is not mentioned in that chapter?
J.T. I have not. I have often thought of it, but it is not there. It is just one Father and one Lord.
Ques. Would it be a question of what is needed at that moment?
{82}
J.T. That is in general what I would say. You might add something, too, because we are here for that purpose.
Rem. One is struck with the skill which the Spirit gives to the ministers to meet the need of those to whom they minister.
J.T. Yes, and you might say about that what Paul says in @1 Corinthians 4, "God has set us the apostles for the last". Why should that be? It is as if they were capable of more reproach and more suffering than any of us.
Ques. Would that passage in @1 Corinthians 8 not also guide us as to prayer so that we should not labour to address more divine Persons than we are free with at the moment, or to address all divine persons in prayer, but that we should be selective?
J.T. Quite so. If we give thanks for our food at the table we do not lengthen our prayers, but we would not deny anything; there are occasions for shortening prayers and for lengthening them. We could easily pick out from Scripture lengthened prayers or lengthened terms of reverence and thanksgiving to God. We could easily select many passages from the Psalms and the Old Testament generally as well as in the New.
C.H.G. Would the expression "they of the circumcision" at Jerusalem in verse 2 of chapter 11 imply those of a certain narrow view of things who were insisting on circumcision and all the Jewish ceremonials?
J.T. They would not be reliable men, I would say. Verse 1: "the apostles and the brethren who were in Judaea heard that the nations also had received the word of God"; notice that it is the "word of God", not the 'words of God', but the "word of God". We say 'preach the word'; that is another expression. The word is a general term conveying the full thought of the mind of God on some point.
{83}
Then it goes on to say: "And when Peter went up to Jerusalem, they of the circumcision contended with him". So we may be sure that they are not with God when they are contending against the truth. They contended with him, saying, "Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised and hast eaten with them". That is a complaint, but it is not according to Scripture. It is just a false contention against the truth.
Ques. In verse 3 of chapter 11 Peter is accused of having eaten with the nations, but when he speaks to Cornelius in verse 41 of chapter 10, he says: "*Us* who have eaten and drunk with him after he arose from among the dead". Does that suggest the intimacy with divine Persons which gives the liberty and power to rise above legalism?
J.T. You would make a point of intimacy; is that what you mean? that Peter had intimacy with the Lord?
Rem. Yes, eating and drinking with Him after He rose from the dead suggests the intimacy of communion with the Lord Jesus in that condition, and I was thinking how it would in that sense reflect on our intimacy with the Holy Spirit now, so as to rise above what is legal.
J.T. Quite so, I think what you say is perfectly right. The question of intimacy with the Holy Spirit is a matter to be understood and to be practised too, because the Lord Himself has helped us as to that truth.
Ques. Does the thought of the Holy Spirit falling upon those that were hearing the word bring in the affections of the Spirit, and how attractive those that were hearing the word would be to Him?
J.T. Quite so. We have the expression "the love of the Spirit" in Romans, so that the idea of the affections of the Spirit is quite in order.
{84}
Ques. Is it not something like the Father falling on the neck of the returning son?
J.T. Very good.
A.J.G. Do you think Peter's action according to chapter 11 in setting forth the matter to them in order, is an example of how to seek to help those who have difficulties?
J.T. I would think so. Perhaps you would say a little more.
A.J.G. I was only thinking that Peter would be sympathetic with those who had difficulties because he had had difficulties himself, and God had graciously removed them by the vision and the voice from heaven, and so on.
J.T. It is a very good sign if a brother who has had difficulties and who has been saying things that are not right, would say so and confess he has been wrong. He would be helped. It often happens, however, that people ignore the errors they have been making.
N.K.M. The effect of Peter's word to them was that "when they heard these things they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then indeed God has to the nations also granted repentance to life".
J.T. Yes, quite so. So that the matter was settled, that is what I would say. It is a great thing to settle a matter, and not to spread it out too much.
Ques. Is it a great thing that the matter was settled by the Spirit's own action?
J.T. Just so. But it might be settled even by the ministry of a brother, too. The ministry of a brother might be the actual word of the Holy Spirit; he might speak by the Spirit of God, and of course every one of us should aim at that, if we are attempting to minister.
J.E.B. Peter in his epistle uses the expression the "oracles of God".
{85}
J.T. Quite so, he says. "if any one speak -- as oracles of God" (@1 Peter 4: 11), so that is an injunction to everyone of us who is ministering.
Ques. Has God something special in mind in bringing forward the Holy Spirit as He has been doing in the last two or three years?
J.T. He certainly has, and I think it is to help all of us in ministry to be clear about the Scriptures, and then to make room for the Spirit Himself, so that the word may be with power, as we often say. It cannot be denied if it is with power. Another thing we should notice is that the Holy Spirit refers to Himself in quoting the Old Testament, "as says the Holy Spirit", @Hebrews 3:7. The whole book of the Scriptures is thus before us in this sense, and the Holy Spirit is the Author of all, but He quotes Himself oftentimes, and He brings forward persons whom He has raised up and is using to present the truth to us. We need to be careful therefore thus to be with the Spirit in what He is doing, because He is the One to guide us in regard of quotations from Scripture, because He has written it. Then too, if we are real christians, He is indwelling us, and there are these meetings which we are having, and in which God is helping us; the Spirit of God Himself is helping us. The truth is being more and more clarified, and of course the young people ought to read or listen to the ministry and get on their knees and see whether they are getting the good of what has been said by the ministers and the Holy Spirit Himself. If a person has not got the Spirit he never understands anything properly, and there are many who have not got the Spirit, and so the question would be, therefore, if I am not sure that I have the Spirit, to be sure to ask for Him.
Ques. Do not these words of Peter become divine communications?
{86}
J.T. They do indeed.
A.J.G. Do you think that the more we come to recognise and value the presence of the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, the more we shall be able to get into all the truth and reach completion, and also to meet every form of opposition that may arise?
J.T. Quite so, and especially if a brother has been neglectful or failed in the ministry to receive it when he has had opportunity, well, then he ought to be more and more particular. He should take it to heart and make it clear to the brethren that he has judged himself, because we are to judge ourselves. We are enjoined to do so, in the epistle to the Corinthians.
Ques. Would continued resistance in this way involve an assembly meeting?
J.T. I should certainly say so, but be sure if we have an assembly meeting to get the facts together to show that there is real need for judgment.
Eu.R. You mean get the facts together beforehand?
J.T. Just so, and let them be declared in the presence of witnesses, because the care meeting is a meeting for witnesses. Witnesses are present capable of telling things and giving information as to them.
Ques. Would not Peter setting forth the matter in order be to carry the brethren with him and to convince them as to the truth?
J.T. Quite so, and tell their wives at home. The wives too should ask them so that they get the truth. It says in @1 Corinthians 14: 35, "Let them ask their own husbands at home". That is an important thing for the sisters; to ask their husbands at home.
J.S.E. Is there something very attractive in the fact that, while Peter was speaking, the Holy Spirit fell on those who heard the word? In his speaking
{87}
he was really acknowledging his own adjustment in relation to the truth.
J.T. Just so. He was a corrected man -- a self-judged man, as you might say. We know well enough that he was adjusted later when Paul had to take issue with him. Paul says, "I said to Peter before all". Paul took issue with Peter himself.
R.S.W. Is the intimacy with the Spirit which we are being brought into necessary in view of eternal conditions upon which we are about to enter?
J.T. Very good. That is an immense word, which we can hardly touch on now, because there is not time, but it is one of the most important things anyone could say. As being translated to heaven, what conditions we are coming into! The Spirit, I believe thoroughly, is going with us when we go. There will, of course, be other ministry by the Spirit, but it will be on lower ground, indeed more Israelitish ground. But then the conditions as to Israel -- the facts as to Israel -- will have to terminate too, because there is no word of Israel being brought into eternal conditions. They will go into it as men, I would say. If they have been brought into the assembly, of course, they have come into it as men.
Rem. So that the idea of nations is not carried beyond the millennium.
J.T. Not that I know of. But still it shows how thoughtful God is and how He is faithful to His promises to the fathers. What regard He has for the fathers -- the believers in the truth, especially Moses. It is wonderful that Moses should be brought forward as he is as speaking to the Lord on the mount of transfiguration. There were Moses and Elias. There are things there that are not very clear to us at times, but a greater study would make them clearer, so that we become acquainted with them.
{88}
T.H. Would the two words in verse 12 of chapter 11, "nothing doubting", be particularly important? There may perhaps be the element amongst us of doubting. It says of the disciples at the close of Matthew, "some doubted".
J.T. Just so; especially if they are gifted men and God is using them. It is most important that they should be sure and not have any doubts about things. Why should we have doubts? If you have doubts, well, get to God. He will make it clear. The word is, "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things", @2 Timothy 2: 7.
F.W.O. Does the recognition of the Spirit's own voice settle every doubt? He says, "The Spirit said to me".
J.T. Quite so. You can have no greater authority than the Spirit of God. He is God Himself.
J.E.B. Would you say with regard to some of the special men in the Old Testament, such as Moses, that they had the Spirit in some special way. I was thinking of what we get in Isaiah. "But he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people: Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is he that put his Holy Spirit within him ..." @Isaiah 63: 11.
J.T. They would not be what we call indwelt by the Spirit. In a peculiar way the Spirit is here permanently now indwelling the assembly -- no one person can contain the Spirit, it is only the assembly fully that can contain the Spirit.
A.J.G. So each believer's body is characteristically temple of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. That is so, but still we cannot ignore the fact that it is only one out of many. The assembly is a united idea; it is a full united thought, and the thought of union too is involved in it. That is another point that perhaps we have not all touched on much lately -- union with Christ, but it implies
{89}
that every one who is indwelt by the Spirit is in union.
A.J.G. John in his second epistle speaks of the truth which "abides in us and shall be with us to eternity". Do you think that is an allusion to the Spirit as with us to eternity?
J.T. I would think so. It is the full thought which is characteristic of John. He gives full thoughts, but many of them are abstract thoughts; you have to bring in the idea of abstraction to get them. John is the most abstract man of all.
Ques. Were you going to say anything more about union?
J.T. No, I do not think I could. We have to study Mr. Stoney's writings to get the full truth of union, because he knew more about it than any of those that have ministered, as far as I understand.
Eu.R. Had you in mind "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit"?
J.T. I do not think that is full union. Union is what we have in @Genesis 2, if you will kindly read it.
A.J.G. In @Genesis 2, first of all the man says: "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh, this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". Then the Spirit adds, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and cleave to his wife; and they shall become one flesh". Is that the thought of union?
J.T. That is right, and as brought into the New Testament that is worked out as union.
A.J.G. And that is quoted in @Ephesians 5, and Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly".
J.T. Quite so. He speaks of other things, but he wants that specially stressed, because that is what is in his mind. "*I* speak as to Christ and as to the assembly". I would say therefore that Paul knows
{90}
more about the assembly than any, because he is minister of it.
A.G.H. Would you please say something about this vessel? Is this "certain vessel descending" the assembly?
J.T. I think it is. We are impressed with the immensity of it, because it is a very immense idea and it refers to the assembly. It came down three times and went up to stay -- that is the eternal thought.
A.G.H. In chapter 10 it speaks of it being taken up into heaven, and in chapter 11 it is drawn up.
J.T. There is not much difference. 'Drawn up' would mean a hand above -- some hand above. Similarly we have earlier in this book the idea of hard breathing, connected with the sound out of heaven. That would be an allusion to lungs. We would be very reverential in referring to the idea of lungs in God, but still the idea is there as to breathing -- hard breathing: (See footnote, @Acts 2: 2).
Ques. Is there any link in @Acts 10: 45, with @Genesis 24, where the servant is astonished at Rebecca? I believe it is the same word used.
J.T. The Spirit is alluded to in @Genesis 24; Abraham's servant typifies the Spirit. So that the astonishment is all the more wonderful in that chapter; it suggests the astonishment the Spirit has. It is better to leave it without saying too much, lest we might get into error about it, but it is remarkable that the Spirit is there and spoken of in that sense. The whole chapter conveys precious thoughts, that we need to feed on rather than enlarge on too much in ministry.
Rem. Referring to the thought of the vessel, once more, we sometimes speak of it as being a sheet, but it is *as* a sheet. I wondered whether the thought of a vessel in this connection would give us an impression of the entity of the church, and that
{91}
it is quite indivisible; you have it all or nothing, so to speak, I wondered whether that would be conveyed to Peter.
J.T. In addition to that, I would say that I do not think we should speak of any part of the assembly as a remnant. I would avoid, as far as I am concerned, speaking of the assembly in any sense as a remnant. The remnant is spoken of in regard to the Jews, but I do not think it should be spoken of in regard to the assembly. I do not think that even in the third chapter of Revelation -- in the reference to Philadelphia -- the assembly should be spoken of as a remnant. Some think of it in that sense, because it is in Revelation, but it is not, it is the full thought of the assembly in that passage.
Rem. What you are saying is very interesting, because sometimes we are inclined to take terms which are used to designate Israel and apply them to the church with equal facility, whereas the Lord has the whole thing in mind when He speaks of the assembly.
J.T. Quite so, I think the Lord, so to speak, would be loath to use it in any other sense, because the assembly is so great, and He loves it.
J.G.S. Might it not tend to be a slight on the presence of the Spirit indwelling the assembly if we talk of a remnant?
J.T. I think you are right. That is just what I would say. Now let us finish verse 18: "And when they heard these things they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then indeed God has to the nations also granted repentance to life", I think that is a wonderful verse after such readings as we have had today. The matter is settled.
P.L. And are those who are now established in it invigorated to go forward to the next step?
J.T. Just so; to go forward. Mr. Mace once told me that he had learnt something from someone that
{92}
seemed to be the truth. It was: 'Go on, go on, go on', just like that, and I think he was right, too. The words 'Go on' struck me, and it strikes me now. We can well go on from what we have been saying as to the introduction of the gentiles, for we belong to the gentiles. There is hardly a Jew in fellowship now.
A.J.G. It is a scriptural expression because we get "Let us go on to what belongs to full growth".
J.T. Very good.
W.B.H. What do the words "repentance to life" suggest?
J.T. It is a real repentance. Not simply that you have a sense that God has done something for you, but it is a real repentance. It is to life, meaning that eternal life would be implied in it; it would reach that point. We all know what came out in Mr. Raven's ministry in the last century as to eternal life.
A.J.G. And does that mean that repentance is in view of filling a position here in testimony in the power of eternal life?
J.T. Quite so.
A.C.S.P. Is it a great matter not only to arrive at the fact that what the ministry has said is right, but to arrive at what God is doing?
J.T. Very good; what God is doing.
A.C.S.P. I was thinking of the expression, "Then indeed God has to the nations also granted repentance to life". They do not say, Peter, you are justified in what you did, but they recognise what God has done.
J.T. Just so. I think instead of saying what God is doing, the time has come when we say God is at rest. We have Mr. Darby's beautiful hymn, 'Rest of the saints above, Jerusalem of God' (`74:1), but then God is at rest as well. That verse conveys the idea
{93}
of rest, and we are coming into rest -- the rest of God.
P.L. "He will rest in His love".
A.M. Do the variety of creatures themselves that are found in the sheet set forth the principle of life in its variety?
J.T. Well, I would say so. The Lord says of His sheep, "I give them life eternal; and they shall never perish" -- so that the thought is there -- "and no one shall seize them out of my hand". All the ideas are there in the sheet.
Ques. You have several times referred to the fact that there are no -- or very few -- Jews in fellowship. Did you have in mind the passage in @Romans 11 about the goodness and severity of God? It says, "Behold then the goodness and severity of God; upon them who have fallen, severity; upon thee goodness of God, if thou shalt abide in goodness, since otherwise *thou* also wilt be cut away".
J.T. Quite so. That is a fitting close to what we have had.
{94}
CROYDON -- READING (1)
@2 Corinthians 3: 1 - 18; @1 Corinthians 11: 25; @Jeremiah 31: 31 - 34
J.T. The subject I have in mind is the new covenant, and the idea before us at this time is to call attention to the full thought of the Scriptures, every Scripture, including Old and New Testaments, and their value. It was, therefore, thought that the idea of the new covenant would aid us in this respect, so that we may see how well off we are as in this dispensation that we are in, as compared with what was before. We have to see, at the same time, that what was before was essential to what is now, but it is all one thought. "Every scripture", it says, "is divinely inspired, and profitable". Nothing, therefore, is to be despised, and certainly not neglected. There should be a constant thought of it, and we should read the Scriptures in the order in which they are written. That is, to take them beginning with Moses and the Psalms, and then the prophets, and so forth, so as to get the order in which they should be read. There is order in which they are written, and the New Testament too, of course, each book in its own place beginning with the Gospels, and then the Acts, and then the Epistles. It is thought now that the third chapter of 2 Corinthians will help us in regard of the epistles and enable us to link on with the Old Testament where the covenant, or the new covenant, is drawn from, because it is a question of comparison between the Old and the New. It was once stated by Mr. Raven, and it may be well to record it here, that the new covenant is the forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Holy Spirit. It might be as well to keep that in mind in all that we may have to say.
Rem. Having the knowledge of God in mind? It says "They shall all know me".
{95}
J.T. Quite so, "From the least of them unto the greatest of them". Then, as it says elsewhere: "They shall be all taught of God". That is another thing that runs through Scripture, being taught of God. It is not simply reading the Scriptures literally, but being taught of God as to their meaning. Hence, we have prophets, and evangelists, and shepherds and teachers, and so forth, and we would now specially recall the idea of teachers. There are, of course, at the present time, a good many capable men, thank God, and these meetings -- and three-day meetings especially -- are being greatly increased, not only here but in America and in Australasia. It is not simply week-end meetings, but three-day meetings, in which there is ample room to work out a principle or a subject.
H.H. Is it to be noted that Jeremiah lived at the time when Jerusalem was captured by the enemy? I mean the whole thing was, in a way, wrecked; so that over against that the thought of the new covenant would be full of meaning.
J.T. Yes, so that God has begun anew. It says in @Revelation 21, "Behold, I make all things new". He has begun anew now, in the New Testament, and, of course, it is connected with the incoming of the Son, the Son of God become Man. That is the beginning and basis of everything.
H.G.H. So do you consider the old covenant as a forerunner of the new?
J.T. Well, as to its general character or manner, but, of course, the contents of the new are very different from those of the old. We must however bring in the old so as to get the good of all the types and all that is mentioned before. Paul says in Galatians that the covenant was "ordained through angels in the hand of a mediator", and we thank God for the Mediator. The Mediator is Christ, but then Moses was also a mediator, and there is *some*
{96}
idea of mediatorship in those of us who are, in any way, capable or qualified to minister the truth, so that there is a go-between amongst us, involving confidence and consideration all round. There would be no idea of partisanship, for it is a question of what God has provided, and all the details are to be observed.
W.J. Are the three Persons required for the development of the new covenant?
J.T. 'Three' is a numeral which is much used in Scripture, and when we think of the divine Persons, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, one name covers them all, according to the end of Matthew.
H.W.A. In @John 6 the Lord brings in what you have already quoted, in referring to the Father taking the initiative in the sense of teaching in the economy. He says, "They shall be all taught of God". He refers to this very thought.
J.T. Just so, "They shall be all taught of God". And remember that the sisters are included in that; but the question is whether the sisters take it on, and whether the responsibility attaching to them is taken on by them, because they ought to follow things with the brethren. But you had something more to say?
H.W.A. I was thinking what an important thing it is to get into our souls that, in this great economy, the Father teaches as well as the Son and as well as the Holy Spirit. The word is in that same chapter, "every one that has heard from the Father himself, and has learned of him", as if to indicate that the Father takes the initiative in the sense of teaching and drawing to Christ.
J.T. Quite so.
P.L. In regard to this ministerial service in mediatorship, is it seen in Moses? It says "The skin of his face shone", and then it says "Moses called to them; and they turned to him -- Aaron and all
{97}
the principal men of the assembly; and Moses talked with them. And afterwards, all the children of Israel came near", @Exodus 34: 30 - 32.
J.T. Very good. They all came near, but then there was the idea of Moses and the place he had as the mediator. No one had a place such as his. He is therefore a type of Christ in that sense. It says "The mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus". So that the full thought is carried down to Christ Himself in manhood. It will not do simply to think of God as in the Old Testament, but we must think of Christ in manhood. He, of course, was in the Godhead before He became Man, but in manhood all things are carried down and made intelligible in Him. The Spirit too is here, sent down by Him, as if He accepted the obligation of looking after things and opening up things and teaching.
E.C.M. Is that supported in @Exodus 24, where it says, "He took the book of the covenant, and read it in the ears of the people; and they said, All that Jehovah has said will we do"? Would the book of the covenant, and reading it, be connected with the thought of teaching the people?
J.T. Just so. And so we rightly stress the fact that in @Luke 24 it says of the Lord, "Having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". So that there you have the full thought, "in all the scriptures the things concerning himself".
P.H.H. Is it remarkable that this finds a place in the things we have come to in @Hebrews 12? It says "Ye have come ... to Jesus, mediator of a new covenant".
J.T. Yes, there are eight of them, and we might as well read them.
P.H.H. @Hebrews 12: 22: "But ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God,
{98}
heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven; and to God, judge of all; and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to Jesus, mediator of a new covenant; and to the blood of sprinkling, speaking better than Abel".
J.T. There are eight; it is beyond seven. It is the full idea, and indicates what we have come to. It is what *we* have come to; not what they came to in Old Testament times, but what *we* have come to.
A.J.G. Is it significant that in that scripture the word for *new* covenant is 'fresh', stressing the freshness in the Spirit which you were mentioning in your prayer.
J.T. Just so, I felt I needed it, because we came through crowded streets in the heat. Of course, we thank God for it, I do, because the heat is surely good for us. What God gives us is good for us.
P.H.H. "And to the blood of sprinkling". Would that add to the thought, "speaking better than Abel"? Does that link on with the spirit of the covenant, which you have in mind?
J.T. Quite so. It is better things too. The word 'better' is a comparative idea, and it shows what we have come into. Whether we take it on and enjoy it is another matter, and that is what these meetings are for, to stir us up and stimulate us into the enjoyment of what is available to us.
A.J.G. Have you in mind that new covenant ministry is intended to set us free in the assembly?
J.T. That is just what I think it is intended to do; and Hebrews, I suppose, would be the suggestion of it. We have the volume and the variety of the things we have come to, and the quotations from the Old Testament are generally from the Psalms, which shows that experience is the great point in mind.
{99}
H.H. It says, "the assembly of the firstborn". That would come into line with your thought?
J.T. Quite so.
H.G.H. So in verse 6 of the chapter read it says, "made us competent, as ministers". Is the assembly in mind there, or is it only apostolic, do you think?
J.T. It is apostolic. Will you please read it again.
H.G.H. @2 Corinthians 3: 5, "Not that we are competent of ourselves to think anything as of ourselves, but our competency is of God; who has also made us competent, as ministers of the new covenant".
J.T. Well, as I said, I think that is apostolic.
P.H.H. Would you say a word as to the new covenant in this setting? Is it a description of ministry, or is it a setting out of *the new covenant*? I am referring to the note to that verse which has just been read. Mr. Darby says, Perhaps it may be rendered 'competent as new covenant ministers', as if that were the description of the ministry and the ministers. Would that be right?
J.T. I think so, covering the whole idea, so that, we might say, if the apostles were together at any given time, as in @Acts 15, they would be in the full sense of that, and they would contend for it too. @Acts 15 is the scripture that covers all that.
P.H.H. The council about the circumcision?
J.T. Yes.
P.H.H. There was a question about it, the enemy was attacking, and that chapter is to reach the whole thought of the truth, and the apostles were all there. Peter was the first one to speak and then James afterwards.
A.J.G. So that new covenant ministry, as brought into christianity, is really part of the ministry of the gospel, is it not?
J.T. Quite so. So we certainly do well to adhere to the idea of the gospel, however few the attendance
{100}
may be, and to have it at least on the first day of the week, because God is blessing it. However much weakness there may be, God is blessing the gospel, and I think He is going to continue it. There is remarkable interest universally, as far as I can see, now, and I think God is showing that He is approving it, and the Lord is thinking of it because He is about to come. The reference to the appearing of Christ is to be specially noted, and we have a reference to those who love the appearing of Christ.
Ques. Is it to be noticed that in the passage that has been quoted in @Hebrews 12, it does not say that christians have come to the new covenant, but they have come to Jesus, the Mediator of a fresh covenant? I wondered if we could get some help as to the fact that the new covenant is not formally made with the church.
J.T. Quite right. What help can we get from that? The reference is to the old covenant, of course, but the truth is that Christianity is in mind and nothing less than that.
Eu.R. Would the expression "*we* all" in the last verse involve that? Is that universal?
J.T. The "we" is emphatic. Quite so, "*we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory". It is a magnificent finish to the chapter, because it is a question of glory -- "glory to glory".
Eu.R. It is no longer ministerial, but the apostle would draw all the saints into this liberty?
J.T. I think so.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the force of the expression; "the glory of the Lord"?
J.T. Well, we could easily say that the new covenant implies that, but glory is a question of what there is, what a thing is. Here it is a question
{101}
of the authority of the Lord, and at the end of the verse we have "the Lord the Spirit", showing that the Spirit of God is involved in the whole passage as to glory. "From glory to glory" refers to the Holy Spirit really. The chapter, we might say, deals with the great subject of the gospel, the Spirit being the power in which it is presented, and not only preached but ministered. The ministry is through the Spirit.
H.H. In @2 Corinthians 4: 6 it reads, "It is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts for the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ".
J.T. That is just what I was pointing out, that the idea of glory is immense, and then the idea of three divine Persons is more than immense; it is unspeakable.
H.H. I am sure you are right. We do well to pay much attention to it.
P.H.H. Do you take "the glory of the Lord" in the first part of verse 18, "*we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord", to refer to the Lord Jesus?
J.T. I think so. And then the glory of God in the next chapter, of course, is God Himself.
Ques. Has not the Person of the Lord Jesus a distinctive place as the Mediator?
J.T. He has, certainly. There is only one divine Person said to be *made* Lord, and that is the Son. The Father is not made Lord, nor the Spirit; it is the Son that is *made* Lord.
Ques. With regard to your remark as to christianity being in mind, is that why the apostle uses the letter as a negative matter to bring into relief the Spirit in a positive way? He says "The letter kills, but the Spirit quickens".
J.T. Just so. It is to set out the greatness of the Spirit. The word *spirit*, however, does not
{102}
always refer to the Holy Spirit, it has to be looked into, as to the setting in which it is presented.
P.H.H. You are referring to verse 6 where it says, "not of letter, but of spirit"? That has a small 's'. Then it goes on to say, "For the letter kills, but the Spirit quickens". That is a capital 'S'. That would be the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Yes, quite.
Ques. Does that not raise the question of the character of any ministry? Paul in speaking of his ministry says, "God ... has also made us competent, as ministers of the new covenant; not of letter, but of spirit".
J.T. I suppose Paul put the whole matter into both his ministry and the way he carried it on.
P.L. Would "death works in us, but life in you" suggest the quickening power of new covenant ministry?
J.T. I think it would. Just so.
S.R. Does the ministry of the Spirit enable us to behold the glory?
J.T. I think that is right.
Ques. Could we have a word as to why the new covenant has such prominence at the Supper? "This cup is the new covenant in my blood".
J.T. That is the first epistle. Well, I think it is the great idea of the ministry of God. It is the ministry of the Spirit, of course, but the Lord's supper is the beginning of everything in the sense of ministry. Everything begins with the Lord's supper. Then we are led on to the thought of the Minister of the sanctuary, and, as it says, "of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched and not man". That is to say, which God has pitched and not man, but the Lord Jesus is the Minister of it. He is the Minister of the sanctuary. All that begins with the Lord's supper.
{103}
R.S.W. Would the shedding of His blood be an outstanding part of the glory of the Lord?
J.T. I should say that. Only one of the divine Persons died, and we cannot but be touched as we think of that. One of the divine Persons died. The others give support. Of course, the Father is first, and then the Son, and then the Holy Spirit, but then, as I said before, only the Lord Jesus Christ is said to be made Lord. He is made Lord and Christ.
F.C.H. Is not the Lord Jesus the only One of the Godhead who is said to be made anything? And that must be as Man.
J.T. It must be as Man. "The man Christ Jesus" is therefore so distinctively prominent, and should be prominent with us today, because it is peculiarly in this chapter.
H.H. A divine Person giving His life gives us such a sense in our souls of what love means, does it not?
J.T. Just so. Right up to the point that "God is love". You could not get anything better than that, "God is love", and then again, "Love is of God".
H.H. "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us; and *we* ought for the brethren to lay down our lives". That is a good word for all of us here this morning, is it not?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. As to the thought here of looking on the glory of the Lord, would that be characteristic or is it specific? Does it enter specifically into our assembling together?
J.T. It is a very wide thought. Think of the wideness of it; all the divine Persons are in it, yet the Lord having become Man, is the great vessel of the display of all these things. But then we cannot ignore the other Persons, because God is love, as we have said, and the love of the Spirit is mentioned
{104}
too. All the divine Persons, in a certain sense, therefore, are love, for God is love. I do not know that we should say, or that we could find in the Scriptures, that Christ is love, but God is love, and the word *God* there would imply the Father, the Son and the Spirit, as I understand.
W.J. Are "fleshy tables of the heart" capable of taking in divine love?
J.T. We would have to use that carefully, because 'fleshy' is apt to divert our minds, but it is just a figure, used in contrast to stone, to imply that they are impressionable. "Fleshy tables of the heart" mean that the heart is the centre of love.
E.C.M. Would you say a word on being "transformed according to the same image from glory to glory"? Do you connect that with the thought of change which you have spoken of?
J.T. Yes, "from glory to glory". Divine Persons are capable of change, and we have to be very careful to speak reverentially of it. They are capable of change, but even we are too. John the apostle says "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". He was capable of change in the Spirit on the Lord's day.
Ques. Does the ministry of the new covenant bring us into liberty? "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty".
J.T. I think it would, but then we ought to be as wide as Scripture, and grasp a thing, and deal with the thing in that sense. There are so many things said which are alike, or more or less alike, but we have to grasp each one in its own setting and in its own meaning.
H.F.N. Would you kindly say a word in regard to the four thoughts. "Now the Lord is the Spirit"; and secondly, "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty"; and then "looking on the glory of the Lord"; and the fourth "transformed ... from glory
{105}
to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", as to which apply to the Lord, and then how the Spirit is brought in, so that we might have the truth definitely before us in relation to each expression.
J.T. Well, you can give us help, Mr. N. Just break it up yourself into small parts.
H.F.N. In connection with the first, "The Lord is the Spirit", it has been so often spoken of as the spirit of Scripture, but is there more in it than that?
J.T. I think Mr. Raven said that, but I doubt that, I think we had better keep to what we have here.
H.F.N. That was what one would like to get help on, that it is something more than the spirit of Scripture.
J.T. I think that is right.
H.F.N. Then the second reference is "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". Would that refer to the presence and operations of the Holy Spirit as introducing liberty?
J.T. Yes. Quite so.
H.F.N. Then finally, "transformed according to the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". The question is, does that refer directly to the Holy Spirit?
J.T. I think "the Lord the Spirit" *is* the Holy Spirit. You have noticed, of course, that the article is left out in both cases, before 'Lord' and before 'Spirit'.
P.L. Is the new covenant ministry the great formative power to furnish and fill the saints as the vessels of the sanctuary? Are the saints, in relation to the service of God, formed and furnished through the new covenant ministry?
J.T. Therefore you have to include all the sisters as well as the brothers, who have the Spirit. Although the sisters, of course, are not to speak in assembly, but at the same time, they are members,
{106}
for they are *of* the assembly, they belong to the body of Christ. They would, therefore, be vessels even though they do not speak, because they can express themselves in many ways, in their looks and in many other ways. The Spirit is the power for the operation of all that.
P.L. I was thinking of David as the one in whom the covenant was set forth, typical in that way of the Lord, preparing the vessels for the sanctuary, that is for the service of God.
J.T. Yes. Just so. You refer to the vessels; that is to say, every member, or person, is of the body, because he has the Spirit.
Ques. Will you say a word as to why, at the Supper itself, the *cup* of the covenant is emphasised?
J.T. I think because it is the drinking that is in mind. I think it is alluded to in @1 Corinthians 12, "so also is the Christ". 'The Christ' there covers not only the Lord Himself as Head, but all the members of the body. It is "the Christ".
Ques. Would it also cover verse 13 of chapter 12? "For also in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bondmen or free, and have all been given to drink of one Spirit".
J.T. I thought that was the thing that touches us, because of the idea of drinking. The idea of drinking, I think, is satisfaction, so all that would come in, and then the power of the Spirit would make all that effective in us. At a time like this, what are we doing, what are we taking in, what are we absorbing? Well, it is a question, of the Spirit, for the Spirit enables us to take in things that are said.
Rem. I was thinking of the peculiar place that the Spirit would have at that moment in the Supper.
J.T. That leads to the thought of what the Supper really means, and what enters into it. With
{107}
the systems around us, of course, the Supper is, you might say, abrogated; it is nothing; they have not the true thought of it at all. Everything depends on the teaching of the truth as to the Lord's supper. It all depends on that, and then our making way for it in ourselves, so as to be effective in the use the Lord would make of us, at any given time, because it is a question of the divine service, the service towards divine Persons.
E.C.M. So that we become glorious ourselves. It is not only that the Lord Jesus is glorious, but the saints become increasingly glorious, would you say?
J.T. Quite so. So that when the Spirit has His place we can see things. The term 'the Christ' would include, not only the Lord Himself, but all the members of the body, for it is a question of the body of Christ. Now something comes into my mind as to the use of the word in chapter 10. "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?". Now the blood is placed before the body, and that has to be observed too, because the Spirit has put it before the body, "The cup of blessing which we bless". That is at the Lord's supper.
E.C.L. Is that because it may have to do with the relations we have with one another, how the spirit of forgiveness is connected with the covenant. @2 Corinthians 2 has to do with forgiveness.
J.T. Yes, of course, but the idea of forgiveness in the covenant, in the true sense of the word, is more what Christ does. He forgives us.
E.C.L. I was wondering whether, as brought in here first, it would have to do with the way in which we appreciate it, and hence how we look upon one another.
J.T. Yes, only I think we might as well make a difference between that and what Christ does in the
{108}
sense of forgiveness. The full thought is that repentance and forgiveness of sins is to be preached among all the nations. Well, that is a full thought; that is not the question of our forgiveness of one another, it is a question of what Christ forgives.
P.H.H. Would it be right to say that it is the cup as used at the Supper, but not exactly in the Supper setting. Is it in the setting more of fellowship?
J.T. Quite so, but still it is the cup. We only have one cup in the celebration of the Lord's supper. The unity in the bread should also be seen in the cup. It is one loaf and one cup.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the force of the word, "Which we bless", not 'which we drink' there, but which we bless. Is it on the occasion of the Supper that we bless it?
J.T. That is just what I was trying to say, I think it is what is seen in the Lord's supper.
P.H.H. The word *bless* means that you speak well of it.
J.T. Just so. That is the idea of blessing, speaking well of it.
P.H.H. So has the drinking an internal effect, and then the speaking relates to what comes out of us, the external side?
J.T. Quite so. At the Lord's supper the bread represents His own body, and that is the main thing. But then the cup is wine, of course, we might say, but it is the *cup* that is stressed, as conveying the idea of oneness.
N.K.M. Would you say a word about verse 29 of chapter 11, "For the eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body". Do we understand that you include all the saints in that reference to the body, or does the body allude to the Lord's own body?
{109}
J.T. That is the Lord's own body, I am sure. But then it says earlier, "This is my body, which is for you". That is also the Lord's body.
Ques. Could we have a further word as to the remark on verse 25 of chapter 11, as to "This cup is the new covenant" as referring to the peculiar place the Holy Spirit may have at that time in the Supper?
Rem. We were speaking of the link between the Spirit and the cup, and I think I remarked, Would not the Spirit have a peculiar place in our minds at that time, as bringing in the glory system with all its liberating power.
J.T. Well, it is a question of seeing how the Old Testament is brought in in a favourable time to the New, and the Lord Himself brings in the covenant in relation to the Lord's supper. Therefore the chapter in 1 Corinthians that we have read becomes very precious as to the heart. Really the section begins with verse 17, but I was thinking of the heart. It says "*I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you" -- I take that to be the Lord's own body -- "this do in remembrance of me". That is the memorial, "In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying" -- the word 'supped' there means a meal, a full meal -- "saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until He come. So that whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty in respect of the body and of the blood of the Lord". So that it is the Lord's own personal body.
A.J.G. Would you say what was in your mind in having Jeremiah read?
{110}
J.T. Well, to show that the Lord Himself referred to it. That the Lord Himself should introduce this remarkable passage is very striking, and I think it points to the wonderfulness of the dispensation in which we are. We can hardly refer to anything fuller than that. What a time we are in, and what enjoyment we should have, this very moment, in the Lord's supper, and what flows from it.
Ques. So that joy and love are combined in relation to the cup of the new covenant?
J.T. Just so, and the order of things too. God takes occasion, so to speak, to stress the idea of order, for He is the God of order.
A.B. Would the writing on the heart have in mind permanent impressions on the saints?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, the heart being the centre of affections.
R.W.S. What is the point of "after having supped ..." -- for ourselves?
J.T. 'Supped', according to the foot note, means a full meal, and that is what the Corinthians were doing; they were eating a meal, which was very wrong; it was disorderly. They should not have done so; they should have done what we are doing now, and rightly doing, and that is just taking a very small part of the bread, and drinking a very small part of the cup. It is not the idea of a meal at all. Meals belong to our houses. The Corinthians were having a meal, and, in fact, it would seem that they were really getting drunk; they were getting under the influence of liquor. It would seem so.
W.S.S. Is it necessary to keep in mind in what we are considering, that the new covenant was made with Israel and not with the assembly, except that the assembly comes into the spirit of it now?
J.T. Just so. We have it, thank God, and the devil is not taking it away from us. We think of what has taken place during the last 130 years, and
{111}
the devil has sought to break it up, but God is helping us to hold to the truth of the Lord's supper, and all that enters into it. I believe we have been helped greatly in the last forty or fifty years as to the details of the Lord's supper.
F.C.H. You used the word 'salvaged' some years ago in regard of the truth in the Old Testament, how that the assembly is the depository of what is salvaged from the Old as well as having the light of all that is coming in.
J.T. Yes. 'Salvaged' is hardly good enough. If I used it then, well, I would not use it now, because the question of the Spirit is the point. The Spirit holds things together, so we have the whole idea, and I do not think the word 'remnant' is suitable, it is not really great enough. The whole idea of the Lord's supper has been revived and God is helping us to keep it.
Ques. I notice that at the Supper the expression "the cup of the Lord" is seldom or never used. Brethren often speak of the cup of the new covenant, which actually is not a scriptural expression, but why is it that "the cup of the Lord" is not used?
J.T. I think it should be, because it is the Lord's supper, and the cup of the Lord too, "The Lord's supper" and "the cup of the Lord" are both right scriptural terms. Do you use it here, in this meeting?
Rem. No. The expression 'the cup of the new covenant' is often used, but I do not find it anywhere. We get "the cup of blessing", and "the Lord's cup", and "the cup of the Lord", but not actually 'the cup of the new covenant'.
J.T. Well, I expect if you lead in that, you will be helped, and the brethren will follow you.
A.J.G. Does not the apostle stress the lordship, of Christ in relation to the cup where things were being allowed that were a denial of His authority?
{112}
J.T. Just so, I think the lordship of Christ is bound up with *that* expression.
H.A.H. Does the mind come in in relation to the new covenant? Here in Jeremiah it is "inward parts". In Hebrews it is "mind and heart" and "heart and mind". Would the mind link with the calling of the Lord to mind at the Supper?
J.T. Just so. The mind is used earlier in the book. It says in @1 Corinthians 2, "*We* have the mind of Christ". The mind, therefore, should be greatly stressed as to the Lord's supper. It is largely a question of the mind, although, as we have also mentioned today, the heart is the centre of affections. We have just mentioned that, but the mind is very important; I can see that clearly.
Ques. When @Jeremiah 31 is quoted in @Hebrews 8 it says, "because all shall know me in themselves". Does the added thought -- "in themselves" -- include the inward consciousness of the mind and heart?
J.T. Just so, and it would show the working of the Spirit in us. The Spirit of God is in us, and the temple of the Holy Spirit is the body of the believer, so that "in themselves" would mean that. How closely the thing comes to us personally!
{113}
CROYDON -- READING (2)
@2 Corinthians 5: 1 - 21
J.T. It seems as if we should go on with this epistle, although it had not been intended to go beyond the third chapter, but it has occurred to me since the morning meeting here that, in view of what preceded in the first epistle and so far in this epistle, the thought before us should be preparation for heaven rather than fitness for testimony here on earth and the service of God here upon earth. The first epistle seems to have in mind the service of God here upon earth and all that is suitable to it, but it seems now as if this second epistle should be in mind. It is not to ignore what has gone before in the first epistle, but the thought of our going to heaven and fitness for that is in mind now. It may seem a rather high intention, but I believe the Lord will help us at this time to consider it. The Lord's coming is so near that we should all be thinking of our fitness for heaven. Oftentimes it has been stressed that fitness for earth is more important, but I think it is due to God that we should have fitness for heaven in mind too, because it is a question of what God has prepared for those that love Him. "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God". So that it is thought that this chapter would help us. First there is the idea of our tabernacle house, which is liable to be destroyed, and in view of the building from God eternal in the heavens, we can well afford to accept it. Some are old and expect to go to be with the Lord, but as far as one is concerned the thought has come that instead of death we should be
{114}
thinking of preparing for the translation. It says in @1 Thessalonians 4: "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord". It seems as if the brethren should have it pressed upon them that the Lord's coming is very, very imminent. Of course, that has been said constantly for many, many years, but it looks as if we ought to have a little insight into the signs of the times, and see that it must be; it must be very, very imminent. Hence it is due to God that there should be preparation for it. There is, of course, preparation for the service of God down here, because that is also due to Him. There is that service and there is what is to be for Him eternally. He must have something in mind for Himself, and He has too, and so we have the idea of the "minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man". Although that may be for the present time, yet it still bears on the thought of going to be with the Lord.
P.L. Would the experience of Paul and the thought of "a man in Christ" fit into your suggestion?
J.T. The reference to the "man in Christ" is the end of the whole book, and what you quote is in entire keeping with the remarks that have been made.
H.H. Should we not then keep in mind that a good bit has to be done after the rapture? I mean in the millennial ways of God on earth, and so on.
J.T. Quite so.
H.H. Might we refer to Habakkuk. It says the vision is written on tablets that he may run that
{115}
readeth it. That implies moving quickly. It also says the vision hasteth to the end. Does not that justify what you have been saying that there has got to be quick movement with the saints at the present time?
J.T. Just so, in view of readiness.
H.G.H. So this scripture refers to that which we know? Should it suggest that there should be definiteness in our thoughts in relation to it?
J.T. It is a statement of assurance. It is a sort of winding up of things to a finish. "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God". A building from God -- there is a sure end to the thing both for God and for us. As regards ourselves, therefore, the thing is readiness.
W.S. Does the use of the little word *if* mean that the apostle had the possible coming of the Lord in mind?
J.T. Quite so, but it is the idea of assurance, "If our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have ..." Now the 'if' bears on that; we have something certain, and that certainty often works out in the sense of being assured by being ready for translation, because it is due to God that we should be ready and not be careless.
A.J.G. Is "the earnest of the Spirit" brought in as helping that?
J.T. Just so; I thought that, and I suppose the bearing of the earnest is eternity -- eternal conditions that we are going into. He is the earnest of that.
P.H.H. Is this entirely from the divine side, or does responsibility enter into it?
J.T. I think responsibility does enter into it, because the word bears on that. "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God". What we know affords
{116}
certainty, but still it is the certainty that requires preparation.
Ques. Does it not flow out of the previous verses at the end of chapter 4?
J.T. It is a steady working up of a system of truth. The "for" refers to a sequence in connection with what preceded it.
Ques. It says: "For our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen". Is that not Paul's outlook?
J.T. Very good.
F.C.H. Does the thought of destroying include that the power of Satan may go to that length in regard to the believer's body?
J.T. Well, I think it is not simply the power of Satan, but what may happen in the sense of death, falling asleep.
F.C.H. I was thinking of what is said in the previous chapter, "cast down, but not destroyed". I wondered if the word 'destruction', or being destroyed, is stronger than dissolution.
J.T. It is the sequence, I think. "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed" -- that is what might happen through death -- "we have a building from God". It is what we have in view of that: "A house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". That is, we have that for our eternal portion.
R.W.S. The apostle Paul seems to have had the decision in his own hands as to whether he would depart or whether he would remain for the progress of the saints. Is there something in that?
J.T. Just so. In Philippians, he decided in favour of the saints, that he would stay here for their sake. Is that your thought?
{117}
R.W.S. And I wondered if it does not work out today, if the brethren value a minister and ask the Lord to retain him with us, He will hear us. Is that going too far?
J.T. Just so. I do not see why any of us -- if we are assured and it is proved that we are of usefulness in the Lord's service and of usefulness to the saints -- might not confidently expect that God would answer our prayers. I certainly think so myself, as far as I am concerned. I can count on God for what is right to be done, and seek to promote it and to be ready for it, and not in any way to interfere with it. Why not? We ought to be confident, and have confidence in God as to all matters. We are about to enter into eternity and we ought to have confidence in God to be ready, and that He will help us. At the same time, as far as we are concerned, we ought to be doing all that is within our reach to be in accord with the mind of God. Why should we not? It is a question really of responsibility.
F.C.H. Is that seen in verse 9, "Wherefore also we are zealous, whether present or absent, to be agreeable to him"?
J.T. Exactly.
P.L. So that Enoch, pleasing God, was translated.
J.T. Just so. He was the seventh from Adam, which is a matter of account. Would you kindly quote that passage, please?
P.L. @Genesis 5: 21: "And Enoch lived sixty-five years, and begot Methushelah. And Enoch walked with God after he had begotten Methushelah three hundred years, and begot sons and daughters. And all the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty-five years. And Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God took him".
J.T. God was thoroughly with Enoch, and Enoch was thoroughly with God too. "He was not, for God took him". God worked out the thought
{118}
exactly according to Enoch's plan. Why should we not expect that? I do not see why we should not, but then the idea or element of responsibility must not be forgotten, and it runs on to the last moment of our history here.
P.H.H. What was in your mind in relation to Enoch being the seventh from Adam?
J.T. That is what Scripture says. It was a question of time. He had come on from the first man that was created, he had come on from that time, and now the question is what the result was in his case; not in Adam's case, but in his case.
P.H.H. You mean it would represent a perfect result?
J.T. Exactly. It began early that believers should have the idea of responsibility always before them, and therefore the end should be according to the mind of God, and, of course, God will be with us in doing that. So that God took Enoch; God finished the matter, but it was in accord with Enoch's thought too.
P.H.H. Because he prophesied?
J.T. Quite so; he was a prophet.
P.H.H. It says, He "prophesied also as to these, saying, Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads" and so on.
H.H. The saints are heavenly, would heaven therefore put in its claim for them? They belong there.
J.T. Quite so. @Hebrews 11 would show that -- "of whom the world was not worthy". There is a place for them elsewhere; this world is not worthy of them. Nor is it worthy of us today. The world is not worthy of the saints, who walk in the truth, in the light of the gospel and in the light of the assembly, and in the light of the coming of the Lord. The world is not worthy of us.
{119}
H.F.N. Is the same thought as you have been speaking of given us by Peter when he says, "All these things then being to be dissolved, what ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness, waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God". Is that the same exercise in Peter?
J.T. Quite so; and so we have the idea of counting, or length of time. It says a thousand years is as one day, and one day as a thousand years; that is to say, it is the idea of counting time, so that we can come into accord with the mind of God as to it.
Ques. Why does it say in Hebrews, "By faith Enoch was translated"? How does faith enter into it?
J.T. I suppose the idea is to stress what characterises our own period; that is to say, the period in which Paul wrote. It is the faith period. In the chapter we have read it says, "we walk by faith, not by sight", but presently, in the millennium, it will be by sight, because there will be measurement of time.
A.J.G. Enoch walking with God would certainly be occupied with unseen things and not with seen things.
J.T. Just so, and then there is the time -- he was seventh from Adam. He does not say that himself, it is a question of God, and it says, "God took him".
H.H. Would the light of these things in the souls of the saints at the present time be faith?
J.T. Certainly; it is the characteristic of the whole dispensation in which we are. It is the dispensation, not of sight, but of faith.
A.B. Is the pleasure of God always to precede the thought of translation?
J.T. I think so. I think God would say that they are worthy. That is how God would reckon, but then He reckons that according to what we are, our conduct and walk, "We walk by faith", it says,
{120}
"not by sight". So in @Ephesians 2 there is something that would bear on that. It says there "For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them". That is the idea, that the whole matter will be worked out according to God.
A.J.G. Is the light of the judgment-seat of Christ brought in to help us in that, as regards our conduct?
J.T. That is the next thing we have to come to. So it goes on: "For indeed in this we groan, ardently desiring to have put on our house which is from heaven" -- we are desiring that house -- not death, but we are desiring that house. "Ardently desiring to have put on our house which is from heaven; if indeed being also clothed we shall not be found naked". That is to say, we will not be found naked, we will have a body from God from heaven, if we have not got this body. "For indeed we who are in the tabernacle groan, being burdened; while yet we do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed, that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit". The earnest of the Spirit refers to an eternal portion -- we have the earnest of that.
Ques. Is there a reason why the believer's body in this passage is called a building and a house?
J.T. I think it is the thought of God. There is a similar word in @Genesis 2. Adam was caused to sleep, but then a rib was taken out of him and out of that rib God built a woman -- He *built* it -- that is the idea, and that refers to the assembly and runs right through Scripture.
A.J.G. Does it include the thought of permanency in contrast to what is provisional? It is called a building, "a house not made with hands, eternal in
{121}
the heavens", in contrast to an earthly tabernacle house.
J.T. Quite so.
P.H.H. The term 'house' is used in the setting of weakness in the end of Ecclesiastes -- the break-up of the body -- "in the day when the keepers of the house tremble", and so on, and "those that look out of the windows are darkened, and the doors are shut toward the street".
J.T. That is written for old men, of whom there are several here.
P.H.H. But what you are saying now about the building would be in contrast to that -- it would be the eternal thing?
J.T. The eternal thing -- just so. We are going on to permanency. It is wonderful that we have such a prospect and it is so near to us. "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God" -- that is not simply apostolic; it is all of us who are christians -- "who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit. Therefore we are always confident" -- that is the state of our attitude -- "always confident, and know that while present in the body we are absent from the Lord". When present with the Lord, we shall be in our future bodies, that is, the bodies we are coming to.
F.C.H. Does "this very thing" refer only to the body of glory, or does it comprise more than that?
J.T. I think it refers to the body of glory; that is the idea. God is working in us for what is permanent, not for a moment, but what is permanent. That is to say, God has had in His mind throughout, from the start in creating man, what is permanent, and in view of the Son becoming man, that everything would be in keeping with Him, in due time.
H.H. Is not the thought of the Holy Spirit in us a side of the truth which has been revived within
{122}
the last year or so, and is not that an important feature in connection with the nearness of the end?
J.T. I think so, because it is just about two or three years ago since the full thought of the Spirit has been revived. It was taken from @Numbers 21, because the Spirit can be spoken *to* as well as that He should speak to us. It has been strenuously resisted by some, but I think the resistance is gradually disappearing.
H.H. I thought too, the Holy Spirit in us is so set against what is not of God in us. We are in a mixed condition, and there is that which is not of the Spirit in us. Is not the Spirit of God setting Himself very definitely against that, in order that we might be ready for glory?
J.T. Just so. He is the great Occupant of our house; I mean of those who have the Spirit.
A.J.G. Is this thought of the "house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens", the idea of a body that is capable of expressing the treasure that is in the believer, the knowledge of God?
J.T. I think so, I just wonder how it is going to be, and whether we are quite equal to it when it comes, and what we are going to be according to the mind of God; what we are going to display; what *He* is going to display in us. We ought not to be beyond thinking of it, so that we will be ready, in some sense, for it when the time comes, because "we are members of his body; we are of his flesh, and of his bones", we are told. Each one of us is a member, but still it is all one idea. It is a question of Christ's body, and the fulness in which He is to be expressed.
J.P. Is the house a collective thought?
J.T. I think so. It is not our houses, but our house. That is to say, the believer's house, taking in the whole idea of christianity, the whole idea of the assembly. Think of the vastness of it -- the work
{123}
has gone on for nearly two thousand years and it is still proceeding.
H.H. If you think of this, say, on the one hand the apostle Paul, and on the other hand a man like Mr. Darby, in what relation would they stand the one to the other in the eternal state? I mean there is an individual distinction, is there not, between the saints?
J.T. Surely. I suppose you would hardly say that any two are exactly alike, because the variety of God is wonderful. Even in the stars there is variety, and then there is all the variety on the earth, too, and it is all of God.
H.W.A. In connection with these three chapters, would it be right to think of the one we had this morning as transformation, and then chapter 4 as transparency, and now this one to be viewed more in the light of translation? I was thinking of chapter 4 -- commending the truth to every man's conscience; he was a citizen of God's city.
J.T. That is what was in mind when I started to speak about this chapter, and so we will read the end of the chapter again: "Be reconciled to God. Him who knew not sin he has made sin for us, that *we* might become God's righteousness in him". I should really have begun earlier, but that is the idea -- it is to prepare us for heaven and to make us ready for heaven. All this that we are speaking of has all that in view; it is not simply what our service is to be actually here; that is more in the first epistle, especially beginning at chapter 11, but what is more in mind is preparedness here in our bodies for heaven.
P.L. Would the heavenly city be included in that thought, "*we* might become God's righteousness in him"? It says of the city, "having the glory of God".
J.T. Just so; answering to "him who knew not sin he has made sin for us". Think of the wonder
{124}
of that passage: "Him who knew not sin he has made sin for us, that *we* might become God's righteousness in him". That, of course, is an eternal thought, for the idea of God's righteousness is to go on eternally. Why should the word 'righteousness' be used? I think God so values righteousness that He has kept it and He is going to keep it; it is simply what is right, but it is God's righteousness.
P.L. "New heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness", @2 Peter 3: 13.
J.T. Just so.
H.H. That idea, being made sin, could only have come from the divine mind.
J.T. I would say that entirely.
W.S.S. Would the constraining love of Christ and the light of new creation be important elements in the preparing for the heavenly condition?
J.T. Surely.
H.P.W. You spoke about star differing from star in glory. You had some thought in that. Are there not to be all kinds, yet will not every star have a glory of its own?
J.T. That is just what I was thinking might come out. There is a great variety in stars.
H.P.W. I had in my mind the very precious thought that not only will the Lord come out in a glory all His own, but that He will be glorified in His saints, in the variety of glory seen in them.
J.T. "Glorified in his saints" -- that is a wonderful expression.
Rem. So that the assembly is one thought, one pearl, but the brethren of Christ and the sons of God bring in this great thought of distinction.
J.T. Quite so.
A.J.G. And yet, by divine workmanship, are they not so set together that there is nothing superfluous and nothing lacking?
{125}
J.T. Just so. It is due to God that we should recognise that with Him everything is perfect.
W.F. It says of Moses and Elias that they appeared in glory. Does that show that the distinctiveness of the believer remains?
J.T. Quite so. The disciples could discern Moses and Elias. They could discern the distinctiveness of each one. Think of those two expanded into myriads of people, and all like Christ! Think of the magnificence of that!
P.L. Would each star having its name fit in? It says "He counteth the number of the stars; he giveth names to them all", @Psalm 147: 4.
J.T. Just so.
W.C. The Lord speaks of those that are "counted worthy to have part in that world", and then He speaks of God as "the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob", @Luke 20: 35, 37. God is mentioned in relation to each name.
J.T. Just so. It says, "God ... is not God of the dead but of the living". We are all living, for all live to Him. That does not mean the wicked dead live to God, surely; but those that are alive and according to His purpose all live to Him.
P.H.H. One of God's early words to Abraham was about numbering the stars. It says, "Look now toward the heavens, and number the stars, if thou be able to number them". But this is an additional thought, bringing in their glory as well as their number.
J.T. So that we might well look at @1 Corinthians 15 to get a word on that.
A.J.G. @1 Corinthians 15: 35 - 50, "But some one will say, How are the dead raised? and with what body do they come? Fool; what *thou* sowest is not quickened unless it die. And what thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall be, but a bare grain: it may be of wheat, or some one of the rest: and God
{126}
gives to it a body as he has pleased, and to each of the seeds its own body. Every flesh is not the same flesh, but one is of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another flesh of birds, and another of fishes. And there are heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies, but different is the glory of the heavenly, different that of the earthly, one the sun's glory, and another the moon's glory, and another the stars glory; for star differs from star in glory. Thus also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruptibility. It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body: if there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual one. Thus also it is written, The first man Adam became a living soul; the last Adam a quickening spirit. But that which is spiritual was not first, but that which is natural, then that which is spiritual, the first man out of the earth, made of dust; the second man, out of heaven. Such as he made of dust, such also those made of dust; and such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones. And as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly one. But this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom, nor does corruption inherit incorruptibility".
J.T. We have already touched on this same chapter in what we said at the beginning, as to our being prepared for the heavenly, so I think you might as well read to the last verse of the chapter.
A.J.G. Verses 51 - 58: "Behold, I tell you a mystery: We shall not all fall asleep, but we shall all be changed, in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and *we* shall be changed. For this corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality.
{127}
But when this corruptible shall have put on incorruptibility, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall come to pass the word written: Death has been swallowed up in victory. Where, O death, is thy sting? where, O death, thy victory? Now the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin the law; but thanks to God, who gives us the victory by our Lord Jesus Christ. So then, my beloved brethren, be firm, immovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord".
J.T. I hope the brethren were all following in the great appreciation that there should be with us of this wonderful chapter, and all these wonderful things we have been able to say about @2 Corinthians 5. It is a question of what we have been able to say, because all is written for our learning. We are now dealing with the things that are peculiarly for us, and so I believe the Lord has led us, without our thinking of it at the beginning of the reading, to all these great things that we have come to now, and the question is therefore whether we can go on further in the chapter so as to get all that there is in it. We might therefore proceed from verse 5: "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit". We have the Spirit already in us, so that we are well capable of dealing with these things in that sense.
N.K.M. Would you say a word as to the bearing of the judgment-seat of Christ upon what you have been drawing our attention to.
J.T. We might as well proceed, if you will read on a little further in the chapter, because there are so many things in it -- so glorious.
A.J.G. @2 Corinthians 5: 6 - 10: "Therefore we are always confident, and know that while present in the body we are absent from the Lord, (for we walk by
{128}
faith, not by sight;) we are confident, I say, and pleased rather to be absent from the body and present with the Lord. Wherefore also we are zealous, whether present or absent, to be agreeable to him. For we must all be manifested before the judgment-seat of the Christ, that each may receive the things done in the body, according to those he has done, whether it be good or evil".
J.T. The point, therefore, in view of the last question that has been raised is this matter of the things done in the body; what is available to us and what is possible to us, as the word is here: "We are always confident, and know that while present in the body we are absent from the Lord, (for we walk by faith, not by sight;) we are confident, I say, and pleased rather to be absent from the body and present with the Lord. Wherefore also we are zealous ..." Now that is the point, that we are zealous, "whether present or absent, to be agreeable to him". That is the great point; to be agreeable to God, just as Enoch had the testimony, that he pleased God.
Ques. So that there would be a present correspondence to what would come out at the judgment-seat of Christ?
J.T. Just so. So that when we come out in glory we shall not be very different from what we are down here, because we have been walking according to this chapter.
E.C.M. The woman in @John 4 in going back to the city says, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done, is not he the Christ?" Would that suggest something of the present aspect of the judgment-seat of Christ?
J.T. I would say so. She had come under the Lord's touch, and everything had been changed for her. But then she left her water-pot, meaning she is leaving things here for the things that are there -- the coming glory.
{129}
P.H.H. What is the thought of receiving the things done in the body?
J.T. I suppose it is the idea of reward; the things done are to be received in that sense, as a reward. But you had something in your mind.
P.H.H. The saints will be in their glorified condition, so that it is not in any sense a question of penalty, you would say?
J.T. God will know exactly how to measure things, and you may come short in that sense. You may come short in the sense that you might have been more. Therefore there is always the suggestion of responsibility to acquire all that is possible.
P.L. And a sense of loss, do you think?
J.T. Well, just so.
H.H. Would the judgment-seat bring in the kingdom side of things?
J.T. I suppose so. It is the judgment-seat of Christ; not of God, but of Christ.
H.H. You will not be rewarded for what you never did, I mean, would not some be higher up, so to say, on the kingdom side of things than others?
J.T. Quite so. Although there will be no room for regrets, yet, at the same time, there is the actual fact that there might have been more. But still I do not believe there is any idea of room for regrets at all in eternal conditions.
Rem. So that Paul said even to the Philippians: "I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more".
J.T. Quite so; that is good, "More and more".
Eu.R. He says the same to the Thessalonians in the chapter that gives us the rapture. "Even as ye have received from us how ye ought to walk and please God, even as ye also do walk, that ye would abound still more".
Ques. Why does he bring in the terror of the Lord?
{130}
J.T. It would be the negative incentive, I suppose, of the very things we have been talking about. What do you say yourself?
Rem. He brings it in in connection with persuading men, not exactly as applying it to himself.
J.T. Quite so, but the saints might be said to be the men, too. "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men, but have been manifested to God, and I hope also that we have been manifested in your consciences. For we do not again commend ourselves to you, but we are giving to you occasion of boast in our behalf, that ye may have such with those boasting in countenance, and not in heart. For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God". He is speaking of himself now, but then he is blending it with the general ideas that are before him, "For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or are sober, it is for you. For the love of the Christ constrains us, having judged this, that one died for all, then all have died; and he died for all, that they who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them and has been raised. So that *we* henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer. So if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold all things have become new, and all things are of the God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and given to us the ministry of that reconciliation, how that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning to them their offences; and putting in us the word of that reconciliation". Well now, I think we have a wonderful line of things here to fill out our chapter, because there is so much in view of our being translated to heaven. It is really one of the most glorious chapters.
{131}
P.H.H. Does the thought of the judgment-seat enable us to pass over into the atmosphere of what is eternal, without any sense of being wrongly there, or unsuitably there?
J.T. I think we ought always to challenge ourselves, at least from time to time, as to whether we are conforming to what is set out before us. Christ is the pattern and we are to be conformed to the image of God's Son. We should therefore have these things always before us, and, of course, Philippians helps us greatly, as we have already remarked, but this chapter is quite enough. As we are here today I think we should keep ourselves to it, because it is so full of glory, and expectation in view of the Lord's coming. In fact, I have been impressed all this afternoon, since I left the house where I was, until now, that the Lord would have us to look at all this in view of the imminency of the Lord's coming, and to be ready for it.
H.H. Christ is there in the new condition. Would that apply to where it speaks of our not knowing Christ after the flesh? Does the thought of new condition come in there?
J.T. "So that *we* henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer". I think the apostle Paul is really speaking of his own experiences, and anticipations, too. But he is also speaking to the saints at Corinth, and he wants them to get all his mind, and to come into it, and be conformed accordingly.
Ques. Would you say a little on the difference between reconciliation and new creation?
J.T. It is a comparison that we have often had. Reconciliation is one thing and new creation is another. Reconciliation is to be conformable to the mind of God; we are conformed to the mind of God
{132}
-- that would be reconciliation; but new creation is absolute; it is finished.
A.J.G. So that reconciliation has reference to a past history and condition of things?
J.T. Just so. New creation, of course, *is* new creation; it is a finished idea.
Rem. It never was anything else but of God.
J.T. Just so -- "all things are of the God ..."
W.S. Would it be right to say that reconciliation is objective, and new creation subjective?
J.T. In a certain sense I think I would go with that. We had a good deal of it in Mr. Raven's time that illuminated us all.
P.L. And a helpful reading in Park Street in 1922 on this subject. You urged that reconciliation was in the mind of God. Mr. Raven having presented it to us that where there was distance now there is complacency.
J.T. That is good. I think I remember it now, as you go over it.
E.S.H. Does the "in Christ" enable us to pass into what is wholly new creation?
J.T. Well, just so. The acceptance of the idea of "in Christ" in the mind, would enable us to lay hold of things, especially when we remember that the Spirit of God indwells us, for He is operating all the time in us; that is, if we let Him.
F.C.H. "Given to us the ministry of that reconciliation" and "putting in us the word of that reconciliation", are they both apostolic or does the second one include the saints?
J.T. Verse 18 is apostolic.
F.C.H. Yes, and then verse 19: "How that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning to them their offences; and putting in us the word of that reconciliation". Would you bring the saints in there?
{133}
J.T. The "in us" is a question of Paul's ability and service, I would think. It says, "putting in us the word" -- 'the word' there is the expression of that reconciliation and that really is a subjective idea.
Ques. So that they were in accord with their ministry?
J.T. Quite so. And then the next verse says: "We are ambassadors therefore for Christ". The word 'ambassadors' would mean they are representatives in the ministry -- Paul was representative in his ministry -- it is apostolic in that verse -- "We are ambassadors therefore for Christ, God as it were beseeching by us" -- God beseeching by Paul, in other words -- "we entreat for Christ, Be reconciled to God". That is what he is saying; he is entreating the Corinthians to be reconciled to God. It is a great and full thought.
Ques. Would you say a word to enlarge the thought of "God was in Christ, reconciling the world"?
J.T. It is a glorious gospel thought, that is what I would say. It is the full glorious thought that was in Paul, "How that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning to them their offences ..." and again "putting in us ..." that is to say the full idea of the gospel put into Paul; it is Paul's gospel. Peter had a gospel, too, but Paul's gospel is the supreme one.
P.H.H. Does the idea of reconciliation enable us to enter fully into the counsels of God?
J.T. I think it does, because you feel that you are restful -- you are at home, as it were, literally. You are at home in the full thought of God. You know Him so well that you are at home in His presence, and that, of course, leads you to heaven itself.
{134}
Ques. Would the words 'beseeching' and 'entreating' show that this matter of reconciliation was a feeling matter, both with God and with the apostle?
J.T. I think so, I think Paul would reflect what was the mind of God, and what was in the heart of God. So that we are gradually coming into the fulness of things in the end of the chapter, the fulness of the gospel and then the fulness of the ministry of the assembly, too. That is, all would be in Christ practically in His service down here, and it is a question of how much we are getting out of it at a time like this.
J.G. Is the best robe of @Luke 15 linked with reconciliation?
J.T. I think so. There are a good many dear brethren here who have preached from that chapter, and no doubt we can get a good word about it if we all say what is in our minds.
Eu.R. I think you said in that reading referred to, that justification clears me but reconciliation retains me for the pleasure of God.
J.T. Well, that is good; that has added a little to what Mr. L. said.
P.H.H. Would the best robe go further than reconciliation? Would it bring in the full thought of what Christ is in heaven?
J.T. Well, I think the best robe is Christ; it is what He is Himself. We are to reflect what He is. I suppose the assembly will be the full thought of what Christ is; she is said to be His fulness.
E.S.H. Would it be reconciliation, when the father kissed the prodigal?
J.T. Well, I suppose it would be. There would be correspondence with the prodigal in every way, you might say, as in the presence of God.
H.H. He was fit to wear the best robe, was he not? "Bring out the best robe".
J.T. Quite so.
{135}
P.H.H. Were you going to say some more about the assembly being the fulness of Christ?
J.T. It says, "the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". What do you say yourself?
P.H.H. I was thinking something like that. Would it be the idea of the complete expression of what is in Christ coming out in the assembly, like Eve, for instance, the woman?
J.T. Quite so. Someone has referred to Adam saying, She is myself over again. That commends itself to me, and I was touched by it at the time. It is as if the Lord would say, It is myself over again.
F.C.H. We were noticing in verse 5: "Now He that has wrought us for this very thing is God", and then in the last verse we get, "Him who knew not sin he" -- that is, God -- "has made sin for us". How wonderful it is that the same God who has wrought us for this very thing is the God who made Christ sin for us.
J.T. And the full result is for God too. "That *we* might become God's righteousness in him".
Ques. Has that last statement reference to eternity, or does it include the present time also?
J.T. I think it is a full reference in a very wonderful way, to what was in the mind of God. "That *we* might become God's righteousness in him". So that we would reflect God Himself; what He is as righteous.
Rem. What we are now and what we shall be.
J.T. It is a gospel statement, really, you might say, and it goes on -- it is perfect. It leads on to the end, the fulness of the thought of God. It is God's righteousness; it is a question of what answers to Christ being made sin, and reflects what God Himself is. It is, you might say, a finish to the whole subject here.
{136}
W.S.S. Does it necessarily lead on to the thought of the new heavens and new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness?
J.T. I think so. It is in accord with that.
Ques. I should like to ask, would the beseeching in verse 20 apply to man generally or to the Corinthians: "Be reconciled to God".
J.T. It is really, you might say, abstract. It does not say definitely who it is. It just says, "Be reconciled". This is what he says really in effect, "We entreat" -- it does not say whom he entreats, it is a general thought -- "we entreat for Christ, Be reconciled to God". It is a general thought, I think, and you cannot fix it on any thing or person. It is a general thought conveying the mind of God as to persons, whoever they may be, and it shows that God has that in His mind for them.
{137}
CROYDON -- READING (3)
@John 4: 1 - 30
J.T. This scripture is suggested partly because it is the first day of the week. It has come before us, from time to time, that there should be recognition of the day, and that we should seek to bring the service of God into it. This section therefore of chapter 4 affords a good example as a subject, for the service of God peculiarly enters into it, not simply in an ordinary sense, but in a worshipful sense. The thought of worship comes into the passage peculiarly, the Lord referring to it in the discourse with the woman of Samaria. He says "The Father seeks such as his worshippers", but the conversation with the woman opens it up, she introducing the subject of worship.
W.S. How does the unsatisfying character of the waters of this world contribute to the matter we are now speaking about?
J.T. It contributes to it negatively. The Lord is said to be wearied with the way He had come, and then it says, "A woman comes out of Samaria to draw water. Jesus says to her, Give me to drink (for his disciples had gone away into the city that they might buy provisions). The Samaritan woman therefore says to him, How dost thou, being a Jew, ask to drink of me who am a Samaritan woman? for Jews have no intercourse with Samaritans. Jesus answered and said to her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". Now the matter is thus introduced, the woman saying further that she discerned that the Lord was a prophet. It is a question, therefore, where our discernment is in a time like this, so that we should get something out
{138}
of it, discerning that the Lord is a prophet, and discerning the spirit of prophecy.
Ques. Is the greatness of the Person as the Giver of the Spirit in view?
J.T. I think so, and that is in keeping with the spirit of John's gospel; it is a question of the greatness of the Person of Christ. So in the first chapter we read, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" and so forth. The subject is introduced there, and it is a question of the greatness of Christ, who He was. "All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being".
Ques. Does that link on with verse 10 of this chapter where the Lord says, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink ..."?
J.T. "Who it is". Quite so. The Lord says elsewhere, "Thou shalt see greater things than these". He always brings in what is to be seen as great.
W.S.S. I think when we were looking at this passage here some years ago, it was suggested that the woman would be suggestive of the assembly. That seems to lift our thoughts on to a high level in relation to the passage.
J.T. That is, the woman as converted. Quite so. Before she was converted, she would not be illustrative of the assembly; you do not mean that, of course.
W.S.S. No. At that time we were considering the thought of man and woman, and the Lord addresses her here as "Woman".
J.T. I think that is good. Perhaps we will be led on to the fulness of it, so that the assembly is in view, because it is said in the end of the passage that she left her water-pot, meaning that she saw the end of natural things. She came to the end of natural
{139}
things, she "left her water-pot and went away into the city, and says to the men, Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done, is not he the Christ?". So that the thing came into her mind that He was a great Person. He was the Christ. The Lord, in fact, had told her that He was the Christ, which is a very remarkable thing. It is doubtful that He told anybody formally that He was the Christ, save this woman.
W.C. When the woman says, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet", would that link on with Joseph's cup -- the thought of the one who divines and discerns? I was thinking that the woman had some sense that she was in the presence of the true Joseph. He is alluded to previously in the chapter.
J.T. Just so. The well is implied in that, and would you say, leading up to the whole thought of the water that the Lord proposed to give.
W.C. Quite. I was thinking of what was said yesterday about the cup of the Lord, and wondering whether it would fit in with that. It is the challenge to our hearts as to conditions, so that there might be no hindrance to the flow of worship.
J.T. Very good. I think you would do well if you said more about the cup of the Lord.
W.C. It is connected with the thought of jealousy in @1 Corinthians 10. "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy?". I was thinking of the jealousy of love that would expose and deal with everything that might hinder the worship.
J.T. Just so.
A.J.G. Does the woman's action in leaving her water-pot indicate that she recognised that now she herself was to be a vessel of the Spirit?
J.T. That is just what I thought. Why should she carry a literal water-pot, when she had the spiritual water? "The water which I shall give him", the Lord says.
{140}
A.J.G. I wondered if that would be a good thing for every brother and sister to recognise fully, and whether the assembly would not greatly benefit if every brother and sister regarded themselves as vessels of the Spirit and therefore contributory to the service.
J.T. Yes.
H.G.H. In verse 10, where the Lord says, "If thou knewest the gift of God", is the Spirit referred to there?
J.T. I think so. The Lord really had that in His heart, when He says that. "Jesus answered and said to her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". That was what was in *His* mind. The great gift is the gift of eternal life. "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal".
E.S.H. The Lord Jesus had spoken in chapter 3, of speaking of heavenly things. Is this woman leaving her water-pot prepared to leave the things she would be drawing upon in regard of earth, but to live in heavenly things by the Spirit?
J.T. I suppose so. She left her water-pot, and then she became evangelical. It says, "The woman then left her water-pot and went away into the city, and says to the men, Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done, is not he the Christ?". So that I think, in going to the men, she became evangelical. Hitherto she might well be afraid to go to them, but she was not afraid to go to the men now. She did not seek out the women simply, she went to the men, and said, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done". I think she was wholly superior now to all the natural feelings that might have been with her. So she left her water-pot,
{141}
intending undoubtedly to go in for heavenly things, but then it was not only that but she went to the men. She was evangelical, and it is a good thing for sisters to learn to be evangelical and to be entirely free from natural thoughts.
P.L. So that it says in Philippians, "*our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens", and so on, and immediately afterwards we have the reference to the true yoke-fellow, and to those "who have contended along with me in the glad tidings".
J.T. You mean the woman symbolised that?
P.L. Yes, the evangelical spirit flowing out of the heavenly position.
J.T. Just so. In fact, the word 'them' in the passage you quote from Philippians is a feminine word, is it not?
P.L. That is right. It might read 'Those women'.
E.C.M. Does the idea of the living water suggest that the service of God is a living matter?
J.T. Well, just so. Peter said of the Lord, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". The service of God implies what is living. Is that what you meant?
E.C.M. Yes, and also the thought that the assembly is "the assembly of the living God".
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. When the Lord says, "who it is that says to thee", is He really referring back to what it says at the end of chapter 3, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand".
J.T. I suppose that is quite right.
H.H. Would you say a little as to eternal life in connection with the thought of the living water. We have the thought of eternal life in the previous chapter, and then it is brought forward into this chapter in verse 14, "the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life".
{142}
J.T. I think the idea in chapter 3 must enter into this, because it is a question of the gift of eternal life, and that must spring out of the fact that it is a question of the Spirit. "Springing up into eternal life" alludes to the Spirit, which is, of course, important now from the standpoint of the light into which the Spirit has brought Himself, that He is an Object. The Spirit is the power of eternal life. It is not simply a question of light, and that one can have light by believing, but the power of eternal life. The power of the Spirit works out into eternal life.
Ques. Is all that necessary if God is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth?
J.T. Just so. Our service therefore on the first day of the week must be the outcome of the Spirit in that sense.
Rem. I was wondering whether this woman depicted soul history with every one of us, if we are to form part of a vessel in which God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth. It involves detachment from what is not right, and becoming, as you have said, a vessel of the Spirit and receiving the knowledge of God and power to respond to it.
J.T. I think that is good. So that what comes out in connection with the woman is that the Lord raised the question of her having had five husbands; He said, "Go, call thy husband, and come here". It is as if He would bring out the polluted conditions in which she had been, but even that would not hinder Him in making her a suitable vessel for the service of God, because she left her water-pot, implying that she was to be a vessel herself. The whole subject now before us implies the service of God, and that is dependent upon vessels. Several things are mentioned in the case of Elijah in @1 Kings 17, and they are put into vessels. It reads: "And he arose and went to Zarephath; and when he came
{143}
to the entrance of the city, behold, a widow woman was there gathering sticks. And he called to her and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink. And she went to fetch it, and he called to her and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand. And she said, As Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse" (@1 Kings 17: 10 - 12). She was impoverished, it was only a little of everything, but whatever it was it was to be in a vessel, and in this chapter the woman herself is to be a vessel. She became a vessel after she had conversation with the Lord, so that I should think that the first day of the week now is a time for vessels, and vessels to be used in the service of God.
E.C.M. Would you connect the springing up with what you suggested this morning, in the word, calling forth all that is within us?
J.T. It would be that because it was a spiritual thought. You would not call upon what was within you other than what is spiritual. The thing would be out of all keeping with the position referred to here, if we referred to something, physical. It is something spiritual that is in mind in the suggestion of calling upon all that is within us.
G.C.S. Is the heart satisfied first? It says "whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst for ever". Is that a satisfied heart? One felt this morning it was satisfied hearts by the Holy Spirit enjoying His love that were available for the praise of God.
J.T. Quite so, and then it speaks about what it became in her. "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". Well now, that is something. What has happened? It is a change in the person
{144}
from mere water to what springs up into eternal life. There is a change in what it becomes *in* the believer.
Ques. So does the fountain indicate life and spontaneity?
J.T. Quite so, but it becomes something. There is a change implied, and we can easily challenge our own hearts as to whether there is a change in us inwardly, and the needed change which God demands from us.
Ques. Is the woman changing in verse 15?
J.T. "The woman says to him, Sir, give me this water, that I may not thirst nor come here to draw". Is that what you allude to?
Ques. Yes, because immediately the Lord says to her, "Go, call thy husband". Is she changing her head?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord implies that there must be a change, if there is anything at all to be in her. There must be a change.
A.W. "Whosoever drinks of the water ..." Does that involve intercourse with the Holy Spirit?
J.T. I would say that.
A.W. So we have a New Testament passage for speaking to the Spirit.
J.T. Quite so. Very good.
A.J.G. This change which you refer to -- "the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up ..." -- would that involve the Spirit's part in the service, giving a living touch to it so that there is a springing up?
J.T. Yes. What prevails on the first day of the week ought to be of that character, and the service of God, of course, would take on the character of springing up, because it is toward God really, but it becomes in a person, so there is something for God already in the person. If there is not a change of that kind, I would think there is not much evidence of the work of God in a man.
{145}
H.H. You get in the Old Testament, "Rise up, well! sing unto it". There is a power arising, is there not?
J.T. Quite so. There is something that is tangible, but spiritual. The nobles of the people sang. They sang *to* the well, which, as has been remarked, was typically speaking *to* the Spirit. That is what helped me some years ago, to refer to the Spirit as spoken to.
Ques. Would prophetic ministry have in view the promotion of this change with us?
J.T. It would seem so, so that I think we might go on to this matter of what the Lord said to her. He says, "Go, call thy husband, and come here. The woman answered and said, I have not a husband. Jesus says to her, Thou hast well said, I have not a husband; for thou hast had five husbands, and he whom now thou hast is not thy husband, this thou hast spoken truly. The woman says to him, Sir, I see that thou art a prophet. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship. Jesus says to her, Woman ..." That is, I think, the point where she comes into things of moral worth, when she is called a woman. It means that she is truly what she is, what God has made her creatively. The Lord recognises that she is that, that she has emerged from what she had been -- the wife of five husbands. She is now a true woman; I believe the Lord meant that, and I believe that all that follows is based on that. The Lord recognises her as being what she was creatively, in her own place.
H.H. When the Lord refers to the man who was not her husband, does the change come in there? I mean it was an unlawful link, was it not?
J.T. Well, quite. The Lord is really dealing with her morally. He is dealing with the moral condition
{146}
in which she had been, and that is the basis of what comes out as to worship, and all else.
H.H. And is not the moral side of things the point of importance for us? If that is not attended to, it would get in the way of what is spiritual.
J.T. Just so. Many things are allowed to get in the way of what is spiritual on the first day of the week.
Ques. Does not Paul strive for this with the Corinthians, when he speaks of their being espoused unto one man?
J.T. Just so. It is a remarkable thing, that he alludes to a feminine thought there, although the persons he spoke to were men as much as women. It shows that the feminine thought is applied to the assembly, and, of course, it must be if the assembly is to be espoused to Christ. That is the great point that will come out in due time, that the feminine thought must be in the assembly and the masculine in Christ Himself. I do not know whether the brethren go with what I am saying, but I am sure it is true, and the apostle alludes to it in the language he uses, "I have espoused you unto one man", and the espousal is of all the saints in Corinth. The word, 'espousal' would allude to a man and a woman; so that the assembly is to be regarded as espoused. The idea of the assembly is feminine, and the idea of the masculine is in Christ, because the assembly is espoused to one Man, and the one Man is Christ.
Ques. In the reference in @Hebrews 2, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" -- is that the feminine thought of the assembly?
J.T. Well, just so. In fact, we had that this morning, in connection with the service of the Son, the Lord Jesus, to the Father, "in the midst of the assembly". But I am glad you allude to the assembly as a feminine thought.
{147}
N.K.M. I think you stressed in your word that it was "the assembly", not "my assembly".
J.T. That is true too, and I think it just fits in to what is being said now. It is not simply "my assembly", the Lord says, but "the assembly", although the 'the' is not in the original literally, what Mr. Darby gives us is clearly right. The 'the' is right.
H.P.W. So it says in verse 29 of our chapter, "Is not he the Christ?". The "he" is the blessed Man, the Lord Jesus.
J.T. It is a masculine thought, you mean.
Ques. Would you say why the Lord uses the term "the true worshippers", in verse 23? What constitutes true worshippers?
J.T. We have to take the Lord's word. He used the word 'true' Himself. If He used the word 'true' He means it, and we have to follow it out, because the idea of worship is in view.
W.J. Is the thought of the feminine that she leans upon the arm of her beloved? "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?" @Song of Songs 8: 5. Is that a feminine thought?
J.T. "Her" would be, of course. Quite so.
W.J. And her attitude too is normal for the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. The Song of Solomon has been greatly used in modern times, and the feminine thought is much stressed in it, and then, as we have said, the masculine side is in the Lord Jesus Himself. The book begins with the feminine thought. Would you kindly look at the beginning of it and see how the feminine comes into it.
A.J.G. "The song of songs, which is Solomon's. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; for thy love is better than wine". That is evidently the feminine speaker.
{148}
J.T. Quite so. That is what I meant. This is the feminine speaker, and she is alluding to the masculine. *She* is speaking; she begins the book really.
A.M. Is the Lord reminding the woman in @John 4 of her femininity in asking her to give Him to drink? I was thinking back to @Genesis 24, and wondering whether it is not a right feminine movement to give *Him* to drink.
J.T. Quite so, but it is rather a long stretch to carry the thought here back to @Genesis 24. It would be a question of interpretation, therefore.
A.M. I was only thinking that the Lord waits on her to minister to Him. Is not that a very great element in the first part of the service, that *He* should be served.
J.T. I think we should say that the Lord, in all He had said at the outset, intended to bring out what was in *His* mind, and that she was to be the subject of it, but He does not come to it until He calls her 'Woman'.
Ques. So that the service of God was in the Lord's mind from the outset?
J.T. Quite so. That is just what it is.
E.C.M. Do you mean that the Lord must have the assembly for that? Is that the thought here? "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises".
J.T. Well, just so.
Eu.R. That verse comes forward from @Psalm 22, which is "Upon Aijeleth-Shahar", meaning 'the hind of the morning'.
J.T. Just so. It is the heading of the Psalm.
Eu.R. Is not the Lord likened in the Song of Songs to a hart, and there are allusions also to the hinds? Both are characterised by great resiliency of movement, and is not that what the service of God calls for?
{149}
J.T. Quite so, and "the hind of the morning" is the feminine thought.
P.L. The word 'hour' is used there, and in Mr. Darby's note to @1 John 2: 18, he refers to it as a period characterised by one thing, and hence looked at as only one time. It is what is supreme and characterised by one thing, and marked by intensity.
J.T. Quite so. Now we might proceed. It says in verse 14, "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life. The woman says to him, Sir, give me this water, that I may not thirst nor come here to draw. Jesus says to her, Go, call thy husband, and come here. The woman answered and said, I have not a husband. Jesus says to her, Thou hast well said, I have not a husband; for thou hast had five husbands, and he whom now thou hast is not thy husband, this thou hast spoken truly. The woman says to him. Sir, I see that thou art a prophet". Now that is a thing that I think we might dwell upon a little, that *she* saw He was a prophet. She had discernment, "I see that thou art a prophet", she says, and then she proceeds, "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship. Jesus says to her, Woman ..." That is the first time she is called 'Woman' by the Lord. It means that the feminine thought is stressed in her, and undoubtedly the Lord has in His mind to work out something alluding to the assembly.
Ques. Why does the Lord say to her in the end of verse 17, "Thou hast well said", and then again "this thou hast spoken truly"? Does that indicate that the change that you refer to is taking place, so that the Lord speaks of her in that way as speaking truly.
J.T. I think the Lord meant that she had not been speaking truly at all up to that; she was not
{150}
reliable, but she is now coming to it. That is the first time she has come to it, and so the Lord says, 'Woman' to her. It says, "The woman says to him, Sir, I see thou art a prophet. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship. Jesus says to her. Woman". That is the first time, I think, that she is recognised by the Lord as in her true place, and it is a great matter when we come to what is true in what we are saying, and in any confession we make. "Jesus says to her, Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when ye shall neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem worship the Father. Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know, for salvation is of the Jews". Now there is another point and that is that the Lord acknowledges that He is a Jew Himself. "We", He says, "We worship what we know". The Lord is rightly taking the place (it must be rightly, of course), but it is a fact to be noted, that He takes the place of being a Jew. In the 'we' He refers to Jews.
N.K.M. What would be the significance of that?
J.T. The Lord was sent to the Jews, "I have not been sent". He says, "save to the lost sheep of Israel's house", @Matthew 15: 24. He made that a point. The Jews had to come into view first, and then the gentiles; and so it was that Paul was raised up to bring in the gentiles.
Ques. Is it not remarkable that the Lord should speak to this woman of the Father?
J.T. I think it is, and so we might as well proceed fully with the thing because we have nearly come down to the end of our subject now. The Lord said, "The hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for also the Father seeks such as His worshippers. God is a spirit" -- now, that is another thing you hardly ever get before -- "God is a spirit; and
{151}
they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth". So that God is not material in any sense; He is a Spirit. But then it says further in John's gospel, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". We cannot, therefore, assume to have seen God; He is invisible.
H.H. Does that not bring in the mediatorial system that has in view that God might be known, the Lord Jesus and the Spirit serving to that end?
J.T. Just so. The Lord Jesus became Man, so that He could be seen. God is not seen, "No one has seen God at any time", the Lord says.
H.H. Do you connect the three divine Persons in the mediatorial system, or only the Lord Jesus and the Spirit?
J.T. The three must be included in the thought of God. "God is a spirit", and if the context shows that it is simply the Father Himself, excluding the Son and the Spirit, then, of course, we can accept it -- but God is a Spirit; I mean to say God sometimes includes the three Persons. Any One of the Three can be called God, but then the Three all together can be called God and are called God. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth" -- well, that is the three Persons. In the interpretation of it, it implies the three Persons.
A.J.G. So would it be right to say that the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit all have their part in the mediatorial system, although it is the Son who is the Mediator and the Spirit who also serves in a mediatorial way?
J.T. Quite so. The Father has never become the Mediator. The term does not imply that. "The Father" is the idea of a revelation or a family; "The Father" refers to a family usually.
W.S.S. The references to the worship at Jerusalem and what is called "this mountain" would be
{152}
lacking in intelligence, but I take it that the worshipping in spirit and in truth would be intelligence in variety and fulness in the light of the revelation of God.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Why is it the Lord adds in the second instance, "the hour is coming, and now is"? Is it because of what He has brought in?
J.T. Quite so. It is the worship of God and He brought it in.
A.W.P. In the service in relation to the Lord Himself, it is the feminine side, but in regard to worshipping the Father, it is as sons that we worship. Does that involve that the feminine thought of the assembly is dropped?
J.T. We have already stressed the idea of the assembly being feminine. The assembly worships the Father. Now I would like to get your thought, because we do not want to misunderstand each other.
A.W.P. That is why I wanted to get it clear. Does the feminine thought continue to the end of the service of God?
J.T. It does continue because the assembly is always feminine. The word implies that.
A.W.P. Is there any point in the service where we change over in mind to sonship?
J.T. Well, there is. There is in assembly service, but it is a question of whether it is in time or in eternity, because the assembly will ever be the spouse of Christ. That is, the idea will be feminine. She is the spouse of Christ; she is ever that.
A.W.P. Yes, I think that is clear to most of us, that she ever remains, as into eternity, the feminine. She is the woman. But then, I thought the sons come in more in regard to the service of God.
J.T. Oh! well, I am following you now, that sisters in the assembly would be viewed as sons.
{153}
Therefore the feminine thought is dropped as regards them, but not as regards the assembly as a whole; because in the worship of God on the first day of the week, for instance, it is so many persons, but the assembly is a unity. It is one idea, and that is where the feminine remains, that is where the feminine is seen, but the sons of God are so many persons; it is not collective. They are never viewed as anything but sons, individuals.
Rem. So that the Lord speaks of "worshippers" -- persons.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. You have been speaking about the vessel in the earlier part of the chapter. It is all in view of producing worshippers?
J.T. Quite so.
G.W.B. May I ask a question in connection with what you were quoting just now in chapter 1, "No one has seen God at any time". Would you say something about what is said in @Exodus 24 as to the nobles of the children of Israel, where it says they saw God.
J.T. I think you have to bear in mind that the Scriptures have to be reconciled; we cannot make them contradict each other. So in @Matthew 5 there are certain persons of whom it is said that they shall see God, but we have to treat that according to the context, and discern what the idea of seeing God is. You might say, if we see the Son we see God, because He is God; He is the true God. But then we have to keep to the context of Scripture and see what is meant in that case, "He is the true God and eternal life". One might say, well, we see Him in that sense, and we do too, because the Lord Jesus has been seen and will be seen eternally.
Ques. Is it significant in the verse that is quoted from Exodus, the Spirit of God through Moses says, "as it were" twice in one verse, as though there is
{154}
not an attempt to define what was seen? "They saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness".
J.T. "As it were" is a form of speech. That is all there is in that. We know what is meant, anyway.
G.C.S. When Job said, "Mine eyes have seen thee", would it be simply in creation, in all the wonders brought before us?
J.T. Whatever it was. The Spirit of God records it thus, and God is to be seen in that sense. But then we cannot contradict @John 1, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". So the word 'declare' has also to be borne in mind. The word 'declare' is said to have the force of the three Persons. The three Persons would be in mind, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". It may be God in that sense. The word 'declare' means a reference to other Persons. I am only referring to the original, according to what I have read, or understood.
A.J.G. Do you mean that the "he" may refer to the three Persons, or the "him"? "He hath declared him".
J.T. The word 'declare', the active part of it, refers to more than one Person.
H.H. Could it not read, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared"? The 'him' is bracketed, as if there is no justification for the word.
J.T. Quite so. Declaration is an open question, an open matter. The language implies that it can be used in that sense. It is a question of language.
Rem. And that makes worship possible. The Lord says, "We worship what we know".
{155}
J.T. Just so. We do not want to say much about the Lord worshipping God, you know, I think it would be better not to use the expression, though the Lord does there, saying, "We know what we worship". I mean to say the whole question is language. What we are speaking of now implies language and the use that can be made of language. God has made language, and we can use it accordingly.
Rem. God must be known to be worshipped.
J.T. Well, just so.
Ques. Could I refer back a little to the remarks as to the worship of the Father by the sons, and to what has been brought forward as to the change from the feminine to the masculine side, when the Spirit of sonship fills our hearts, and ask if there is something that is due to God that would involve the feminine side of the assembly? "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". Does that come into the service of God?
J.T. I would say there that the word 'assembly' is feminine itself.
Rem. That is what I have in mind. But we do not have this side very much. We generally turn from addressing the Lord to speaking to the Father in sonship.
J.T. Yes. Well, that is quite right, but then it is so many persons. The sons are so many persons.
Ques. Yes. I understand that, and that the great collective idea is the assembly, but when would this singing of the praises of God in the midst of the assembly take place?
J.T. I think it would be in the collective sense. The assembly is collective.
Ques. Where does the verse in @Hebrews 2 come into the service of God, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises"?
J.T. Well, the assembly will be formed of persons, of course, but it is a collective idea in just the
{156}
ordinary sense of the word 'collective', and the idea of sons is a personal idea -- so many persons. But what I am saying I am sure is right, that the masculine and the feminine must merge into the idea of Christ and the assembly.
Ques. The masculine and the feminine, did you say, must merge ultimately?
J.T. Yes, I mean the masculine in Christ and the feminine in the assembly.
Ques. I follow what has been said, that the assembly is a collective and feminine thought, whereas sonship is more the individual thing, but the point in my mind is, where in the service of God does the singing of the praises of God take place? I am alluding to @Hebrews 2, "In the midst of the assembly"; that is the feminine idea of the assembly.
J.T. I do not know that we can assume to be the full collective idea, but the collective idea, as I have said, will be *ultimately* (which would be eternally) seen in the assembly itself; and it will be only that, if we exclude the idea of Israel. Of course, the feminine is applied in her case, but it does not come into our dispensation. The ultimate thought of God, I am certain, is that the masculine is seen in Christ and the feminine is the assembly viewed collectively. That is the best way I know of putting it. It is a question of examining into it, as to whether language admits of all that, but I am sure it is. The feminine must appear ultimately in the assembly as the spouse of Christ. This is the word, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". The bride is a feminine thought, and Christ is the masculine.
Rem. So there will be only one woman in eternity, in that sense.
J.T. Well, just so, unless we say that Israel is a woman too, because the feminine is applied to her. The idea of the bride, that we have alluded to already in the Song of Solomon implies that, but that
{157}
will not appear, as far as I can see, in the eternal conditions. There are only two ideas, the one idea is Christ the masculine. He is the masculine in everything, and the assembly is the feminine in everything.
A.J.G. Is it possible that the thought of sonship, from the divine standpoint, is to emphasise dignity and liberty and intelligence rather than to stress any masculine thought?
J.T. Just so. Besides the Father must have some portion in the Lord's day morning meeting, and that portion is in the sons.
Rem. So that the personal side in sonship continues into eternity.
J.T. I think so. The sons of God will be there. We are all sons of God in Christ Jesus.
H.H. Would you place the assembly as such before God in the feminine character?
J.T. In the sense that the Father has His pleasure in Christ and the assembly. He must have peculiar pleasure in Christ *and* the assembly, but then the Father has His own sons, and we do not connect the sons of God with Christ personally, because they are sons of God.
H.H. The sons are the assembly viewed in another light -- are they not?
J.T. In another light -- quite so. Sonship is one idea, and the assembly, the feminine idea, is one idea. The assembly is not the spouse of God, that is never said. The word 'assembly', the feminine idea, would refer to what she is to Christ. It says, "Christ and the assembly". The feminine is the assembly and Christ is the masculine. The idea is, that Christ and the incarnation must be brought into it all, to make it simple.
Rem. I remember your saying some years ago that every reference to the bridegroom in Scripture was filled out in Christ's manhood.
{158}
J.T. Well, I think it is, "He that has the bride is the bridegroom".
W.F. Is the close of @Ephesians 3, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", the feminine thought going into eternity, in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so, "In Christ Jesus".
P.L. You helped us in 1946 in London in relation to the thought of brethren, the assembly, and sons, that they are collateral thoughts and each involves the same persons.
J.T. Quite so, I would say that now, too.
Eu.R. And they all go on into eternity.
J.T. Quite.
{159}
WORTHING -- READING (1)
@Ephesians 1: 1 - 23
J.T. I have the word 'elevation' in mind, considering the first chapter of Ephesians this morning, because of the spiritual elevation that is found there, and then this afternoon the part of Corinthians which treats of the service of God too, but what relates to what is physical in the sense of elevation, because there is physical elevation too, which we hope will come about presently.
It need not be remarked that it is not intended to pursue this chapter in Ephesians in detail. It is one of the fullest and most blessed chapters in the Bible; the thought is just to touch on it from the standpoint of spiritual elevation. Later we hope to look at Corinthians in which the apostle speaks of being caught up to the third heaven, which would be physical elevation. Now it is a question of what is moral and spiritual, so that we might be lifted out of the mere naturalness of the scene around us into what is of God, and spiritual, in the sense of elevation. We all know how the heavens are in mind, and so it says here: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies". It is a word peculiar, I believe, to Ephesians -- "heavenlies" -- and it refers to heavenly-mindedness and heavenliness in the sense of spiritual elevation.
F.B. You mean that we should understand somewhat of this spiritual elevation now?
J.T. Just so; that is the idea. We shall have the physical presently, which Paul speaks of as to himself, when he was caught up a good many years before. We cannot assume how often that happened, apparently it was only once. But Thessalonians treats of an elevation which will be literal. "For the
{160}
Lord himself ... shall descend from heaven" and then we shall be changed and caught up so as to be with Him in the heavenlies.
P.L. "And he built his sanctuary like the heights".
J.T. "Like the earth which he hath founded for ever". Quite so. God has great thoughts, of course, in this sense, both moral and spiritual, and then physical, because all these things enter into the coming thoughts of God, and into His present thoughts too. The present thoughts are in mind in this reading, because the epistle to the Ephesians treats of the blessings that belong to us, as given to us in Christ.
Ques. Would you say that the spirit of the apostle is moved in worship to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as he thinks of the elevation in the heavenlies in Christ?
J.T. I would think so, I suppose, no one anywhere in the universe, except divine Persons, could speak as he does. He could speak as having been given the ministry of the assembly, and all that enters into it.
Rem. An understanding of this is necessary for the service of God.
J.T. That is what is in mind. The service of God really begins with the Lord's supper as in Corinthians.
R.S.W. Would the upper room be in keeping with that?
J.T. Very much so. Luke refers to it in connection with the Supper, and also brings it in in Acts l, and he tells us who were there. The apostles were there, of course, and there were several women too.
Ques. Is the suggestion of elevation also seen in Paul's visit to Ephesus in @Acts 19, where he is stated to have passed through the "upper districts"?
J.T. Very good. That has often been referred to and is quite in keeping with what we are saying.
{161}
It says the "upper districts". Whatever they may have meant literally, the word "upper" gives character to them in a spiritual sense. He had to do with lower things, too, humbling things. He tells us what he had gone through in the sense of suffering. Of course, we shall come to that presently, but it is well to have it in mind that the apostle gives an account of the sufferings which he endured. And so he comes to visions and revelations in @2 Corinthians 12, but here it is moral and spiritual elevation, as I was saying. It is in order to take the saints out of the level of this world and all that is in it, so that we might live in heavenly places, because that is our proper elevation -- our proper living place.
A.J.G. Is the reason for this elevation that the blessing which Ephesians speaks of must be according to God Himself?
J.T. Quite so. It is largely a question of God, too, in the epistle, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". It is a full title as to God.
A.H. In @Acts 19, the first question Paul raises after arriving at Ephesus through the upper districts is as to the receiving of the Spirit. Has that an important place in what is in your mind?
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of the Spirit, as if the full truth of Ephesians depends on the Spirit, and what has come to light of late, too, making it very effective.
F.B. Have you in mind that this thought of elevation should be constantly in our minds throughout the week?
J.T. I think so. If we are in business, we are apt to be thinking of our business and what importance we have in it and what it is, and so forth, whereas the elevation we are dealing with now would lift us above all that. Then when we come to it, if the Lord is pleased to take us to Himself, or through death, we have to think of literal elevation,
{162}
that we are going to be with the Lord. It says, "To depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better" -- that is elevation, surely.
A.M. As to the moral side, do you think the word in verse 1 as to the "Saints and faithful in Christ Jesus" enters into that side of things? Is there certain faithfulness that the apostle discerns in the locality?
J.T. Quite so. Undoubtedly the work of God went on well at Ephesus. We are told of it in Revelation, of course, but then there has been declension from the level on which Paul had placed it. Paul had placed christianity at its full thought -- the divine thought -- in the sense of elevation. Paul had specially placed it there, and he was faithful in doing so, and then evidently the saints were faithful at first, but later, alas, according to the book of Revelation, they had declined -- they had left their first love.
Ques. What is the character of these spiritual blessings with which we are blessed, in view of this?
J.T. It would be hard to cover them all, but perhaps as we proceed with the chapter (that is the reason why I read the whole chapter) we might touch the blessings we are brought into; not ordinary earthly blessings as there will be in the millennial day, but heavenly blessings. It is characteristic of the present time -- the recovery as we properly speak of it -- that the epistle to the Ephesians is the great top-stone of the truth to which we have been recovered.
Rem. You said this is what we enjoy together, at the Lord's supper, did you not?
J.T. Yes. What we *should* enjoy together. Of course the subject of the Lord's supper is in Corinthians, not in Ephesians, and one great point of Corinthians is headship, and we touch it here in the last verse or two of this chapter. It says, "in which
{163}
he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead, and he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly" -- notice this "to the assembly" as if the assembly has part in the headship -- "to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all" (verses 20 - 23).
Ques. So that whilst the Supper takes place in the wilderness, the light of what is heavenly is to bring about elevation in the service?
J.T. Quite so. We have in mind elevation in the service, and that we are gradually coming to the idea of sonship. We partake of the Lord's supper at the beginning and then reach the thought of sonship in relation to the Father; the Holy Spirit Himself comes into it, for He is the Spirit of adoption, which is the Spirit of sonship.
P.A.R. Would the expression "in Christ" give the full measure of the elevation you are speaking of?
J.T. No, I do not think so. Of course "in Christ" is a great measure, but at the same time it is not so much the point of elevation as the fact that it is in Him -- in Christ, and Christ may be regarded as down here in the Spirit, only God has raised Him up and set Him at His right hand. He is in the heavenlies in that sense, but we know that He has come down here since that time, the Lord has actually been down here on earth since He went to heaven. He has a way of coming down. The epistle to the Corinthians will instruct us as to it.
W.W. Does the moral elevation touch on the great thought of being holy and blameless before Him in love?
{164}
J.T. Yes, but I did not want to go away from the point just raised, as to the Lord Himself actually having been down here. He may be regarded as down here, too, in a certain sense, because in Matthew He is not said to have gone into heaven at all; it is the assembly gospel, so that the Lord is where He can come to us and make Himself known to us, I would not like to move away from that, because I think the brethren ought to think of it more than they do.
Ques. You are alluding now to "I am coming to you" connected with the service of God?
J.T. Quite so. It is not coming *for* you, but coming *to* you. He will come *for* us, and that will bring about physical elevation, but in the meantime He is coming to us, and that is in the service of God.
Ques. Paul, in writing to the Philippians, says: "The Lord is near". Is that more in the characteristic sense that Matthew presents Him as being with the saints all the days?
J.T. Just so. It is a comforting thought that He is near.
Rem. In @John 20 it says: "The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord", and their only record of that meeting is "We have seen the Lord".
J.T. If there is one record, that is quite enough, for the Scripture cannot be broken. It is a great thing in @John 20, that there is such a thing as seeing the Lord. It used to be said by certain ones that the Lord was always in the midst, but He is not, for He has gone to heaven literally, and He is at the right hand of God, angels and principalities being made subject to Him, but He comes. He is a divine Person and can come as He wishes; we must always recognise that. We cannot control Him, He comes as He wishes, and He does come, too, in the spiritual sense which we are now dealing with, but He came, at the
{165}
beginning, literally. He was with the disciples forty days, literally, before He went up.
L.H.R. Is His present coming to us by the Spirit?
J.T. Well, you might say that, and yet you cannot be too sure because the Lord is a divine Person. There are three divine Persons; the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, and the Three are presented under one name in the gospel of Matthew.
A.J.G. It would seem as though even before the Lord died He was accustoming the disciples to His coming in and going out, because in @Acts 1 it says. "Of the men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up".
J.T. He has a right to do that; He is a divine Person. We cannot assume He is under control in any sense, but what He wishes He can do. So that the idea of the Lord coming to us is of first rate importance in order to bring out the thought of the service of God.
F.B. Then should there be conditions with us that would, so to speak, cause the Lord to come among us?
J.T. Just so. We cannot say that He should come. We must have the conditions if we assume that He comes. We assume here in this town that the Lord comes to us every Lord's day, but are you sure about that; we have to be sure about it. The conditions may not warrant it, they may keep Him away too. So that He may withdraw, and so forth.
Rem. His coming, in that way, is His own act.
J.T. It is presented in that way, I would say. "I will beg the Father", the Lord says, "and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever". Then the Lord goes on to say that *He* comes to us -- "I am coming to you". It is not
{166}
'I have come', but "I am coming to you". It is a present action, that we regard as privilege and gives character to assembly service. It makes it heavenly.
Ques. Does the verse in the Song of Songs suggest that He comes in relation to an elevated position? "The voice of my beloved! Behold, he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills".
J.T. Very good. That part of Scripture has been much used during the last forty or fifty years, and has greatly enhanced the service of God -- making the Lord's supper the beginning of it. Then we go on to the Father, and lately we have had the Spirit of adoption, so that we may enter into that sphere at that time.
J.O.S. Does Samuel give us the proper exercise when he says: "We will not sit at table till he come hither"? Is that the spirit in which we should be together on Lord's day morning?
J.T. Just so, "We will not sit at table till he come".
G.W.B. Is it significant that it says in @Acts 20 with regard to Paul, "Having gone up, and having broken the bread"?
J.T. Just so. He went up, because he had come down in love. He came down in love to enfold, in his arms, the boy that had fallen. The breaking of bread evidently was deferred, and that is why it is put in that way. The apostle went up and then they broke bread and then he went away, so that it was a happy season.
Ques. Would you say what the evidences are that the Lord has come into our midst? In @John 20 He was actually seen.
J.T. I think the affections of the brethren will be moved. It is a question of movement of affection towards Him. It is a wonderful time. We meet each other first; that is the idea of the Lord's
{167}
supper, and we greet each other, and then in due time we are in unity in the assembly; it is the assembly time, because the Lord's supper belongs to the assembly. Paul says, "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper", but it should be. Paul says it is not the truth, but it *should* have been that; it should be the Lord's supper if we are going to begin the service of God. Not that we may not call prayer the service of God, but the full idea of the service of God begins with the Lord's supper, and hence the apostle said in the chapter I am referring to in Corinthians, "It is not to eat the Lord's supper". He wanted to blame them and get them right about it, but there is no blame here in @Ephesians 1; everything is according to God.
Ques. Would you say that you get an expression, so to speak, of the stirring of the affections in @1 Samuel 16? It says, "He sent and brought him in. And he was ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance and beautiful appearance".
J.T. And he was David; that was his name, and the name carried a meaning. It is 'the beloved' really.
Rem. The stirring of the affections when he comes in -- every eye beholding him.
J.T. Quite so. David in that chapter is a type of Christ. When David came in all was aglow; his brothers were not equal to it for the moment, but he was -- it was his moment. It was David's moment. His name means 'beloved', and of course we have here the thought of beloved. It says in verse 6: "He has taken us into favour in the Beloved". It is the Lord Jesus.
A.L.C. Would you say that our affections sometimes have to be stirred before we recognise the Lord, like the two on the way to Emmaus? Their
{168}
eyes were holden, but they knew Him in the breaking of bread.
J.T. And they reproved themselves afterwards -- why did they not know Him? So we do well to reprove ourselves if we do not discern the great privilege that is accorded to us in the Lord coming to us.
J.S.E. Would the question of Rebecca to the servant help us in the normality of this matter of the Lord's coming to us? "Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us?" You remarked just now that it was a question as to whether the Lord came in by the Spirit, but is not the Spirit essential to us for the discerning of the Lord when He comes in?
J.T. Yes, but we cannot say that the Lord must come by the Spirit.
J.S.E. No, I am thinking of ourselves as needing the Spirit for discerning the Lord when He does come.
J.T. Just so. David says to Abigail, "Blessed be thy discernment", and that is the point we are on now in Ephesians.
J.S.E. And does not the word 'see' in John's gospel often imply discernment rather than visibility?
J.T. Very good. I would say that fully.
W.C. In @John 21 it was the disciple whom Jesus loved that said, "It is the Lord". Is it love that discerns Him?
J.T. Very good. John has that peculiar designation -- "that disciple therefore whom Jesus loved". If we read Revelation we will read about John. But we are now dealing with Ephesians where the full divine thought of christianity is set out; and it is in the assembly that the Lord comes, and He serves in the assembly. The assembly is the great vessel of His service, and this epistle indicates what the Ephesian assembly was. It was in accord with the
{169}
mind of God, but what is said about it in Revelation is that it had fallen. There was departure, for it had fallen from its first love, but still there was something there that the Lord respected and spoke to. The first address of the Lord is to Ephesus, showing that it had the greatest place, really, in the assembly; greater than Jerusalem. It does not say that the Lord wrote to Jerusalem; it was to Ephesus He wrote first.
A.J.G. Would the fact that the Lord says to Ephesus, "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen", show that He felt the giving up of the elevation?
J.T. Just so; that is what the Lord felt -- "I have against thee". We do not want to have the Lord against us, because He is stronger than we. If He be against us, He will let us know it; He will make us feel it.
Ques. Would the word 'first' there be first in quality, and not necessarily in time -- "thy first love"?
J.T. That is right. It is the freshness of the love. It may wane and grow cool, or cold, but first love, I am sure, is fresh love, and the Lord values it.
Ques. Is it important here that the truth stands in relation to the purposes and counsels of God, so that if there is recovery it is to what is unchanged in itself?
J.T. Quite so. So that the Spirit of God being here, there is enough to bring about heavenly conditions and the recovery, too, I believe, implies that the heavenly conditions have been recovered. That is what has happened during the past hundred or hundred and twenty years. There has been a real recovery of the assembly and the truth as to it. So we have these meetings constantly, and God is helping us through them. The first day of the week and all that enters into it has acquired great increase
{170}
of power because of the service that God has rendered in the ministry that has come to us as to it during the last fifty years.
G.C.S. Would the blood being brought in here assure to us all these privileges and blessings on the basis of redemption?
J.T. The blood, of course, is only one thing. There is more than that needed, for the Spirit is needed as well as the blood. Blood may bring people into the millennium, but the Spirit will bring them to heaven. That is what He is doing now; He is bringing us to heavenly places.
G.C.S. In Colossians the blood is left out to concentrate on the greatness of the person of Christ, but here the foundation of all these blessings for us is in the redemptive work of Christ.
J.T. The work of Christ, quite so. But then, as I said, it is of immense importance to make room for the Spirit. Of course the Spirit will have part in the millennial day, too, but not in the same sense as it is now. The Spirit is here Himself fully. He has come down -- been sent down -- from heaven.
A.J.G. It says here that the Holy Spirit is the earnest of our inheritance. That is more than light, is it not? It is the positive enjoyment already in the Spirit.
J.T. Just so. Of course the earnest is not quite the whole thing, but still the Spirit is great enough to bring about the thing in principle.
Rem. Would you say a word as to why the Holy Spirit is called "the Holy Spirit of promise" here. The chapter deals with purpose, generally.
J.T. Well, it is to enhance the thought of the Spirit, which has been done and is being done by Himself at the present time. He is the Holy Spirit of promise -- not simply the Holy Spirit, or the Spirit, but the Holy Spirit of promise, the idea of promise bringing in love. There is something peculiar
{171}
in promise -- promise is a peculiar word, and it refers to something given, so that the Holy Spirit is the Holy Spirit of promise. He was anticipated as given, but now He is given. So you rightly ask people, Have you got the Spirit? Perhaps they would say, No; well then, the thing is you should ask, for the Spirit of God is a gift. The greatest of all gifts is the Spirit of God. Eternal life is the next greatest gift, but the Spirit of God must be the greatest of all gifts, because He is God Himself.
W.C. So when Achsah asked her father for a blessing, he gave her the upper and the nether springs.
J.T. Quite so. The upper and nether springs are the full thought, figuratively, in that particular Old Testament scripture. So it is here, the Holy Spirit of promise, but we have the Holy Spirit of God also.
A.H. Are you thinking of chapter 4 verse 30? "Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God".
J.T. Yes, that is what I thought. I knew the passage was here, because it is the full thought, and it is a question of gift. It is a wonderful thing that we have such a gift as that; it is God Himself, really. But we have to make distinctions in our minds as to how the gift is to be thought of.
Ques. In the end of @John 3, the Lord Jesus says: "God gives not the Spirit by measure". Earlier in the chapter He speaks of the heavenly things: "If I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe?" Is the giving of the Spirit without measure in view of heavenly things?
J.T. "God gives not the Spirit by measure". He gives It as He has given It to the assembly. The whole idea of the Spirit is in the assembly. In the millennium, it will be different; there will be measure attached to it. Things will not be so great. The fact of the matter is, I believe, that the idea of Israel will have to cease in time -- it may be a thousand years, but
{172}
it will have to cease. The full thought is here now, in what we are dealing with. The Spirit is not given by measure.
H.F.N. Would you say a word on what follows: "The spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him". Would that maintain us at the full height of elevation of which you have been speaking?
J.T. Just so, but what have you got in your mind, please, fully?
H.F.N. In relation to the thought of elevation, how the Spirit comes in first as wisdom, or resource, and then the idea of revelation which is the thought of unveiling. Would not that be the power to enter into this great elevation which you so preciously brought before us?
J.T. I would say that, surely. "The full knowledge of him" and then again, "being enlightened in the eyes of your heart" -- showing that it is a place of affection in our hearts -- "so that ye should know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of the might of his strength, in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead, and he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come". That is a wonderful statement as to the glory of Christ.
Rem. That makes the position in which the assembly is seen at the end of the chapter all the more remarkable.
J.T. Just so. The assembly is greatly stressed, as I am just about to read: "And gave him to be head over all things to the assembly". It is a remarkable thing; not only that He could be head over
{173}
all things, but it is "to the assembly". The assembly has part, clearly, in the headship. It is a remarkable thing -- one of the most remarkable things we can get on this point. So it goes on to say, "Which is his body". The assembly is the great vessel -- "which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". That is the full thought of God, it refers to Christ and the assembly.
F.B. Have you in mind that it is possible in our measure to reach that on a Lord's day morning?
J.T. I think so. It is a question of the place we give the Spirit, and what cannot be available to us if we give full place to the Spirit? So God has helped us in the way the Spirit has been brought forward by Himself. The Spirit has done it Himself, and it is to enter into the service of God and make it complete and full for God at the present time. Then in the eternal state, of course, it will be there too. It will be there in perfection, and that, of course, will enter into what we shall have this afternoon, because in @2 Corinthians 12 Paul speaks of being "caught up". He says: "I will come to visions and revelations". It is a time of revelations.
A.H. In saying 'the place we give to the Spirit on Lord's day morning', have you in mind more than carrying the thought in our minds, but perhaps addressing Him personally on that occasion?
J.T. Quite so. People refuse the thought of addressing the Spirit, but it is quite wrong to refuse it, because He is a divine Person; why should we not address Him? It is due to Him, and it is due to us too, to the assembly that it should be properly understood in that way.
Rem. You get the thought of elevation in @Colossians 3, "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ, seek the things which are above, where the Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God, have
{174}
your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth".
J.T. Just so. It is not simply the things that are of heaven, but "the things that are above". It would give stress to the idea of elevation, and it belongs to Colossians, but Ephesians is the proper sphere of it.
F.V.W. Would one of the greatest things in connection with the gift of the Holy Spirit be the insight into affections between divine Persons Themselves.
J.T. I would say that -- the insight into it. So in @John 3 we have: "Except any one be born anew he cannot see". That is, new birth is necessary to see what is going on in the divine realm. But then he has got to be born of water and of Spirit as well. That is to say, redemption is needed as well as new birth. New birth is one thing, but redemption is another.
J.S.E. Is it not significant that in this epistle which deals with matters at such a great altitude, the Spirit of God is referred to at least three times in a way that He is not referred to anywhere else? "The Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance to the redemption of the acquired possession" in chapter 1. Then the expression that has been referred to in chapter 4: "The Holy Spirit of God", then in chapter 5 as he comes forward to the mystery of Christ and the assembly, is it not the only time in Paul's ministry where he exhorts the saints to be filled with the Spirit? Are not those references suggested to us as the necessity of the Spirit on our side, if we are to come into the gain of this elevation that you have referred to?
J.T. Very good. The Lord Himself is spoken of as full of the Spirit, which is very remarkable. So that in this epistle we get correspondence with Christ Himself. She is presented as a suitable bride
{175}
for Christ -- that is, she is His wife, according to @Revelation 19.
P.L. The allusion to the Spirit as the Father's Spirit (chapter 3: 16) is also unique to this epistle, is it not?
Ques. Why do you think the "eyes of your heart" are emphasised?
J.T. That is a moral thought. It is the seat of the affections, I would say. The full thought of affection is there in power by the Spirit.
G.C.S. Does it help, where the Lord refers to the Spirit in @Luke 24: 49? He speaks of "the promise of my Father" and then being "clothed with power from on high" -- not from heaven.
J.T. Quite so; "... till ye be clothed with power from on high", as if the Lord meant that they should not be here as representative of Him unless they were "clothed with power from on high". It is the idea of elevation.
L.H.R. Could we have a word as to being made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus?
J.T. It would show the dignity that belongs to us; sitting down is dignity and greatness. They are great persons. The assembly is the greatest family in the heavens and on the earth, except for divine Persons; the assembly is the greatest of all, and the members are made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ.
F.W.K. Would @Exodus 24 suggest the thought. "They saw the God of Israel ... and ate and drank". It seems to be based upon the volume of the blood suggested in that chapter.
J.T. I would like you to read it. It is a great matter to have these scriptures read so that we can get the full force of them.
F.W.K. I am referring to @Exodus 24: 9, "And Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy
{176}
of the elders of Israel went up; and they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness. And on the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: they saw God, and ate and drank".
J.T. That is to say their dignity is implied, for they saw God, and ate and drank. Well now that raises another point, that @John 1 says: "No one has seen God at any time". So we have to make enquiry about that in time. We cannot do it now, but it is a fact that "no one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". That is to say, the declaration is by the Son. But then the seeing of God is denied according to the first chapter of John, and we have, therefore, to understand how we can see Him. It is also spoken of in @Matthew 5 and now in Exodus, so that it is a question of understanding as to how we can see God. It is a marvellous thing that it can be said, and then that the Spirit is given to us, as well as that. The Spirit is given to us; it is a gift given to us.
A.M. How does the thought of the "greatness of his [God's] power towards us who believe", as referred to in this chapter, link up with the power of the Spirit?
J.T. The greatness of God's power is in the Holy Spirit, but then all these things are mysterious, because the Holy Spirit is God Himself, only the mind of God is seen in the working out of things in the three Persons. We cannot explain the three Persons; why there should be three Persons -- we cannot explain it, it is all mystery, but still we are in the realm of mystery, and we ourselves have the Spirit of God in us. Wonderful fact! and therefore we know all things, as John says. We can know all things in that sense. In fact John's first epistle
{177}
speaks of that, "*Ye* have the unction from the holy one, and ye know all things".
A.M. I was thinking too of the reference to faith -- "towards us who believe".
J.T. Well, we are in the faith period, but the faith period is the Spirit's period. When we come into the sight period, it will be the millennial period. The faith period is the period of the Spirit of God, in which the Spirit of God has the greatest room and liberty amongst His people.
A.J.G. Does not the Spirit always link His power with faith on our part?
J.T. I think so, that is true.
A.J.G. If there is not faith with us the Spirit is greatly hampered, is He not?
J.T. Quite so, and the saints in the present dispensation should have the Spirit. If they have not got It they should ask for It, and the Father will give It to them.
A.J.G. As regards "seeing God" -- does that not require the mediatorship of Christ?
J.T. Just so. Besides, the word 'seeing' might refer to certain features of God, whatever they might be.
E.P. Would @Hebrews 11: 1, apply with regard to God being seen? "Now faith is the substantiating of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen".
J.T. Well, the things that are seen are temporal, but things that are not seen are eternal, and these are the things that belong to christianity, and that is what we are dealing with, in this wonderful chapter of Ephesians.
E.P. I was thinking that faith has come, and the present time has been referred to as a 'faith dispensation'; faith would help us to move into all these matters.
{178}
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit enables us to move in. We arrive at the understanding of the revelation of God in the power of the Spirit. So, in that sense, we see what is unseen.
Rem. We see God in His beloved Son.
J.T. That is true, but the beloved Son is God. "He is the true God and eternal life". He is the true God Himself, so it is all mysterious, only that we are within the realm of it, because we have the Spirit.
Rem. The Spirit operates in the region of faith, hence the importance of believing and the maintenance of faith, so that the Spirit may operate freely.
J.T. Quite so. So that the recovery, as we have already said today, is to the full thought of christianity, and I think it should be kept in mind that Mr. Darby and those who walked with him one hundred and twenty years ago were used for the recovery of the full thought of christianity: not simply what they had at Pentecost, but Paul's ministry as well. Thank God it has continued, and it is being kept continued because the brethren keep on with these meetings, where we get the truth developed and time to develop it, especially in three days meetings.
E.C.M. Would the "things ... which God has prepared for them that love him" be connected with the spiritual blessings here? They are said to be revealed by the Spirit, for "the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God".
J.T. Quite so, "The Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God". That is what we are dealing with. This epistle contemplates that -- the full thought of God in christianity.
Ques. Is active faith needed right through the service of God?
J.T. Quite so. The systems have not got it; that is really the truth. They have not got the service of God, because they have not developed faith; they
{179}
have returned to the idea of sight, and systematic things according to man's ways; such as Presbyterianism and Baptists and so forth. They have given up the idea of faith, and they have given up the idea of the Spirit of God. It is a terrible thing to think of, but it is really the truth, and it is making way for the terrible apostasy that is coming in, which the apostle speaks of in the epistle to the Thessalonians.
Ques. Have you got the idea in Caleb? It says in @Numbers 13: 30. "And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up boldly and possess it, for we are well able to do it. But the men that went up with him said, We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we". Do you think it gives the difference between faith and faithless persons in regard to the inheritance?
J.T. Quite so, I should not like to direct our attention to ourselves, but in truth that is what is implied in the recovery; that we have come back to the thought of faith and the Spirit of God. It is a wonderful thing that it is so, and I believe the Lord is going to keep it until a certain time and then He will have recourse to sight; in the millennial day, it will be a question of what is seen. Thomas was like that; he says he would not believe unless he put his finger into the mark of the nails. He represents a Jew at that time, but we have faith at the present time, and therefore we come to the full thought of christianity.
A.H. So that in "our struggle" which is referred to in chapter 6, the shield of faith has a very large place.
J.T. That is just what we are talking about; faith is the great feature of the epistle to the Ephesians. The means of the full thought of God being recovered is in the epistle to the Ephesians.
A.H. And is all the armour there to maintain us in this elevated position?
{180}
J.T. Just so: "Put on the panoply of God" is the full thought. It is to protect us in faith.
G.W.B. Does the assembly at the end of our chapter in Ephesians fill out the type of Adam's helpmate in @Genesis 2?
J.T. Quite so. So that we have to come to this, that we are in the time of the Spirit, and the time of the fulness of recovery of what is of the Spirit. It is a question of what God has done for us to bring that about, and what He is doing for us now is to help us to keep it, and to continue in it. Later we come to the millennial period, but at the present time we are continuing in the full thought of God in the assembly; and the Spirit of God is helping us to do it, and I believe He is using these meetings, of which we are having so many recently, to this end. He is helping us on that one point, that great point, so that there is a continuance of the dispensation which God has inaugurated through the apostles at the beginning.
H.W. Is this the antitype of the last verse of @Deuteronomy 29: "The hidden things belong to Jehovah our God; but the revealed ones are ours and our children's for ever". Is that the thought of continuity here?
J.T. Just so. Of course we are dealing with the New Testament, which refers to the gift of the Spirit, which we have as believers, and not with the Old Testament. We believers have the Spirit, but if we have not we should ask God for It.
A.J.G. And we really have the hidden things, have we not? Things that were hidden from before the ages are now made known.
J.T. Just so.
J.S.E. If one can make a remark, it is that your frequent and emphatic references to the Spirit, in this visit, ought really to search all our hearts as to
{181}
whether we are consciously getting back, by the help of the Spirit, to God's richest and original thoughts.
J.T. Just so; and if we have got back to it to stay in it.
J.S.E. Yes, I feel this allusion to the last section of this chapter as taking us back to @Genesis 2, links us on with a scene where sin has never intruded.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Do you get the "staying and continuing" suggested in @Acts 1? And are we to be there too? "And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber, where were staying ..."
J.T. Very good; and there were certain women, too, staying there.
E.T.S. Would all that we have been enjoying this morning be in order to make us come into the full knowledge of Him in verse 17, so that the Father may have a fuller return from us? Some of us, if I may speak for others, feel that there is perhaps a paucity in connection with the answer to the Father's love, and I wondered if we prayed that prayer which is in verse 17, that we might come into the full knowledge of Him, there might be a fuller and more definite response to the Father.
J.T. Yes, so that if the recovery has taken place, and it has, in certain men we have alluded to whom God used to do it, the Spirit of God remains here. They have gone to be with the Lord, but the Spirit remains here. He is here all the time, and it is in His power that we -- can realise -- or hope to realise -- what we are speaking of.
A.J.G. So there is no lapse in the continued work of recovery; the Spirit is guiding all the time into all the truth.
J.T. The fact is, I think, that there has been a measure of recovery even since they were taken. For the last fifty years, I would say, there has been steady indication of recovery, and a desire in the
{182}
service of God to go on in it, because the service of God has attained a peculiar phase in the past thirty or forty years. I am speaking subject to correction by the brethren, but it is my judgment that this is what has happened, and the thing is now, at meetings like this, to revive ourselves, and to revive each other by being reminded of what has happened. Then there is what is in the Scriptures themselves, that "every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work". That is the position.
{183}
WORTHING -- READING (2)
@2 Corinthians 12: 1 - 21
J.T. Someone here was asking a question as we left off this morning.
P.A.W. We were speaking of the high level of things this morning, and also the place that the Spirit has in relation to the service of God. I wondered if you could help us as to the Spirit leading us on into these great high levels. We have in @Ephesians 2: 18 "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father".
J.T. It is clear enough that the access is through the exercise of the Spirit's power. "Through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father". That is through Christ, so that it is a question of mediatorial service, which is a very important matter, and involves that One of the divine Persons takes a lower place to be mediator -- to mediate a position or a circumstance. There are clearly religious systems around us that have certain principles to go by that are simply human -- at least in a great measure, but those who are walking in the truth recognise that the means of worship is by the Spirit -- through the mediatorial service of Christ.
P.A.W. I think some of us would like help on the position the Spirit has as Mediator.
J.T. There are two ideas. First it is "through him" -- that is Christ; He is the main thought in the mediatorship, but then the Spirit also is a Mediator. Of course it is a question of the power of the Spirit, but the Lord Jesus is the actual Mediator in everything. The main idea of mediatorship in divine things is in Christ Himself but then the Spirit has a part in the mediatorship also. There are three Persons in the Deity, and of course the Three act in whatever it may be and the Spirit in this case acts in our souls. It is not external; it is in our souls.
{184}
P.A.W. I think the thought of the Spirit being in our souls is helpful.
J.T. Just so. Now if you take the Church of England, of course, they have got methods or ways that are merely human, and so have the Presbyterians, and so also all of them, whereas those who are walking in the truth recognise the Spirit, and they recognise that Christ is the main thought of Mediator of everything, and that the Spirit also has a mediatorial service, but that is inside of us.
Now what is before us is @2 Corinthians 12 where we get, "Well, it is not of profit to me to boast, for I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows; ) such a one caught up to the third heaven. And I know such a man (whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows)"; it is remarkable this repetition in the parenthesis, and then he says: "that he was caught up into paradise". "He was caught up into paradise". That is the idea that is before us, for it is a question of elevation, and what this may mean in Paul's case. It is really physical catching up. He did not know whether he was in the body or out of the body, which is a remarkable thing. Apparently he was -- like Peter -- in a state of ecstasy, and therefore it is a question of our being able to discern what is meant in this elevation; how it happened to him. He intimates that it is extraordinary because apparently it only happened to him once, and that was fourteen years before, which is a very remarkable thing.
F.B. Does it suggest, so to speak, a complete change of place?
J.T. The apostle has to acknowledge that he did not know himself, whether he was in the body or out of the body. It is for us to discern now, if we can
{185}
do it, what the condition can be -- in the body or out of it. Yet Paul is conscious, for he is able to say what happened. What did you mean by change of place?
F.B. It says he was caught up into paradise, I thought that would indicate an entirely different position to being on earth, and therefore he would speak of it as a complete change from what he was generally used to.
J.T. Yes, but then the question is, how could he say that he knew about it. "I know", he says, "a man". It is a sort of abstract statement, and then he repeats it in verse 3: "And I know such a man, (whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows; ) that he was caught up into paradise". He changes the word from "third heaven" to "paradise", so that I confess that I myself feel that I do not know just what to say about it, because it is extraordinary. It is an extraordinary circumstance, and yet it is clear that it is an opportunity for the brethren -- a good many of us here now -- just to enquire what it means, and whether there is any such experience in the service of God that we know of. I confess I do not know of it, nor do I think that Paul knew it fully; he says, "I know not, God knows", and we can take refuge in that -- that God knows everything.
Ques. Do you think it would be divine compensation for all the sorrows that he speaks of in the previous chapter? "Thrice have I been scourged, once I have been stoned" and so on to the end of the chapter, "and through a window in a basket I was let down by the wall, and escaped his hands".
J.T. I suppose you might read that into it. Whether he really means that I do not know, but I think he means that we have come into what is wonderful in the sense of spiritual understanding -- spiritual knowledge, and it is for us to seek to be in
{186}
it and join together in it, and know the service of God as in it.
Rem. I was wondering whether he was worthy of it, divine communications being given to those who are near enough and worthy to receive them.
J.T. Well, possibly that might be said.
Ques. What have you in mind about his naming the third heaven and paradise?
J.T. That in itself is really a wonderful thing. It is an inscrutable thing to my mind, and I think we should all seek to come into inscrutability, because we belong to the realm of inscrutability as in christianity.
Ques. Does this experience come with the visions and revelations that he refers to earlier?
J.T. It does, that is what he is speaking about. We might as well just look at the wording. He says: "Well, it is not of profit to me to boast, for I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord". That is to say it was the Lord's doing -- the Lord was revealing Himself in certain connections and circumstances, and then he says, "I know a man" -- meaning that he had extraordinary relations with God and with the Lord, and with the Spirit. Perhaps, as suggested, there was no man in the whole realm of creation like Paul -- so much distinctiveness -- he was honoured so much in the truth. So that it is just as well to think that there was such a man, but at the same time there is something for us to see, in the sense of spirituality, that we have not reached, and the question is whether we can reach it, because it is a time of learning, and if God is graciously giving us opportunity to learn we must take advantage of it, and seek that we can learn, because the Spirit of God is within us. He is actually here as sent from heaven; that has been repeated over and over again, and I do not know of anything more important in the matter that we are dealing
{187}
with, than that the Spirit of God has been sent from heaven. It does not say He has come -- He has been *sent* from heaven. He is under orders, as it were, and yet He is a divine Person, showing how the divine Persons can interchange positions. We cannot say what was before the economy in which we are; we just do not know, but They were there and there were Three, and They were all equal, but now They have come into an economy, two of Them taking less place than one of Them; that is to say, the Father. The Lord Jesus and the Spirit have taken a lower place relatively than the Father. So that I confess all this is inscrutable, and we might as well accept the idea of inscrutability and yet, at the same time, seek whether we can attain to anything of it.
Ques. Would you say why the apostle speaks of himself as "a man in Christ"?
J.T. It is to bring out the idea of manhood, but it is manhood in Christ. There is a passage elsewhere -- "the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus". That is the same allusion; He is the Mediator. Of course, the Spirit is too, according to what we are saying here, for the Spirit also can be a Mediator, but the Father is supreme; it is with Him the mediatorship is. That is to say the Mediator is in relation to the Father; He mediates things in relation to the Father.
Ques. As regards the matter of elevation, is it right to say that the third heaven is the highest altitude to which the creature can go?
J.T. It looks like that. But the Lord is gone beyond all the heavens, so that we have to recognise a non-created (if I may use that expression) condition. The Lord can go beyond all that, because He is a divine Person. We cannot do it, for we are just creatures, and even Paul was just that. It is well
{188}
however to accept that there is such a condition, because it reminds us what we are brought into.
Ques. Is Paul bringing this forward as showing what gave colour and character to his ministry? He is not stressing his apostleship, but this experience of the man in Christ.
J.T. Quite so, but he was an apostle, as he says. He is abstract here because he, as it were, separates himself from himself, from his individuality. He says, "I know a man in Christ" and then, "I know such a man". That is a thorough idea, so that it is intended to remind us all of the greatness of his calling, and the ministry that he had. But the object now would be for us to see whether we can get into anything like that, because we have been converted and have the Spirit.
G.W.B. Would there be any connection between this and the promise to the overcomer at Ephesus? He would be given to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God.
J.T. Just so. The allusion clearly is to the same thing. The word 'paradise' is the same word here. But it says he will be given to eat of the tree of life, and the tree of life is Christ Himself; He is the tree of life.
A.J.G. Christ in His own sphere, the sphere of the Father's pleasure; would that be the thought of paradise?
J.T. Well, I do not know. We have the word 'paradise', of course, and there is what was alluded to a moment ago, an ecstasy. It is open to us, but it is a question whether christians at the present time, including ourselves here today, know anything of this ecstasy, and whether we know anything of these thoughts that we are now seeking to speak of, whether we know anything about being "caught up". That is the word used, "caught up into paradise" -- meaning that he is brought actually into it. But
{189}
before that it was "as far as", "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows; ) such a one caught up to the third heaven". There is an expression "the third heaven". We can speak of the first one, for we see it, it is visible; but the third, what do we see? I mean to say we are dealing with wonderful things, and inscrutable things, but at the same time it is surely intended that we might have some part in them, and become more spiritual than we are.
J.P. In chapter 5 we read that "if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". Would the "man in Christ" be a development of that idea?
J.T. Quite so; "If any one be in Christ", he says, "there is a new creation" -- not 'he is new creation', but there is such a thing, and he has part in it.
A.M. In the same chapter (chapter 5 of this book) Paul says, "For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God". Is that not a reference to ecstasy, and he says 'we' there as if he would look for others to become in that state?
J.T. Quite so. It refers to Paul and those with him. If they were beside themselves, it was to God. It is a phrase that implies he is not in his ordinary reckonings; he cannot say whether he is in the body or out of it. He is simply out of his ordinary reckonings, but then the question is whether we today can say anything, whether we have any knowledge or experience such as that, otherwise there would be really no advantage in the scripture being written at all. There is surely something in it for us, as to this matter of being beside ourselves. If I am beside myself it is to God -- he would be taken up with God so much, that he would be in an ecstasy.
A.J.G. And what you are pressing is that the power for this being caught up is in the Spirit.
{190}
J.T. Just so, and whether we have any experience of the kind, or whether we just go along as if things are all right with us spiritually, and yet really it is not, because this is something that is possible to us; it is within our reach.
Ques. Is it your thought, then, that in the economy in which we are, if this was possible to one man it is possible to another?
J.T. That is right. The 'we' is just the 'we' of christianity. That is, he is saying something that is obviously true.
A.B. Would there be any similarity in regard of the Spirit of the Lord catching away Philip at the end of @Acts 8? You were referring to the power of the Spirit of God, and this thought of being caught up, or caught away.
J.T. That is another instance of what we are speaking about. The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip; it was the Spirit's action, and Philip was found somewhere else. There were such things happening in the early days of christianity. We know that well because of the facts mentioned, but then the question is whether there is not something of the kind that we may have part in.
A.J.G. In @Revelation 4 John says he heard a voice saying: "Come up here", and he says, "Immediately I became in the Spirit". Is that an example of availing oneself of the Spirit's power?
J.T. Just so; I would say that. That is a point that ought to help us, "I became in the Spirit". It is a question of how we can become things; how we can change. There is a certain change that we come into, but then how can we come into it? It enters much into the first day of the week -- the Lord's day and with it the Lord's supper, because these changes are possible. I think what we are dealing with is something that is hardly expressible in words; it is something to be understood in the
{191}
soul. You would soon be moved by it if you experienced it and acted in it. It would soon become known to the brethren; we should be known to each other as spiritual, because the point is now spirituality, and how we acquire it and how we may ascend into heaven in a moral sense at the present time, as we shall, in a physical sense, presently. But this really is a physical matter that Paul is alluding to -- he has been caught up himself and he could not tell whether he was in the body or out of it, and therefore it is an unknown matter -- only God knows about it. But yet we are here, and there is opportunity for us to learn something of this in our own experience, but whether we are doing it is a question.
Ques. Does the first reference to Paul being caught up *to* the third heaven present, if I understand it rightly, that there were limitations to his going higher? But, in the second reference, that you are bringing before us, there appears to be no limitation in the power of the Spirit. Is that so?
J.T. There are limitations to us -- to creatures, but Paul refers to something that he had experienced, namely, that he had been caught up to the third heaven. Then he uses another word, and that word is paradise, which is the thought of immense enjoyment.
Rem. That is the force, perhaps, of the word *into* paradise.
J.T. That is the force of it, but in the first sentence he says, "Such a one caught up to". There is a change of word in the original there.
Rem. I was only thinking, in asking that question, as to Christ having ascended above all heavens.
J.T. That does not mean that we can go up beyond all heavens. It is a divine Person of whom that is said.
Rem. Yes, therefore I was wondering whether in the case of Paul he writes in this way as showing
{192}
limitations, but he says, "into paradise" -- he is inside, where he heard these unspeakable things.
J.T. He is saying it because it is a very important matter, because he is implying that he was distinguished in this way, in that he was caught up. It is just something that he was entitled to do and to write about, so that we might get into it in some sense. I say 'in some sense'; I do not know what the sense is, but *some* sense.
W.S.S. Do you connect this passage with the rapture, where the same words are used -- caught up?
J.T. That is the word that is used for rapture, really. That will take place when the Lord Himself comes down from heaven, but then the change has to come about, and the Spirit of God will bring about that change. At the rapture, we shall be changed, but this does not allude to that. This alludes to what is possible, in some sense, with us at the present time, before actually we are changed in body.
Ques. With regard to the thought of "into paradise", there is a reference in @John 1: 18, which speaks about Him who is *in* the bosom of the Father. Would you tell us a little about that, please?
J.T. I do not know; "in the bosom of the Father" means infinite affection between the Father and Son -- infinite. Much could be said about the word *in*, but I do not know that we can say anything to help us here. The bosom of the Father refers to the infinite relations of affection between the Father and the Son, "The Father loves the Son", it says, "and has given all things to be in his hand".
Ques. In referring to inscrutability and our being able, in some measure perhaps, to touch it, does that link with what Paul says that he "heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter"?
J.T. That is what he says here.
{193}
Ques. Would that touch on what is inscrutable?
J.T. "I ... heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter". That is just what we are dealing with, and yet we are to enquire amongst ourselves, and each for himself, as to whether he understands anything of it, because it is within our range, clearly.
F.B. I would like to ask if this of which you have been speaking is confined to the Lord's day morning meeting?
J.T. I speak of the Lord's day morning meeting because it is alluded to in the first epistle, chapter 11. He says in verse 17, "In prescribing to you on this which I now enter on, I do not praise, namely, that ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse. For first, when ye come together in assembly, I hear there exist divisions among you". That is to say, he deals there with the idea of the divine service, and that the Lord's supper is the beginning of it; but we are now dealing with the second epistle, and it is a question whether we know anything of what we are speaking of. "I know a man in Christ", he says, "fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows; ) such a one caught up to the third heaven". That is a remarkable thing, and then he goes on to say, "And I know such a man, (whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows; ) that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter". Well, now we are dealing with what is unspeakable, but at the same time there is something that we can come into; it is surely written for that purpose.
A.J.G. Does the fact that he speaks of hearing unspeakable things said indicate that he was allowed to hear the communion between the Father and the Son? Would it be divine Persons speaking?
{194}
J.T. Well, very likely. We had something recently as to what we come into. The first was in @Acts 1, and I might just read it so as to give a clue to what we are talking about, "Having said these things he was taken up, they beholding him, and a cloud received him out of their sight" (verse 9). That is just an inscrutable thing, and yet it is remarkable that it is given to us to know something of it, and the question is, therefore, what we do know. Then it is said that God made the *worlds* by the Lord Jesus. What worlds are they and where are they? We do not know how many there are, but then these things are written for our learning, and it is undoubtedly to bring about a state of spirituality in us, so as to enable us to enter into things, because presently we shall be caught up to heaven and join the Lord with one another in the air. We are coming to this almost at any moment, and the present time is a time of learning, so that we might be fit for all these things that are written for us, and that we might know something about them.
P.L. So that all this is to promote a spiritual state suited to eternity.
J.T. That is what I thought, because eternity is before us. We are going into it, and the dead in Christ are to rise first, and that is yet another thing we have to think of. Those that have died in Christ are to rise first, and those of us that remain are to be changed and caught up to meet the Lord in the air and so shall we be for ever with the Lord, "With the Lord" -- that is an eternal condition.
G.H.M. Do we get some help from the word in @Ezekiel 8, where it says, "The Spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heavens, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem ... . And behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the appearance that I saw in the valley".
{195}
J.T. That fits in with what we are talking about, for it is a question of what Ezekiel and the prophets came into. If the prophets had something that we have not got, and if Paul had something that we have not got, well now, why cannot we have it? That is the whole question this afternoon, as to whether it is possible for us to become more spiritual, and therefore to escape worldliness, and earthly-mindedness that is so apt to lay hold of us. It is not actual wickedness, but earthly-mindedness which is unspiritual. We do not know anything about these things, but is it not possible that we should know them? That is the whole question.
Ques. And would you say that throughout those fourteen years, through all kinds of sufferings, he had retained the impression as fresh as it was at the beginning in spirituality?
J.T. I would say that. He remembered fourteen years ago. He might put it into days, or into minutes, so to speak, but he knew it, he remembered it, and he mentioned it clearly so that they might understand that God had honoured him. He was to be honoured too, and the Corinthians were not honouring him at times; they did not honour Paul at times at Corinth. It very often happens that even ministers in our own times are not properly gauged as to their importance, and what value they are in the assembly. So that we should know each other, and know how to regard each other. Paul was not properly regarded at certain times, we can see that, and so he gives a long list of things that he endured, in chapter 11. He says in verse 32 of that chapter, "In Damascus the ethnarch of Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes shut up, wishing to take me; and through a window in a basket I was let down by the wall, and escaped his hands". That is to bring out the sufferings of Paul. Of course, we have the sufferings of Christ; Peter speaks
{196}
of the sufferings of Christ, but then we have the sufferings of Paul, for he followed Christ. That is the great thing for us to see, that he was a true follower of Christ, and he wished that we should be followers of him as he was of Christ.
Ques. Paul speaks of the matter of fasting. Would that have a bearing on this matter you are referring to?
J.T. There is a strong bearing on it, because the Lord says, "This kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting". Some kind of demon possession was referred to, but it could only be cast out by prayer and fasting. The early christians clearly knew about it and practised it. Paul did, anyway. So that "prayer and fasting" is a thing to be thought of, and how much we can acquire by it.
Ques. Why did Paul wait fourteen years before he spoke of this?
J.T. That is a good question. But why did he? He does not tell us. He just records it so that the brethren might think rightly of him, and how God had honoured him and what ability he had.
A.H. You referred to chapter 11, but Paul says there: "I do not lie", and now in this chapter he says: "I will say the truth". Why does he speak like that?
J.T. He wants to impress upon the Corinthians that he did not lie; he was truthful. Sometimes we are quite untruthful, in spirit, even if not actually or openly so. But Paul was not that; he was truthful. It is remarkable that he deigns to tell the Corinthians that he was that, and that he did not die.
W.S.S. I should like to ask whether you think that the Lord's day morning, after the Supper, would present the greatest opportunity to us to know something of this kind of thing?
J.T. I would think that is the truth. It is the Lord's supper, but the Lord deigns to allow ourselves
{197}
to have part in it, of course; it is intended for us, but the Spirit has part in it. The Spirit takes part in it and helps us to understand and to recall the Lord Himself, as it says in the note: 'For the calling of me to mind'. The Lord's supper is for a calling of Christ to mind, that we may take on of His character, and become like Him.
W.S.S. I was thinking how we might be carried by the Spirit at such a time into these spiritual realms.
J.T. I would say that fully. Some have indicated that we should not speak to the Spirit at all, but that is not true. We can speak to the Spirit; Peter did, calling Him Lord.
Ques. Have we not the word 'rapture' used in the typical language of the Song of Songs: "In his shadow have I rapture and sit down"? Does that not suggest an experience of the bride?
J.T. The word 'rapture' is great or intense enjoyment; it is the idea of pleasure.
J.S.E. May I ask if you think that the allusion to the Spirit in His authority in chapter 3 is set out to help us to see where the power is, and, in this chapter we are reading from, is Paul giving an illustration in himself as to the result of this?
J.T. I would say so. But, of course, we are dealing now with elevation, and it seems to be seen here really in a physical sense, because Paul says, "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I know a man in Christ fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows; ) such a one caught up to the third heaven". That is to say, it was an actual fact that he was caught up -- it was a physical matter. Then, as we were saying, where the worlds are is all akin to this. We cannot say how many there were, but whatever there were they were all made by Christ, for God made the worlds by Christ. It is a marvellous
{198}
thing that we know something about that, and we ought to enter into it more, that there is something of that kind for us, "By whom also he made the worlds".
Ques. Would you say something, please, about the thorn for the flesh in this regard?
J.T. That is just to check us if we are carried away by any success in service, because we are apt to think too much of ourselves and so we get a thorn for the flesh to humble us, as he says further, "If I shall desire to boast, I shall not be a fool; for I will say the truth; but I forbear, lest any one should think as to me above what he sees me to be, or whatever he may hear of me. And that I might not be exalted by the exceeding greatness of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn for the flesh", meaning that it was something to check the exertions of the flesh; it was to check that. "A thorn for the flesh, a messenger of Satan" -- a remarkable thing -- "that he might buffet me, that I might not be exalted". And so he says, "For this I thrice besought the Lord that it might depart from me. And he said to me" -- the Lord said to Paul -- "My grace suffices thee"; and then the Lord says further, "for my power is perfected in weakness". And then Paul says, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me. Wherefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in necessities, in persecutions, in straits, for Christ, for when I am weak, then I am powerful" (verses 9, 10). All this shows how a servant is to keep himself under -- keep his body under, so that he may not be carried away by his own importance, which is very apt to take hold of any of us.
F.W.K. Is there a sharp distinction drawn in verse 5? He speaks of "such a one", which was "a man in Christ", and then he says, "But of myself I will not boast"?
{199}
J.T. 'Myself' is what he was ordinarily down here. Suppose a man had a wife and children; it is just what he might be ordinarily down here, that is himself. But "a man in Christ" is another idea altogether outside of all that. That is a heavenly thought that we are to enter into while we are down here.
Ques. And was the messenger of Satan a divine preservative for the impressions that were lodged in the vessel?
J.T. I would think so; it was to save him. Such a vessel should be saved and the Lord knew that. We learn from the book of Acts how he failed several times; well, the Lord saw that, but He saved His servant, and He knows all about every one of us, and therefore we have to count on the Lord to help us, to save ourselves from the workings of the flesh, and the thorn for the flesh, whatever it may be, is useful for that.
Rem. In the first epistle Paul speaks of buffeting his own body, "But I buffet my body, and lead it captive".
J.T. Just so.
Ques. May I ask a question in relation to the service of God, as to whether in worshipping the Father you would confine yourself to the idea of spiritual and moral elevation, or whether it would be right to bring in the thought of being actually there soon?
J.T. I should think so; why should we not? The fourth chapter of first Thessalonians tells us "thus we shall be always with the Lord". Surely that is a great thought? It is a great and precious thought in the service of God that we have already in our minds, that in a moment we will be transported there, for we belong to the class of men that may be transported at any moment to heaven; that is
{200}
as changed. If we die, of course, our bodies go into the grave, but presently the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then those of us that are alive and remain will be caught up, but we have to be changed before we are caught up, and the Spirit does that, I think; the Spirit quickens us.
Rem. I asked the question because in the minds of many to refer to the physical idea of elevation is a drop in power. I think a good many brethren feel that.
J.T. It is, you might say, the hope of something.
Rem. I go fully with what you are saying.
J.T. Yes, quite so, I mean the items of faith, hope and love. These are items that stimulate us and help us in the service of God.
Ques. So that the two sides we have had before us today would properly enter into the service of God?
J.T. I should say so; all these are things that cause hope, "Hope does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us". The Spirit does that -- "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts". It is the Spirit's work to do that, and all that enters into the service of God to make us happy and hopeful in it.
F.B. Would you say a word as to the expression, "The power of the Christ may dwell upon me". Is that in view of his understanding what he had experienced; is that the power of the Spirit?
J.T. I think so. The power of Christ is the power of the Spirit; the power of God is the power of the Spirit. The divine Persons are inscrutable, but there are three and They are equal, according to the teaching we have in Scripture, but the economy into which we have come shows that two of Them take a lower place than one of Them; that is, the Father. Therefore all these things enter into the idea
{201}
of our service, because if we have joy in our service or if we have love in our service, well the Spirit of God does that for us, our service is improved. Our service in every sense is thus improved by the effect of the Spirit, and the love of God being shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit. So that here he says, "For when I am weak, then I am powerful". He is referring to what he has just said; it is a consequential matter. So that he is not afraid if persons come against him who want to kill him, even he is not overcome, because there is no more that they can do. They are left out, therefore. The saint thus is superior to all circumstances, and that is really the meaning of this chapter.
Ques. Does this show that support is greater than relief? The thorn was sent for his benefit, but he had also the grace of Christ to help him to sustain it.
J.T. Yes. "My grace suffices thee". The grace of Christ suffices us as to everything; it makes us powerful, so that when we are weak we are more powerful.
Ques. Why is it only Christ in this epistle? It is usually "Christ Jesus" in all his other epistles, and "in Christ Jesus" conveys so much more to our souls, does it not?
J.T. We get Christ Jesus and Jesus Christ, too. It is just a question of pursuing and taking up the Bible and looking into it and seeing what it means, because the context almost invariably explains what any text means. So that the Spirit of God has written in such a way as to explain Himself in all that is said in the Bible. The context helps us, "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete". The man of God is a man that is here for God, for His work and service.
{202}
A.W. In verse 8, where it says, "For this I thrice besought the Lord", is that the Lord Jesus or Lord Spirit?
J.T. That is the Lord Jesus. I besought the Lord Jesus that it might depart from me, it was the Lord Jesus who sent it to him. The Lord sent him the thorn, and the Lord would take it away. So that Paul besought the Lord to take it away.
G.C.S. Does this experience of Paul greatly stimulate his service: "Now *I* shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls" (verse 15)?
J.T. Yes. It was for the Corinthians souls, "Now *I* shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls". That is to say, Paul is showing what love he has for the Corinthians and how ready he is to serve them and even to lay down his life, if necessary. It shows what the Lord has set down in this chapter for us who are seeking to serve Him in any sense, and especially those who have gift to do it.
Ques. Is it like the Lord saying, "I am among you as he that serveth"?
J.T. Quite so; exactly. That is just what Paul says, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ". That is the idea, and he brings it out here.
Ques. Was Paul right in beseeching the Lord three times and then not going any further?
J.T. I think he was. It is an example for us. If you do not get an answer the third time, you may as well say the Lord is not going to answer you, because if He is going to answer you He will answer you the third time.
Ques. May I ask why this is disclosed to an assembly such as the Corinthians, as to whom, in the close of this chapter, he evidently has moral doubts?
J.T. Well, that explains what we are saying.
{203}
A.H. In verse 11 he charges them with making him become a fool.
J.T. That is the way they treated him! that is just what he is dealing with, and yet he loves them. It indicates how love must come into the matter with every one of us who is seeking to serve the Lord, so that we bear all things, hope all things, and do not give way, because of the opposition or criticism. Criticisms are very trying in service when people are doing the best they can.
A.J.G. Do you think it would be distasteful to the apostle to say all this about himself, but love required it to be said in order that he might get the proper place he should have with the Corinthians?
J.T. Quite so. That is what he means by "*ye* have compelled me". Their behaviour was scandalous when there was a brother like Paul doing so much for them. I use the word 'scandalous' because they really were. Chapter 11 of the first epistle shows that they were behaving very badly. If anyone reads it they will see what is meant.
J.O.S. Would what the Lord says in @John 15, verse 7, come in? "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall come to pass to you". Does that encourage us to take this matter up in prayer?
J.T. Quite so. It shows how we can get things and how the Lord is ready to answer our prayers.
{204}
BARNET -- READING
@Genesis 3: 1 - 24
J.T. It is remarkable that Satan does not appear at once under the well-known name of Satan, or even "the devil"; it is "the serpent" here. It says "the serpent was more crafty than any animal of the field which Jehovah Elohim had made". He is seen in his craft. It is a very solemn thing that he is presented in his craft, and as attacking the woman instead of the man, indicating that he always takes advantage of whatever weakness there may be and attacks through it. God takes pains to meet this situation, bringing forward the different ones involved. It is important that we should see how the human race, as we may call it, appears in this way, in view of all the wickedness that has been current, and is current, and how the enemy works through weakness, whatever it may be, taking advantage of it. God nevertheless never gives up His side of the matter, but He meets the enemy, and encourages us to do it too, to do it wisely. Satan's suggestion was in the way of enquiry. He said to the woman, "Is it even so, that God has said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And the woman said to the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, and ye shall not touch it, lest ye die. And the serpent said to the woman, Ye will not certainly die". That is, the serpent opens the idea of falsehood, lying. The Lord said, "He is a liar, and the father of it". John's gospel opens that up.
A.C.S.P. Does a readiness to entertain any questioning, such as the devil brings in here, lay us open to the more definite attack that follows? I was thinking of what you were saying, that the devil in his
{205}
craft begins with a question, "Is it even so, that God has said ..." and then he goes immediately to a blatant lie; he says, "Ye will not certainly die". One could not help being impressed with the audacious character of his attack, as way is made for him.
J.T. If you were to enquire, as, no doubt, you have, or any of us, as we have opportunity, we shall see how Satan works. The boldness and the audacious character of his attack here are very striking. There are so many we could mention if we wished to, but we should be aware of the character of the enemy we have to deal with, and clothe ourselves with the armour of God in meeting the attacks of the devil. So the Lord Himself shows us the way, in the manner in which He met all the attacks of Satan in the gospels.
Ques. Was Paul referring to this when he wrote, in @2 Corinthians 11: 3, "I fear lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft"?
J.T. Just so.
L.F.J. The woman goes too far when she says, "God has said, Ye shall not eat of it and ye shall not touch it" (verse 3). God did not say, Ye shall not touch it, in verse 17 of chapter 2. It seems as if she also was affected by the enemy and that she goes further than the truth herself.
A.G.R. Is not accuracy important in regard of what God has said? I was thinking of the Lord Jesus using the word of God in meeting the attack. He was accurate, whilst Satan was not.
J.T. Just so.
A.Mac. Am I right in thinking that the tree of life is in the midst of the garden, and not the tree of knowledge of good and evil?
J.T. Well, quite. Perhaps we might read what the devil actually says, "And the serpent was more crafty than any animal of the field which Jehovah Elohim had made. And it said to the woman. Is it
{206}
even so, that God has said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And the woman said to the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, and ye shall not touch it, lest ye die".
A.C.S.P. In the previous chapter it says in verse 16, "And Jehovah Elohim commanded Man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou shalt freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest of it thou shalt certainly die". Verse 9 says, "And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim made every tree grow that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; and the tree of life, in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil". The woman refers to the tree in the midst of the garden, which was not accurate. It says in verse 2 of chapter 3, "And the woman said to the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, and ye shall not touch it, lest ye die. And the serpent said to the woman, Ye will not certainly die; but God knows that in the day ye eat of it, your eyes will be opened, and ye will be as God, knowing good and evil".
J.T. Perhaps you would enlarge on the whole matter yourself, and help us all.
A.C.S.P. I think what has been touched on will help us as to this need of accuracy, that we should discern that when something that is not strictly in keeping with the word of God is quoted, we need immediately to be on our guard against it, because a readiness to listen may lead us into a more dangerous position and lay us open to attack.
J.T. Quite so. The thing is to be on our guard as to weak points and be sure to have our armour
{207}
on. "For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4: 12. First the armour and then the means of attack by advance.
Ques. In connection with the weak points you have referred to. Peter says, "Ye husbands likewise, dwell with them" (that is, wives) "according to knowledge, as with a weaker, even the female, vessel". Would that be in keeping with what you mean as to the attack being made through the weaker vessel, the woman?
J.T. That is right. We know from the facts Scripture speaks of that the enemy will attack. We cannot just account for Satan, where he originated, but we do know that he is ready to attack as he finds opportunity, and that he attacks at the weakest point. The thought therefore would be for us to have the armour or means of protection, and then the power of advance in the sword of the Spirit.
F.E.S. You have been drawing a good deal of attention to the need of discernment recently, I was wondering whether the background here of Satan's craftiness would be met by the Spirit helping us with the quality of discernment, and whether the way in which wisdom is available to us, as in Proverbs, would help us in relation to this very matter.
J.T. That is good. Will you tell us what you are alluding to in Proverbs.
F.E.S. I was thinking of the earlier chapters. It says in chapter 4, verse 5, "Get wisdom, get intelligence"; and then in chapter 8, wisdom is presented as so surely available.
P.L. "The path of life is upwards for the wise, that he may depart from Sheol beneath", @Proverbs 15: 24.
J.T. Just so. So that Satan's attack is very plain.
{208}
A.M. Would that enter into Adam having named this creature, the serpent, as having some knowledge of its character?
J.T. Quite so; but no doubt you have something more to say.
A.M. I was wondering if Adam perhaps was more discerning than his wife.
J.T. Quite so, but we have to take the facts as they come; it says in verse 2, "And the woman said to the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, and ye shall not touch it, lest ye die". There is clearly inaccuracy in her remarks there. Then we have the serpent's further attack; he said to the woman, "Ye will not certainly die". That is a barefaced lie, but it shows what we have to contend with. Then he further says, "but God knows" as if he pretended he knew what God knows, "that in the day ye eat of it, your eyes will be opened, and ye will be as God, knowing good and evil". Well now, there is the attack, and it is marked by a downright lie. Whoever may be the instrument of it, that is the kind of thing we have to deal with, and therefore the need is to have the sword of the Spirit -- the word of God.
A.C.S.P. Is it significant that the references to the armour and the sword of the Spirit, in @Ephesians 6, follow so closely after the apostle's speaking as to Christ and as to the assembly, as though the devil would attack immediately the choicest thoughts of God are brought out?
J.T. Yes, and another thing too is the first epistle to Timothy, where we have the idea of man and what man is according to God.
A.H. Are you thinking of @1 Timothy 2: 14, "And Adam was not deceived; but the woman, having been deceived, was in transgression". And verse 11,
{209}
"Let a woman learn in quietness in all subjection; but I do not suffer a woman to teach nor to exercise authority over man, but to be in quietness; for Adam was formed first, then Eve".
J.T. Well now, the whole position is laid bare there. It is the character of the woman, and Satan is seizing that in his attack here. So it is a question now of our getting instruction, because we are in the midst of this sort of thing, whoever the agents may be; we are in the midst of this sort of thing and we ought to be ready to meet it, and clearly we must have the armour on, which Eve did not have. And then we have to have the means of advance and attack, so that we can advance when there is attack made. That is to say, we need the word of God, which is quick and powerful, "For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart".
P.L. Is "the helmet of salvation" that wherewith the man would rebut the foe's insinuations?
J.T. Very good.
P.L. I thought the moment she listened she was gone, in principle, so to speak.
J.T. Yes; she listened; quite so; and we should note the plausible phraseology that often accompanies an attack of this kind.
Ques. Paul speaks in @2 Corinthians 11: 3, "But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ". Do you think the enemy here, the serpent, was on that line with Eve -- he was corrupting her thoughts?
J.T. So that she should have hidden in her proper place. She was not first formed; Adam was first formed. She should have hidden behind that and not listened to the serpent at all, or, at least, she
{210}
should have referred him to her husband. She did not appear to do that; she listened to him and acted, and then deceived her husband too, but she was in the transgression.
H.W.S. I would like to ask if the parable of the sower helps in this matter, as to whether the woman did not deliver up the word that was sown in her heart. The Lord says, "These are they by the wayside where the word is sown, and when they hear, immediately Satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them", @Mark 4: 15.
J.T. Sown in the heart; not in the mind but in the heart, the place of affection. The mind is often put before that, and, of course, the mind is particularly alluded to in connection with the Lord's supper -- 'Do this for a calling of me to mind' -- but the heart is the seat of the affections. It is safer to trust the mind at times, because the mind is formed with great intelligence. It has more intelligence, of course, because the very word 'mind' would indicate that, "*We* have the mind of Christ", and that is the idea, to hide behind the position in which we are set, where obedience is required. "Obedience is better than sacrifice, attention than the fat of rams".
J.S.E. Is not the whole matter of headship at stake here, and the serpent brings forward a challenge to it and acquires his greatest success?
J.T. Very good; so the idea of headship enters remarkably into the instructions as regards the Lord's supper. It is a peculiar fact that the first epistle to the Corinthians provides for the mind. The Lord mentions it in connection with His Supper: 'a calling of me to mind'. The mind is taxed, as it were, to be used in meeting the enemy, and so the head of the woman is the man, "I wish you to know that the Christ is the head of every man, but woman's head is the man, and the Christ's head God", @1 Corinthians 11: 3. It is remarkable instruction at
{211}
that particular point, because it is a question of what leads up to the service of God. The full thought of the service of God begins there.
Ques. Would it be right to say that the serpent is really attacking the man through the woman?
J.T. Just so. He attacks at the weakest point that opens out in any given circumstance. If there is an attack being made, the weakest point would be attacked by the devil.
Ques. So that his attack against the assembly is really an attack against Christ? Christ is the objective?
J.T. Quite so.
F.E.S. Does not this scripture emphasise the importance of what you have drawn attention to elsewhere -- the question of the token? Is not that principle seen here?
J.T. Just so. That is a point that always comes up in these circumstances; and so the woman is to have authority, a token, on her head because of the angels. That is a protection, that she is under authority.
A.C.S.P. And that teaching comes in in connection with the remark: "Man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man. Therefore ought the woman to have authority on her head, on account of the angels". Does it really show the wisdom of God that has arranged things so as to get the very best for Himself and for the Lord Jesus, and do we need to recognise that order in every detail, whether it be the general ordering of creation or the family relationships which Ephesians deals with -- fathers and children, and husbands and wives?
J.T. Just so; and so that raises the question of mediatorship, that Christ is the Mediator of creation, and then all else. He is the Mediator of everything. It says, "the mediator of God and men one, the man
{212}
Christ Jesus". The idea of mediatorship is in Christ, and it is through Him we are saved. In an attack being made, we can take shelter under the Lord's leadership. He is Mediator.
P.L. "The name of Jehovah is a strong tower, the righteous runneth into it, and is safe", @Proverbs 18: 10.
J.T. Quite so. "The mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all" -- the heart is secured in that way -- "the testimony to be rendered in its own times". That is to give assurance.
R.B. Is it to be noticed that at the end of Revelation, immediately after the devil is finally disposed of in the lake of fire, you have the heavenly city coming down, "prepared as a bride adorned for her husband"? I was thinking of what has been said as to headship.
J.T. Quite so. The chapter really opens up so much. It is the very beginning of the truth, and man is the centre of it here, the word 'man' covering man and woman, according to the word, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion". The plural is there at once -- the man and the woman. The man comes first and then the woman, but they are both together, "let them have dominion". They are united in it, and that will run through the Scriptures.
A.L.R.T. Would you help us as to how this matter might take form practically as referring to Christ in the face of an insidious attack of Satan. How would it be met according to the truth? I was thinking of what you said just now, that she failed in not referring to her head, she presumed to answer Satan herself for them both. How would that apply today in a practical way?
J.T. I think instruction on these chapters would help us in these matters because these chapters are
{213}
intended to set out the beginning of man, the beginning of the Christ. Someone wrote me today to say that he heard that I said that man was created before angels, which was not the truth. It is an untrue statement, but that is the way things are said; and the thing is to be bold and open and frank in answer. The suggestion that man was created before angels is absolutely untrue. We do not know when angels were created, but we do know when man was created, because we have it in the first chapter of Genesis, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion". So we get instruction as to what is to be done. It is first man and then the woman. God has given instructions; therefore the thing would be to abide by the instructions. So in the attacks of the devil against the Lord in the gospels, the Lord's answers certainly afford immense instruction for us as to all these matters.
A.H. You referred to the word of God. Does that come in here in verse 8, "And they heard the voice of Jehovah Elohim"? Is that the great antidote to the subtle lies of Satan?
J.T. Just so. It says "they heard the voice of Jehovah Elohim" -- we have both names -- "walking in the garden in the cool of the day. And Man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of Jehovah Elohim, in the midst of the trees of the garden". Well, why should they hide themselves? God had shown His beneficence to them. It is a matter of frankness in all these matters, and, of course, declaring the truth, "abundantly declared the thing as it is!" Job says (@Job 26: 3). Whatever it is, declare it fully.
Ques. Is not the fear of exposure a very basic thing? We should not be afraid of exposure in God's sight.
{214}
J.T. Exactly. We should have confidence in God. Even if there is exposure, well, God is God, and He has shown men here in Genesis that what comes out as to Himself is always to inspire confidence in Himself on the part of man, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion". God is indicating what His thought about man is at once, so the word 'Man' is written with a capital letter because it is '*the* Man' really. In God's mind the idea of man is to be respected, because man is man, and God made him superior to the woman, although the same word covers them both, only that man comes first; man was formed first, not the woman.
J.S.E. Is it not a fact that we are called upon to face the situation as it is now that superiority is placed before us at this juncture in the history?
J.T. That is just what I was saying -- abundantly declaring the thing as it is. The conditions generally are so serious that it behoves us to be transparent and open in what we are saying, especially in speaking of the things of God. We are to be accurate in what we are saying, quoting Scripture properly; and the Spirit of God is with us from the very outset, because the word is, at the beginning of this book, "The Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters". That is the full thought of the Spirit. He was there from the very outset, with all indication that He is God. He is the Spirit of God. He represents God in the fullest sense.
A.C.S.P. Is the suggestion that even as God begins to operate with man in view, there is abundant resource available already to meet the worst that the enemy can do?
J.T. Just so. There is abundant resource, so that we can afford to declare the thing abundantly as it is. Give plenty of information if it is needed, because language is for us too. Language is the most wonderful
{215}
thing of God's handiwork. It is God's provision, and how man is taught to use it.
P.L. Let the worst be known; it will only make room for God bringing in the best.
J.T. Just so. God is God, and already He has shown in the first few pages that He is beneficent, and ready to do good. 'God is good'.
A.H. At Maidstone you made a very striking remark, which I wonder if we might repeat here, that the word of God really is God Himself. In plentifully declaring the thing and bringing in that word, is that how the situation is met?
J.T. Yes. Just so. If you read it through you will see how accurately it is stated, in @Hebrews 4.
A.C.S.P. "For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do".
J.T. I think that is a statement which we should all take to heart. What do you say about it, Mr. H.?
A.H. I was greatly impressed myself when you made that remark, that the word of God really is God Himself, inasmuch as the scripture you have just asked to be read from @Hebrews 4 goes on to the reference to His eyes. God's eyes, indicating, do you think, that God Himself is brought into the matter as His word comes to bear on us?
J.T. Just so -- the eyes of him "with whom we have to do". That is God Himself.
Ques. Does the reference to His voice, "the voice of Jehovah Elohim", suggest that His heart is in this matter, searching His creature?
J.T. Just so. 'Elohim' is simply God. 'Jehovah' is the name furnished later, in Exodus. It is a
{216}
softening down of the thought of God by the addition, so that we should have all the more confidence in Him.
A.L.R.T. I was thinking of the reference to His voice. Does it not imply really that His feelings were in this matter as He was seeking His creature?
J.T. Well, just so. If you are thinking of His voice conveying His feelings. It conveys affections. God's voice, what is it like? We have the word in @1 Samuel 24, "Is this thy voice, my son David?"
A.L.R.T. Would that apply too to the Spirit, "Thou hearest its voice" in the allusion to the wind in @John 3?
J.T. Quite so, "Thou ... knowest not whence it comes and where it goes, thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". There is the power.
Ques. Is the setting here "in the garden in the cool of the day" to emphasise the softening way in which God moves?
J.T. Just so. He comes down to where we are, to indicate that He is not far away from us. The word in Philippians is "The Lord is near". A beautiful word! He comes down to give us assurance that He is near and ready to help us.
Ques. Would the question, "Where art thou?" indicate the deep feelings of God as having lost His creature man?
J.T. I think so. But we ought to proceed. We have already touched on what the woman said, and what the serpent said. Then again we have in verse 6, "And the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a pleasure for the eyes, and the tree was to be desired to give intelligence; and she took of its fruit, and ate, and gave also to her husband with her, and he ate. And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig-leaves together, and made themselves aprons". Well now,
{217}
that shows clearly enough what we have to deal with in Satan's effort and in the weakness of the woman, and then Adam coming under her influence, for he was remiss too, and it runs right through the Scriptures.
H.W.S. It says in chapter 2 that "Jehovah Elohim made every tree grow that is pleasant to the sight", to show us that it was a thing to be desired. Is that in line with James, where he says, "Let no man, being tempted, say, I am tempted of God. For God cannot be tempted by evil things, and himself tempts no one. But every one is tempted, drawn away, and enticed by his own lust; then lust, having conceived, gives birth to sin; but sin fully completed brings forth death". Was it in that order, that there was lust, and then sin, and then death?
J.T. Just so. He was remiss in listening to the woman. He ought to have known too, and asserted himself. The man ought to assert himself. He has the superior knowledge, and he ought to take the lead. Therefore the place women have just now in the world is altogether contrary to the truth of these chapters, and we have to be on our guard not to be drawn into this way of doing or thinking, because God has set the man over the house. The man is head of the house, but the woman fits in there; she is to do things, for she guides the house. She is not the head of the house, but she guides it. It is a very beautiful thought. It encourages confidence that the right words and thoughts are conveyed here. It is where they are needed.
J.S.E. Does the history of Vashti come to our aid in this matter? That broken commandment did not alter this principle. I was just thinking of the reference to her in the book of Esther. When she was called that her beauty might be displayed, she refused to come. That is, she disregarded this great matter of headship as to herself, and the word was
{218}
that something must be done to put this right in order to maintain the principle of a man bearing rule in his own house.
J.T. That is right. We have that especially in that book.
P.L. It says in that passage, "All the wives shall give to their husbands honour, from the greatest to the least", and then later it says, "Every man should bear rule in his own house, and should speak according to the language of his people".
J.T. Very good. Another thing that comes up there -- is whether prayer is mentioned in Esther or whether it is just fasting that was called for in a time of great need.
P.L. You are referring to the verse "Go, gather together all the Jews that are found in Shushan, and fast for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise", @Esther 4: 16.
J.T. I am only calling attention to that so that we might pay attention to the actual accuracy of Scripture. We often say, 'Let us pray about it', but there are other things. Sometimes it is not prayer; what is needed is fasting.
A.C.S.P. Do you mean there are some things where the truth is so plainly known that it is not a matter of prayer, but of acting?
J.T. Just so.
P.L. Is that why Joshua is told to get up and act? "And Jehovah said to Joshua, Rise up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face? Israel hath sinned", @Joshua 7: 10.
J.T. That is the point, "Rise up". You should know what to do, and do it!
F.E.S. In God's approach to the woman here, is there a certain model for us as to the way in which things should be done, coming in the cool of the day, in the garden? I was wondering if there is not some
{219}
pattern for us in seeking to get to a person's conscience, where there is need of recovery.
J.T. Just so. Then what happened? "Man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of Jehovah". That is where the defect lay; they were not transparent.
F.E.S. I was only just thinking of the principle, that in seeking to get at a person's conscience in view of recovery or adjustment, where there is this attitude of drawing near so to speak in the cool of the day in the setting of the garden, it would all help to put them at the very best advantage in relation to the matter.
J.T. Yes, but all the facts have to be mentioned, whatever the case may be. It says in verse 9, "And Jehovah Elohim called to Man, and said to him, Where art thou? And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I feared". Why should he say that? He is not transparent. He is not open in what he is doing. Neither is she either. These are defects that are to be faced when an attack is made.
J.S.E. Do we not always fear when we surrender headship? Are we not always at ease when we accept it and move in it? I wondered if that is why the word 'I' and not 'we' is emphasised here. It is the actual man himself who answers.
J.T. He hides behind the fact that the woman did it, but he should take on the responsibility. The man is head, and the responsibility rests with him. Really he did not face the thing. There was not integrity and openness and honesty, and these are things we have to deal with in assembly matters. These are the very things we have to deal with, and we can get correction now in the scripture before us.
Ques. In dealing with the matter, does not God bring it back to them? While He first addresses Himself to the man and then to the woman and then to the serpent. He works back again and addresses
{220}
Himself to the woman, but finally completes the matter with the man and places the responsibility there.
J.T. Just so. He places it where it should be.
Ques. So that whatever failure there is in headship, the man is held responsible?
J.T. Just so. 'Responsibility' is the word, and we should face it, if we are responsible. Let us face the matter and be open, honest and transparent.
E.C.L. He says to the man, "Where art thou?" He says to the woman, "What is this thou hast done?" Is there something in that?
J.T. Yes, indeed.
E.C.L. The question of departure having come in in the man too.
J.T. I think Mr. Darby makes a good deal of that in certain writings of his. It is a question of where are you morally and what governs you? "What is this thou hast done?" If there is a confession to be made, make it at once.
Ques. Would there be two things really to face? First, the preparedness for exposure, and secondly, the acceptance of responsibility?
J.T. Just so.
{221}
MAIDSTONE -- READING (1)
@Hebrews 1: 1 - 14
J.T. It may be wise that we should be reminded of the character of the epistle to Hebrews. It is an epistle, as the title indicates, addressed to Jewish believers at the beginning of our dispensation. Those believers, however, were declining and weakening in the faith, and sin is treated very seriously -- more seriously than in any of the other epistles, so that in Hebrews it really is not to be forgiven. It is thought that in view of all this the epistle should be considered, and we should have two readings today, one reading tomorrow and two readings on Monday, God willing. There is thus fairly good scope to consider the epistle, and it may be remarked that the quotations from the Old Testament (and there are relatively many) are largely from the book of Psalms. They are almost entirely so, either directly or indirectly, and this would remind us too of the need of experience. The book of Psalms may be taken to be that -- experience with God, and we would, no doubt, all admit that we need that very much to cope with such a world as is about us. Another thing, of course, that enters into the Psalms is that it contains five books, and they are written in the main or collected by David, and he himself is said to be "the sweet psalmist of Israel". So that, in view of these facts, we have now a most precious opportunity to consider what is available to us, not as Hebrews or as unregenerate people but as believers. The word 'faith' is greatly enlarged in the epistle to the Hebrews, and it is said there that "without faith it is impossible to please him". And another thing that comes into Hebrews is the thought of salvation, so that it says, "*We* are not drawers back to perdition, but of faith to saving the soul".
{222}
Salvation is in the realm of the assembly. Of course, it is in Christ, but it is in the realm of the assembly, and that would be in our minds too, in what we have to say about it.
A.J.G. What is in mind in the epistle's commencing with such a distinctive presentation of the glory of Christ?
J.T. I think there was the need of the Hebrew christians, and there is the need now of so-called professing christians, to understand fully and maintain in the soul, and in the assembly too, the deity of Christ. The Person of Christ is the main thought, because there is so much to the contrary, worldliness having deadened the feelings and affections of most of the so-called brethren abroad; so-called christians, because the word 'christian' is not applicable except in professing saints. No doubt in most of the denominations, including the Church of England, there are many christians, many whom we regard as christians, and rightly so, but there are many too who are not christians. There are those in the Church of England and other churches, so-called, such as Unitarians or Christian Scientists that are not christians. These terrible things are current, and hence there is the need of considering such a book as the epistle to the Hebrews. So the book opens -- "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son". Now the word 'end' there, as you will see in the notes at the bottom of the page, refers to the days when the Messiah was to be introduced. The end is to lead up to the thought of the Messiah, that is to say, Christ, and that helps us as to the dispensation in which we are, that we are in the dispensation of faith, not that of the law. The Lord Jesus was born under the law, and He witnessed to the truth in it -- as under it, but at the same time knowing that the
{223}
end was near. But He came to die, and so in verse 3 it says: "having made by himself the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high ..." "Set himself down" -- the Lord did it Himself; it is a question of His own power, that is, He is Himself God. The speaking, too, was "in Son", the word being without the article infers that the Person speaking is God. Therefore I think it is perhaps needed that each of us should take to heart how we hold the truth of the Lord's Person, and then all that enters into it in the sense of the divine service. For while He is God Himself, yet He is in the relation of Son; that is, it is a question of sonship. So that it is more necessary that we should be loyal to Him in regard to His personal deity. He has "set himself down", it says, and the word 'Himself' implies that; it treats of Himself in His inmost feelings. But He is God; He has set Himself down; no one else except a divine Person could do that.
Ques. Would that bring out the greatness of the way in which He has accomplished redemption?
J.T. Quite so. It says, "Having made by himself the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high". He accomplished redemption and set Himself down, not in heaven simply, but at the right hand of the greatness on high; that is where power is. "All power has been given me", He said, "in heaven and upon earth". So He sat down after having accomplished redemption, that is to say, the purification of sins.
A.J.G. Does that mean that the way is now clear for the bringing in of all God's thoughts and there is power to make them effective?
J.T. That is the way I would look at it -- power to make them effective. Redemption, of course, involves power because it involves the resurrection. Christ is raised from the dead by the glory of the
{224}
Father. So there is power there. He has raised Himself, really. The Son is spoken of, and it is a question of Himself; what He does. Several times He refers to Himself as having such power, and it is a question of what He does in power.
N.K.M. What would be the significance of the expression, "the greatness on high"?
J.T. The word 'greatness' is abstract, of course, and it carries with it all that we are speaking of. It is an action of a divine Person, that He goes there; He can take His place there. He is a divine Person -- He is God Himself, the Son.
A.H. Is it the created realm or outside the created realm?
J.T. Both. He goes beyond the created realm, but He also operates in the created realm, because we are brought into it. So that both thoughts are involved. The uncreated realm is an infinite idea; it is abstract, but it is infinite, and is wholly beyond the reach of the natural mind. It is wonderful that we have part in these things, and Hebrews, in fact, treats of us as having part in it, as we shall see later. It is a question of what we are as having part in redemption, and we have a right that others have no claim to at all. We shall see that later, at the end of the book. The deity of Christ is the main thought running right through, and that is clearly in order to deliver us from what corresponds with judaism. What judaism was at the beginning, mere professing christianity is now. There are those who are real in it, but the thing as a public system is doomed according to the Scriptures. The apostasy is coming in and we are to be saved out of it, but it is coming upon all the world, to try those that are dwelling upon the earth. The Lord has promised that to Philadelphia, and Philadelphia represents undoubtedly the assembly in its present circumstances.
{225}
F.C.H. Are there not two distinct lines of attack on the Person of Christ at the present time? One an attack on His deity, and the other an attack on the reality and excellence of His manhood.
J.T. Quite so; without His manhood there could be no redemption. As Paul said even as to the resurrection: "If Christ be not raised ... ye are yet in your sins". We are left in our sins if Christ -- the Son of man, the Lord Jesus -- did not become Man to accomplish redemption. We should be *yet*, even at this minute, in our sins.
P.L. In the second book of Psalms, in the last one of them, the 72nd, it says, "Blessed be his glorious name for ever! and let the whole earth be filled with his glory! Amen, and Amen. The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended". Is that finality?
J.T. Just so. That is, the needs of the saints are ended. There is no more need for prayer meetings, if that can be understood. When we are translated to heaven there is no need of prayer any more.
J.S.E. Would it be opportune to ask for a little in relation to the statement, "by whom also he made the worlds"?
J.T. I think we had a little word about that in Edinburgh, which might be repeated here. The word 'worlds' is in the plural, of course. It is 'worlds', it is not 'world'. We, of course, know one of them; we know of the one we are in now at the present time literally, but how many there are we do not know. Therefore it is an infinite thought, but it is a mediatorial thought too; God did it, but He did it by Christ. It is a mediatorial thought, but it is an infinite thought, because we are not told how many there are. We have to do with the *worlds*, which causes us to feel our littleness, for we can scarcely regard ourselves as in the divine realm at all, in that sense, that is to say viewed as this chapter gives
{226}
it, because the chapter says: "Who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power". When we deal with all these things we feel that we are not equal to what is presented; only Christ is equal to these wonderful things. So that it brings about the feeling of reverence and the feeling of littleness too in ourselves. We have to feel how very small we are as compared with the facts of this chapter.
Ques. Could it all be expressed in one word -- 'infinite'?
J.T. Yes, but I think 'inscrutable' is a better word than 'infinite'. It is inscrutable, that is to say, we are left to realise that we are outside the range of all these great things, and yet in a *certain* sense we are dependent on them and have part in them. In that certain sense, things should come before us so as to be intelligible to us, because it is a question of spiritual discernment as to these matters.
Ques. In chapter 11 it says, "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God". What bearing would that have on our discernment?
J.T. Quite a good bearing. It is based on these facts that are before us now: Chapter 11 is towards the end of the book, but we are at the first chapter now, so that we have to get understanding about the facts of the first chapter in order to come to the eleventh chapter. Chapter 11 is to give an account of faith and to show how faith worked out in the Old Testament times and how it works out now. So that it says, at the end of the chapter, "They should not be made perfect without us". That is to say, the Old Testament saints were not perfect, for redemption had not been accomplished. Redemption is required for perfection, in the sense in which the word is used.
{227}
J.S.E. Are you feeling that there is a necessity amongst us for more simple bowing to divine assertions?
J.T. I go with that, fully.
J.S.E. And when that is a settled matter, does it make room for the Spirit to bring in the matter of our apprehension?
J.T. I think that is the great point that God has caused to come to light and to come into our minds recently, because the Spirit searches the depths of God. It is "the depths"; He is God Himself, and He knows everything. Hence we have just to understand and accept that things are inscrutable, but we have to bow to them, knowing they are there, although they are beyond us. But knowing they are there, that is a great point too. It tends to keep us in the realm of intelligence, and the more intelligence we have the more we want, and the more we get if we want it. John contemplates that we know all things because we have the Spirit, the unction. By the unction even the little children, in the sense John speaks of them, know all things.
J.S.E. Does your reference to man being relatively recent in the creation lay the road open in our minds for this contrast of the Son with angels?
J.T. I think God reserved the great thoughts attaching to man, in view of the Lord Jesus coming in. He reserved man for His greatest thoughts; and the Son having become Man, that explains it all. If the Son had not become Man, we should be still unredeemed, but the Son of God having come, and redemption having been accomplished, we are in the day of the Spirit, and we know all things. That could not be said in the Old Testament time. The brethren, therefore, would do well to be sure that they have the Spirit, and that they recognise Him in all the fulness in which He is presenting Himself during the current time.
{228}
C.H. Are there then certain things which we apprehend without being able to compass them?
J.T. Very good, 'Comprehend' is a greater thought than 'apprehend'.
Ques. As to the expression, "the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance" -- is that inscrutable?
J.T. It is, and there is a note to the word 'substance' that helps us. It indicates that the essential being of God is in mind in the word 'substance' here. It is said of the Son, "whom he has established heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance". The reference is to what Christ is as the expression of the divine substance. It is not 'person' but 'essential being'; that is to say, Christ is in the glory the expression of the essential being of God, and He could only be that owing to the fact that He is God Himself. As John's epistle says: "He is the true God and eternal life". The true God is the greatest thought, of course. There could not be anything greater than the true God.
Wm.H. Would the suggestion of the "expression of his substance" bring what God is within our range morally?
J.T. 'Within our range morally', meaning that there is distance. You think of God, and it says, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". It would mean there that He is within our range in that sense; also according to @Matthew 5 certain ones are said to see God. The meaning, therefore, must be, not of seeing His essential being, but the expression of it in One, who, though in manhood, is Himself God.
A.M.P. Would these expressions be intended to induce worship?
{229}
J.T. They are intended to induce worship. The scripture says, "He is thy Lord, and worship thou him". That 'Him' refers to Christ, but whether it be God the Father, or the Son, or the Spirit. All are the Object of worship. All have their part in the worship, and anyone that denies that the Spirit of God is to be worshipped denies the truth.
Ques. Would it be right to say that the created realm has been brought into being for the glory of Christ and that God might be fully expressed in Him?
J.T. Well, the glory of creation, of course, comes very short of the full thought of the glory -- the expression of the Father's glory. It says here: "By whom also he made the worlds; who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance". That is God Himself, but there is some outlet in what we have in the word used here, "Whom he has established heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power, having made by himself the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high, taking a place by so much better than the angels, as he inherits a name more excellent than they". So that the divine Beings are in mind now and it is a question of how far we can apprehend Them. The word 'apprehend' has been used and I believe it is a good word to use, because it keeps us in our place. We cannot undertake to say that we comprehend the divine Beings; we do not, it is beyond us.
J.S.E. I think the word 'outlet' will help us as we proceed with this chapter, because there could be no outlet apart from this Person, the Son?
J.T. There must be the mediatorial link between the divine and the creature, or there can be no link
{230}
at all, and I believe that mediatorial link will go on into eternity. I fully believe that when we are changed and taken up into heaven and made like Christ, the mediatorial link will continue.
C.H. Because God will remain God, and the creature will remain the creature, however blessed.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Does that truth in Timothy therefore fit in: "The mediator of God and men one".
J.T. Just so -- "the man Christ Jesus". That links it up with the Lord being Man, not that I would exclude the conditions before the incarnation, because He was mediator then too. God made the worlds by Him -- that is mediatorship. He made the worlds, the Lord Jesus brought the world that we are in into being on the ground of mediatorship -- it was His doing.
A.W. So His mediatorship is not simply based on His incarnation.
J.T. Not simply. I wonder if the brethren would be kind enough to say what they think about that, because it is a time for learning. We are all here now and we are to learn from each other. There is not much to be gained in meetings such as this unless we say what we think of. If things are left unsaid, or unacknowledged, then we do not come to the real facts.
J.S.E. May I just remind the brethren of what was presented to us at Croydon, in the need for distinguishing between the word 'mediatorial' and the actual word 'mediator', which occurs in relation to Christ relative to God and men. Was it not said there that the Spirit has His place in mediatorial service, and does that not help us in the understanding of this word, "By whom also he made the worlds"?
J.T. Quite so. The three divine Beings are all in it. It is a question of whether we can discern, at
{231}
any given time, who is speaking, which of the divine Persons is speaking, or whether They are all implied in what is said. So that it is a learning time, as I said, and the point is that we should learn and seek to learn from one another.
R.W.S. It says in Job: "By his Spirit the heavens are adorned", @Job 26: 13.
J.T. Very good; that was a mediatorial service.
Ques. Is it true that from the outset of divine activities the incarnation was in view, and that the Persons of the Godhead acted in the order in which They have come out since?
J.T. Could you quote a scripture to show what you are speaking about?
Rem. I was thinking of the one we were on. "By whom also he made the worlds", and then "by his spirit he hath garnished the heavens", as though the Son and the Spirit were active in a mediatorial way from the outset in view of the incarnation.
J.T. The Son was not active *as* Son.
Rem. Not as Son -- no.
J.T. Because He comes in in time -- "this day have I begotten thee" -- which shows that He did not have part in the creation in that sense *as* Son. He has part in other things, but not in the sense of Son.
H.W. Have you in mind that the One who became Son acted in a mediatorial way?
J.T. That is right. The expression 'became' is right, according to @John 1. "The Word became flesh". It was not that He was always flesh, but He *became* it -- "and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory)", that is, as in flesh, and that is the point of christianity, and all *that* enters into the divine counsels in manhood and in relation to the earth.
W.C. In @1 Peter 1: 19, it says, "By precious blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without
{232}
spot, the blood of Christ, foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world". Would that confirm what has been said as to mediatorship not being based simply on the incarnation?
J.T. It is a question of foreknowledge. Quite so. That is to say, Christ was apprehended and spoken of in the divine counsels in view of His Manhood, "Lo, I come", He says, "to do, O God, thy will". That is anticipative. That is before He became Man, but He was anticipating it.
F.C.H. Would you say a word as to the quotation from @Psalm 2? It seems to be one divine Person speaking to Another, does it not? It says, "I will declare the decree; Jehovah hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee".
J.T. Quite so. That is, the incarnation is in view, because "this day" refers to time. Many in earlier days, in connection with the trouble we have had on the point of sonship, would claim that it did not refer to time but that it referred to eternity, whereas it did not. It refers to time -- "this day" refers to time.
F.C.H. And would the One speaking to the Other include the peculiar pleasure of both Persons?
J.T. That is right, I would say that. So it is precious for each and all of us to ponder these communications between the Father and the Son, and any communications that are available to us by the Spirit between each other, because divine knowledge is in the assembly -- it is in us. It has been placed there, of course, for it is not there inherently, but, at the same time, it *is* in it. That is a fact, and therefore we have all come to the idea of intelligence.
A.J.G. Is that not borne out by this very chapter, that the truth of the Person of Christ is built up from what is drawn from what was in the souls of God's people and expressed in the Psalms?
{233}
J.T. Very good. That is just what I thought. How precious the Psalms are! There are five books, corresponding, we might say, to the Pentateuch, because there is no doubt that there is a relation between the two; it is a question of Moses and David. David is the sweet psalmist of Israel, whereas Moses is the man that God raised up to set out the truth of the creation.
A.J.G. Would you say that the glories that are indicated in all these quotations which are brought in in this chapter, together constitute the name more excellent than that of angels?
J.T. Very good. Perhaps you will enlarge on that.
A.J.G. It says, "as he inherits a name more excellent than they", that is, the angels. I thought perhaps the Spirit of God was stressing the exceeding greatness of christianity, and that the quotations together constitute the name.
J.T. We do not know when angels were created, nor how many of them were created. Then there are other suggestions too, such as the seraphim and the cherubim, which are just symbols. So that it is well to have all these things in mind at a time like this when we are drawing near to the appearing, so that we might be living in the realm of the appearing anticipatively, and learn to think anticipatively of what is coming in. We all ought to be in these things, and be accustomed to the thought of angels and what they are, and where they come in in the service of God, for angelic service is an immense service. This chapter says, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?". So that they are to be servants to us, but they are wonderful servants to God too. They were serving God before, for it says "all the sons of God shouted for joy". We can say but very little as to them; their beings are inscrutable, as we are saying, but, at the same time, they are available
{234}
to us for service, and we know this from the last verse of this chapter. We might well look into it carefully as we proceed with the chapter.
Rem. They are called on here to worship the Son: "Let all God's angels worship him".
J.T. Showing the Son is a divine Person -- the object of worship, but the angels are not, and so the angel says to John, "Worship God".
Rem. Would you say a word as to the character of the angelic service for the heirs of salvation.
J.T. You can see it in what is said here. There is a host of things mentioned in the Scriptures old and new. Take Cornelius experience, an angel stood by him, and told him about certain things that involved the gentiles coming into blessing as well as the Jews. That is an illustration of what angelic service is, and that is a great service, and I believe it goes on all the time although we do not notice it. Things happen that perhaps we do not know about or that we do not understand; but the angels are behind it, they are doing it, and their service can be counted on too.
H.W. Did Hezekiah count on the service of angels according to the record in @Isaiah 37? One angel came in, and one hundred and eighty five thousand people were destroyed by him.
J.T. Quite so. Now we are touching on this point of the Lord's deity, and in the afternoon we hope that we shall take the second chapter which will lead us to man. It is a question now, as we have said, of the Lord's deity, which is a great matter and greatly needed to be attended to by each of us so that we should be in the power of it. There are not three Gods, there is only one God. So that if One divine Person speaks to Another, in the mediatorial office, that would be that the Lord Jesus is in mind and He is acting mediatorially and yet in the action He is God. We do not therefore
{235}
use the word 'God' in the same sentence or in the same breath as it were. "God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, the testimony to be rendered in its own times" -- notice that -- "in its own times". Divine Persons have been pleased to take relative positions -- The Father is the supreme One, and the Son and the Spirit have taken lower places; They have taken them to become Mediators of certain services, but "the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" is one name, not three names, but one name.
Ques. Is the word "the age of the age" in verse 8 millennial or does it allude to the eternal state?
J.T. It is millennial. The word 'age' refers to the millennial, always. So as we have said before, "the end of these days", in verse 2, refers to the days of the Messiah, and the Messiah would bring in the millennial days, which would be, as far as we can see, a thousand years. There is no evidence that Israel as such will go into the eternal state.
W.F. His name, according to @Isaiah 9, is "Father of Eternity" or 'Father of the age'.
J.T. That is the Lord Jesus; that is what is said of Him; He is the Messiah there. He introduces the millennium, which is a question of time. It is not eternity, but a question of time.
A.J.G. You said just now that Israel would not go into eternity. Is your thought that Israel and the other nations simply become merged in the thought of men in eternity?
J.T. I think so. They must be changed; we must be changed from our present condition of flesh and blood; that must come to an end, because "Flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom". So there must be change, and God is ready to make that change when He wishes; it is a question of
{236}
time. We are changed, and we are said to be changed by the Spirit, according to @Romans 8, verse 11.
A.J.G. But that refers to the saints of today, does it not, and the change that will take place when the Lord comes for us, but you were speaking a moment ago of Israel at the end of the millennium. Will there not need to be a change somewhat similar in character in relation to Israel at that time?
J.T. Quite so; similar in character. God will know how to do it, for everything must be reconciled to the mind of God. There will be no discrepancies at all, so that when the time comes God will change our mortal bodies, but then the dead in Christ shall be changed too, for it says, "The dead in Christ shall rise first". They will come into bodies of resurrection, bodies like Christ's. That is as plain as anything can be as taught in Scripture.
S.J.H. Does the last verse of @Ephesians 3 refer to the millennium or to eternity? "All generations of the age of ages".
J.T. I would say it is the eternal thought in Ephesians. The epistle to the Ephesians leads up to the eternal thought of "all generations of the age of ages". So what they may be as to their state, or the like, physically is another matter. It is a question of generations, and every family, in the heavens and on earth, it says in the same chapter, is named of the Father.
H.W.R. When it says "the tabernacle of God is with men", is the assembly included in the title, 'men'?
J.T. Very likely. The word 'man' of course, governs the passage. The word is 'men', it is not angels, and so in @John 1 it says, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God ... In him was life, and the life was the light of men". It is not angels, not Israel, but men. He is the light of *men*. That is the idea in
{237}
@Revelation 21 too, "the tabernacle of God is with men", showing the place man has in the mind of God.
G.P. Is there some significance in the fact that it speaks in verse 2 of the Son -- "by whom also he made the worlds" and then in verse 10, "And, *Thou* in the beginning, Lord, hast founded the earth, and works of thy hands are the heavens". Is there any significance in the change from the thought of Son to the thought of Lord?
J.T. How does @Psalm 102 read? Is it 'Jehovah' or 'Lord' or 'Adonai' -- which is it?
A.J.G. It says, "He weakened my strength in the way, he shortened my days. I said, My God, take me not away in the midst of my days! ... Thy years are from generation to generation. Of old hast thou founded the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands, *they* shall perish ..."
J.T. What is the preceding pronoun in the Psalm?
A.J.G. Well, verse 12 says, "But thou, Jehovah ..."
J.T. Well, that is 'Jehovah' there -- the word 'Lord' is Jehovah there properly.
Eu.R. Leading on to "Thou art the same" which is a name of God in the Old Testament.
J.T. The word 'Same' is a name of God, and the word 'Jealous' is a name of God. We are entitled to use all these names, because we understand the meaning of them from the original of the Old Testament and the New Testament. So that we can use them, you might say, intelligently.
Eu.R. They apply to the Son here to impress us with His deity.
J.T. Just so, and to impress us with the whole chapter, because the quotations generally are from the Psalms.
A.H. Would you say a word now about verse 9? In view of what you have been bringing before us as
{238}
to the supreme glory of this blessed Person, I wondered whether this might not have a deep bearing on us, as to loving righteousness and hating lawlessness.
J.T. Quite so, "Thou hast loved righteousness and hast hated lawlessness", that is to say God is speaking of His beloved Son in a mediatorial position, and as thoroughly equal to it, "Thou hast loved righteousness and hast hated lawlessness; therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy companions". It is to distinguish the Lord Jesus. As we were saying, these Psalms quoted here refer to certain days -- the days of the Messiah -- but the Messiah had not yet come; they are anticipative of the coming in of the Messiah.
P.L. So that He reaches His exaltation in a path of moral worth.
J.T. That is right -- in a path of moral worth; that is the idea exactly.
{239}
MAIDSTONE -- READING (2)
@Hebrews 2: 1 - 18
J.T. It will be noticed that this epistle, beginning with the first chapter, is continuous almost entirely throughout, so that this second chapter begins, "For this reason we should give heed more abundantly to the things we have heard, lest in any way we should slip away". That is, the instruction is sequential, and what is stressed now is the danger of the word being neglected. So it says, "For if the word which was spoken by angels was firm, and every transgression and disobedience received just retribution, how shall we escape if we have been negligent of so great salvation, which, having had its commencement in being spoken of by the Lord, has been confirmed to us by those who have heard; God bearing, besides, witness with them to it, both by signs and wonders, and various acts of power, and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to his will?" This paragraph deals with the beginning of christianity, clearly, and how certain were turning aside. That is what is in mind almost entirely throughout the epistle, and hence the stress laid upon the things that have been heard. They were first spoken by the Lord and confirmed to the saints by those who heard Him. So the idea of hearing is stressed in view of the danger of giving up what we have heard, so that in the letters in Revelation we have stressed seven times by the Lord Himself, "He that has an ear, let him hear". But we must not attach over-importance merely to what we hear, even although we may attend meetings like this, because it is not what we hear but what we appropriate and assimilate, and thus make good in our souls. What is to be observed, too, is that the types of Genesis, Exodus and Leviticus call attention to certain food that was
{240}
useful and clean, and that should be eaten, reminding us that we may appropriate, in this sense, ourselves, that is brethren. We appropriate each other in the sense of obtaining food from each other, as is indicated in the types. We may keep company with each other and get wholesome food, but also it is possible we may keep company with people that are not in themselves pure and fit to be associated with.
Eu.R. Is that why it is a matter of calling on the Lord out of a pure heart?
J.T. Just so.
N.K.M. Would you just enlarge upon those three words you have alluded to, at the beginning of this chapter: "For this reason".
J.T. The first chapter is in mind, and the second is just sequential to what is taught in the first. That is to say, the deity or Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ, and all that enters into that are in mind. Certain things were stressed in the first chapter, and now the thought is to proceed in enforcing them in a practical sense, and I think we shall see as we proceed in chapter 2 that it affords much material, so to speak, for the service of God, because it abounds with references to the service of God. We have Christ Himself singing to the Father; praising the Father in the midst of the assembly, and that is where we are to carry on the service, and to praise God and to worship God. We have to remember that the assembly is the sphere of it, and it is therefore a question of purity, as already remarked.
A.J.G. So would this "so great salvation" be in the assembly, and realised as we are fully committed to the service of God and all that it requires?
J.T. I was thinking of the assembly as a sphere of salvation. It has often been stressed, and even in @Genesis 6 the thought is indicated typically that the assembly is a sphere of salvation, "By faith, Noah ... prepared an ark for the saving of his house".
{241}
He prepared an ark for it; that is, in principle, the assembly, where the element of salvation is.
F.C.H. Would the latter part of verse 4 bring in Paul and his ministry? It says, "Various acts of power, and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to his will?"
J.T. These are elements that accompanied the testimony of those who had heard the Lord. What was indicated in chapter 1 gives force to what follows, "For this reason we should give heed more abundantly", it says, "more abundantly". It is not just to give heed, simply, but "more abundantly to the things which we have heard". That is to say to the gospel that is preached, for Paul himself speaks of his gospel. The gospel that is preached is therefore allied to it, as it says, "For if the word which was spoken by angels was firm, and every transgression and disobedience received just retribution, how shall *we* escape if we have been negligent of so great salvation" -- notice the superlative feature of the words, "Which, having had its commencement in being spoken of by the Lord", that is, the Lord Jesus -- "has been confirmed to us by those who have heard". That is to say such as Peter and the eleven, because Paul was evidently the author of the epistle to the Hebrews. So that Peter and the eleven would be the ones that confirmed what the Lord had taught. Then it goes on: "For he has not subjected to angels the habitable world which is to come"; that is to say now we have the idea of the world to come brought in in connection with all this. It refers to the dispensation that is after this dispensation; this is the present dispensation, but the world to come refers to the coming dispensation.
C.H. Would the testimony to the greatness of the Person of the Son make the refusal of it the more serious?
J.T. Just so. That is the idea.
{242}
C.H. I was thinking of what you remarked this morning, at the beginning of the reading, that sin in Hebrews is regarded very seriously.
J.T. I think it is apostasy, and it might be said not to be forgiven. It says, "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation". We are therefore dealing with the seriousness of so-called christianity that is about us, because the tendency of it is towards apostasy. Thessalonians points out that that is so, and that the apostasy must come first. Paul says in @2 Thessalonians 2, "Only there is he who restrains now until he be gone, and then the lawless one shall be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and shall annul by the appearing of his coming". These are the terrible things that are coming. They are, we might say, imminent, and hence it says we are to take heed to ourselves, lest we might also fall away, for there is such a thing as falling away, unforgivable actions in turning away from the Lord. The Lord says in the gospel of John, "Will ye also go away?" and Peter answers immediately to the Lord that He had words of life eternal and they had no thought of turning away; the apostles had no such thought. Evidently therefore the apostles, as the leaders at the outset, set out what is fully in accord with loyalty to the Lord; and so it says in the types, "Thine are we, David, and with thee, thou son of Jesse". In the days of David, the people took the ground that they were his and on his side, and that is the position today.
Ques. Does the footnote to the expression, "of so great salvation", in the New Translation, carry the two suggestions, firstly, that the assembly is the sphere of salvation, and secondly, that refusal of it leads to apostasy? The footnote is, 'Not merely neglected when presented, but not cared for
{243}
when, as here, they were nominally inside, making profession'.
J.T. Just so. That is a good comment, I am afraid that the brethren, including oneself, are somewhat slack in taking hold of the seriousness of the situation as it is. The Lord has said, "Behold, I come quickly"; the thing is therefore imminent.
P.L. The gravity of the last hour.
J.T. Just so.
A.H. In connection with the matter of loyalty to Christ, is it of import that that quotation you have made from @1 Chronicles 12, came from one who was clothed with the Spirit?
J.T. Very good. I would say that fully. At Pentecost, the Spirit came fully, not partially, and the word by Paul to the twelve men at Ephesus was, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" The word in John also is, "God gives not the Spirit by measure", and I believe that means that those who receive It belong to the assembly. The thought of the full measure is wrapped up in the sending down by the Lord Jesus of the Holy Spirit. It is a full-measure matter. I suppose in the millennium it will not be full; it will be a lesser fulness than in the present dispensation.
H.W. The expression used there with regard to Amasai is unique almost, is it not? It is literally 'The Spirit clothed him'.
J.T. Very good. The Lord told the disciples to remain in the city "till ye be clothed with power from on high". The prodigal too was clothed, as it says, "Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it". The very best was put upon him as clothing.
But the thought now is to enlarge on the service of God and how it comes out in the remaining part of the chapter; so it says, "For he has not subjected to angels the habitable world which is to come, of which we speak". That is to say, the saints are
{244}
to be characterised by speaking of the coming world. Of course, we have what is greatest now, even in the present world, for the fellowship that we are brought into is the greatest; the assembly is the greatest family there is in the universe. So it says here, "but one has testified somewhere, saying, What is man, that thou rememberest him, or son of man that thou visitest him? Thou hast made him some little inferior to the angels; thou hast crowned him with glory and honour, and hast set him over the works of thy hands; thou hast subjected all things under his feet. For in subjecting all things to him, he has left nothing unsubject to him. But now we see not yet all things subjected to *him*, but we see Jesus", and that is a precious thought; that is the present dispensation and shows how things are. It is a question of what we see, not what we *shall* see, but what we see now. "We see Jesus". So that Stephen saw the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, but He is *sitting* at the right hand of God also.
F.C.H. Why do you think it is referred to in that way as "somewhere"? Is it to awaken our interest in the Old Testament scriptures?
J.T. I think the idea is that we ought to know. The great difficulty we often have in such occasions as this, is that we do not know. We do not know the Scriptures well enough, but Paul says, "somewhere". His remark challenges us as to how much we do know, and whether we can quote scripture when necessary. The Lord when He was tempted, as we all know, quoted scripture in His answer every time that Satan attacked. It is a great thing too, in our public meetings and, as I might say, all meetings, to quote scripture and quote it rightly and fully. If we cannot remember it, be sure and have the Bible and open it, and the right translation, which is the one we have, thank God!
{245}
Rem. This quotation is from @Psalm 8, the heading of which is, "To the chief Musician. Upon the Gittith" -- a musical instrument. The word is feminine, from root meaning 'vat' or 'press'.
J.T. That is all in keeping quotations what we have said already, about the quotations in this book, and the richness of them, as involving experience with God. It is not simply experience with the world, but experience with God, and so David is seen as "the sweet psalmist of Israel", according to the last words of David. It occurs in the historical book where his last words are quoted, which is a very important matter too, a man like David having his last words quoted. It says, "These are the last words of David: ... the sweet psalmist of Israel", @2 Samuel 23: 1.
W.C. It would appear that Job mentioned it before David. In @Job 7: 17, 18 he says, "What is man, that thou makest much of him? and that thou settest thy heart upon him? And that thou visitest him every morning, triest him every moment?" Would that suggest that David had studied the book of Job?
J.T. Just so. It shows how the Scriptures confirm each other, and that is one of the greatest things to have in our minds. "Every scripture", we often quote it, "is divinely inspired", which implies that the Scriptures are inspired by the Holy Spirit, "and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work". I do not know of any scripture more important than that, for brothers and sisters.
Ques. Is "the world to come" introduced here to bring out the supremacy of Christ in relation to men? What is said in the Scriptures as to the world to come, as, for instance. @Psalm 8 and 10, seems always to focus on the greatness of Christ. I wondered
{246}
if that was to be in our minds in view of the service of God, as developed in this chapter later.
J.T. Therefore "the world to come", I would say, is somewhat inferior to this world -- I mean to this world in the sense of what it is on account of the Holy Spirit having been sent down. I believe that is what gives the great distinction to this world, so to speak, and by that I mean to this present dispensation. The great distinction is the gift of the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven, and that He is here according to the word, "and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to his will". I believe the thing is to stress the dispensation, and that it is the dispensation of all this in this paragraph, and then, of course, as to "the world to come", it *is* "the world to come". It is not the world that is, but "the world to come", and I think it will be inferior. Nevertheless, it is still a wonderful one, because it is the final phase of the present created world; it will be the final phase of the dispensations. The word in @1 Corinthians 10 is, "upon whom the ends of the ages are come"; the end of the dispensations has come upon us.
A.C.S.P. When it says, the "world which is to come, of which we speak", is that primarily in our conversation together or would it include the preaching?
J.T. Oh! the preaching. The "we" is a sort of apostolic "we", but at the same time I would say it evidently extends to all christians. Characteristically we should be speaking about it, for the wonderful things we are coming into, are the great theme of our conversation, "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God". I think all that brings out -- at least, that is
{247}
my thought -- the character of the present dispensation, that the spiritual features of the world to come, which is another dispensation, are brought by the Spirit into the present.
W.C. Would you say another word about the "distributions of the Holy Spirit"? I wondered whether it suggested a universal system, the Spirit in every quarter of the earth, in the assembly.
J.T. Just so. The assembly is the sphere or the vessel of the Holy Spirit, so that it is available at all times, and, of course, there are those to whom God has given gift. They are the ones to be used, and are used, in the distribution of it. It is not that any one of us can *give* the Spirit, but, as Paul said to the Galatians, "He therefore who ministers to you the Spirit". There is such a thing as that in ministry.
A.J.G. Does it not make the assembly very great, that the service of God is maintained in it by the Holy Spirit, in this dispensation?
J.T. Just so, and in Galatians too, as I was trying to say, "He therefore who ministers to you the Spirit", *he* who does it. It is abstract, but still it is evidently Paul himself. If you go to the Church of England you will not get anyone doing it there. It is not a question of attacking the systems around us, but we should see what there is around us and what we are exposed to in those systems. Every christian ought to be where the Spirit is distributed, for the Spirit of God is *freely given*.
R.W.S. Which is now Europe and its outgoings?
J.T. That is right.
R.W.S. There is not much in Asia, even though Paul had such marvellous results there.
J.T. Quite so. Philippi gives a clue as to where it began. @Acts 16, I think, points to the time when the Spirit began to direct the apostle specifically in view of abiding results. The gospel was preached in
{248}
Europe by the river, where Lydia was found, and others, where prayer was wont to be made.
P.L. "But all these things operates the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each in particular according as he pleases". Would that connect with the distributions?
J.T. Clearly. Paul was a great distributor, in that sense. Of course, the Lord was, because it was a question of living water. The Spirit is synonymous with the idea of living water, according to @John 4. The Lord said to the woman, "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". That points to the distribution of the Holy Spirit, and refers, of course, to christianity, not simply to the time when the Lord was here in the flesh. That is what Paul teaches us in the epistle to Corinth, and this epistle to the Hebrews, that it is christianity; and this epistle is to check or to correct what was current among the Jews, the Hebrews.
J.S.E. Is it safe to say that in the present dispensation the Spirit ministers much more than what is just connected with the thought of the Messiah?
J.T. I would say so. It is Christ glorified. "The Spirit was not yet", we are told, "because Jesus had not yet been glorified". We do not have to say 'given', because it just says, He "was not yet", as much as to say the Spirit was not known as active here or operative here fully, because Christ was not glorified. Everything waited the glorification of Christ, and hence the Lord says to the disciples, "Do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high". That is to say, you are not to go until you are fully qualified, and the qualification is "power from on high", not simply power in the sense in which the Lord gave it when He was here, but "power from on high". Christianity refers to what is on high. It is a heavenly system, but the
{249}
millennium will not be that. It will be, of course, a wonderful time, but it will not be equal to this dispensation. There will not be the Spirit given freely by way of distribution.
J.S.E. Would that be why the world to come is introduced, so to speak, to make way for this greater thought in the many sons being brought to glory, and the service of God in the assembly in the later part of the chapter?
J.T. Very good. So that you will notice verse 11 refers to the ministry of Christ, but verse 10 refers to God Himself. "For it became him", that is God, "for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings". That is a greater thing really than verse 11, although verse 11 is the ministry of the Lord Jesus Himself to the Father, in regard of which he says, "Both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". That is to say, it is the Lord's own service, but verse 10 gives God's own service. It is a time of bringing sons to glory, not children, but sons.
N.K.M. Are sons a greater thought than brethren, here? The brethren of Christ?
J.T. I think they are, I think sonship is the greatest thought; it is individuals. The assembly is a vessel, but the sons are individuals and they are so in accord with Christ, because we have the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of sonship, shed abroad in our hearts. We are entirely according to Christ.
G.P. We were noticing this morning the expression "by whom" in chapter 1, "by whom also he made the worlds", as referring to the mediatorship of Christ. Now we have it here in verse 10: "For it
{250}
became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things". Is that more the thought of God as source?
J.T. Well, quite so, although the mediatorial idea is here too, in verse 10 "by whom" is by someone, and it is God Himself. As a matter of fact, all this depended on the service of Christ. It is through His mediatorship and death that all this comes about, and the gift of the Spirit too is necessary for it.
A.M. Why is the thought of sufferings stressed here? It is not only death, but sufferings, "on account of the suffering of death" and then "make perfect ... through sufferings".
J.T. I suppose it is the simple thought of the sufferings of Christ. "To you has been given", it says, "as regards Christ, not only the believing on him, but the suffering". It is a necessary thing to qualify us and make us like Christ, in spirit and character. Sufferings are needed to bring about the condition that qualifies us to be companions of Christ. Therefore sons are introduced to be His companions, "Thy God, has anointed thee with oil of gladness", it says, "above thy companions".
W.F. "The sufferings which belonged to Christ, and the glories after these", is all that intended to give us substance for the service of God?
J.T. I think so. You will never get much if you do not suffer. The types would help us immensely in that sense, for example, the badgers skins and so forth, because we need all that to protect us in our sufferings. So that, in proceeding with our thought as to the service of God, we have the first idea of the sons being brought to glory, and then "both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one". That is another thought that we need to get some clear idea of, the word "one" there. That is to say, they are "all of one". Christ and ourselves are "all of
{251}
one" -- a peculiar way of putting things. Then it says, "for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren". We are all of one; we are the same stock; as Rebecca was the same stock as Isaac. We often have that, Isaac and Rebecca were of the same stock, and hence Rebecca was suitable to be the bride to Isaac. Hence when she lifted up her eyes, she sees Isaac, but then Isaac lifted up his eyes, and what he sees is the camels. That is to say, we need to understand what carries us, how are we carried to Christ. Is it by presbyterianism, or any other 'ism', or is it by the Spirit of God? So the persons were carried to Isaac; and Isaac sees what is carrying them, and that is the idea typically of the Spirit of God. It was the servant of Abraham that did all the work of bringing Rebecca to Isaac, and that servant is typical of the Spirit of God, and we have to consider Him in what He says in order to get what the Spirit of God is saying to us now in recent times. We should understand the great place He has in connection with the idea of the bride -- Christ and His bride. We need it according to @Ephesians 5, as Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly".
F.C.H. Is the assembly regarded here as the vessel, or the sphere, in which all that is said of the Person of Christ in chapter 1 and His sufferings in chapter 2 are appreciated and treasured?
J.T. Just so. We talk of it. It is to be in keeping with what we have said, "the ... world ... to come, of which we speak", but it is now Christ and the assembly we are to speak about, as Paul did: "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". How much do we speak of Him? What is current when we sit down after the meeting, say, in our houses? What do we speak of? Is it what we hear of in the assembly, and our heavenly calling? That is the thing that should test our hearts.
{252}
Ques. Would you bring reproach in in connection with the sufferings of Christ? In @1 Peter 4: 14 it says, "If ye are reproached in the name of Christ, blessed are ye; for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you".
J.T. Quite so, "To you has been given" too, it says, "as regards Christ, not only the believing on him, but the suffering for him also", @Philippians 1: 29. It is a privilege given to us.
Ques. Would you say a word as to why verse 12 is a quotation from @Psalm 22? and why it should come into that setting where the Lord's inward feelings and sufferings are so fully brought out?
J.T. It is a feminine psalm. The heading of it is a peculiar heading, implying female conditions, and therefore, it is in the midst of that that the Lord is said here to have praised.
A.J.G. The heading of the psalm is "Upon Aijeleth-Shahar", which means 'according to the hind of the morning'. Aijeleth being feminine. Would that suggest the agility of feminine affections in the assembly that the Lord uses?
J.T. Very good -- agility. So we have Him "leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills", in the Song of Songs.
A.J.G. Is it not striking that this verse which is quoted, "I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" is the first thing which the Spirit of Christ says in @Psalm 22, after He is heard from the horns of the buffaloes, as though it was the first thought in His mind?
J.T. Would you be kind enough to read the psalm.
A.J.G. Well, if we start at verse 18, He says: "They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture. But thou, Jehovah, be not far from me; O my strength, haste thee to help me.
{253}
Deliver my soul from the sword; my only one from the power of the dog; save me from the lion's mouth. Yea, from the horns of the buffaloes hast thou answered me, I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee".
J.T. I think that is most beautiful, and the link there with this passage in Hebrews is so full of meaning in the service of God. We ascend up to the idea of the assembly, in praising the Father, because the upgrade is the thing that we come into immediately or, almost immediately after the Lord's supper is celebrated. We have the brethren first and then the sons come in after that, the sons brought to glory.
Ques. Does the declaration of the Father's name afford intelligent equipment in the assembly as the vessel of praise?
J.T. Well, objectively it does, for the declaration of the Father's name is to be apprehended. The declaration of the Father's name is, of course, by Christ Himself, and the declaration affords material, so to speak, for the assembly's service. The material is really bound up in the idea of sons and then the idea of children: "I and the children which God has given me". We have both the idea of sons and the idea of children. The idea of children is derivation, and the idea of sons is dignity and glory.
H.P.W. Would you mind saying a word on that scripture, "I will declare thy name to my brethren", which is, I suppose, a masculine thought, and then "in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". I remember your telling me once years ago that you thought whenever the assembly is mentioned it is feminine in character.
J.T. I think it is.
H.P.W. That has been a great help to me.
J.T. And the idea of brethren, as you say, is properly masculine, but we have to remember that
{254}
sisters in the assembly have the place of sons, if they are viewed individually. If the sons are viewed severally they are individuals, the idea is individual. The sons brought to glory are individuals, because it is a question of what there is for God Himself, whereas the assembly is feminine because it is a question of what there is for Christ, "Christ, and ... the assembly". That is the way I would work it out. I am thankful you mentioned it now, because you just state what I understand to be the truth.
A.J.G. Would you say that God Himself has great pleasure in seeing the assembly before Him with Christ?
J.T. He does, surely. I think it is like the king, as Matthew says, who made a marriage for his son. That gives a suggestion of it, what God has in Christ *and* the assembly viewed together, because they are one.
H.P.W. The thought of the man and the woman.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Is that to have a place in the service of God -- this close link between Christ and the assembly?
J.T. Surely. You can see in @Genesis 2, how much Jehovah thought of Adam and then thought of Eve. "It is not good that Man should be alone" -- that is the masculine idea -- "I will make him a helpmate, his like". And then Jehovah puts Adam into a deep sleep, and while he was asleep He took a rib out from him and built a woman out of the rib. Of course, we have often spoken of the word "built", but it ought to be kept in mind. It is the first time the word is found in Scripture, and it ought to be kept in mind that it applies to the assembly; that is to say, Jehovah built a woman. Then when the woman was built Jehovah brings her to Adam, and does not say anything; He just brings the woman to Adam, and then Adam speaks. He says, "This time
{255}
..." -- meaning that Adam was thoughtful as to what God was to him, that He loved him, that His love was in it, and that He would make him a helpmate for him, his like. So he says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh, this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". The words for 'man' and 'woman' are 'Ish' and 'Ishshah'. That is the word, the original word clearly used, as though it came from the very mouth of God and the mouth of Adam, typical of Christ.
H.P.W. Is that in a kind of way how things work out in the Supper?
J.T. I think so. We have been working on these lines for fifty years, and God has been helping us, and I believe the brethren are coming into the idea more and more. The service of God as thus developing out of the Lord's supper is becoming more and more understood.
Rem. So in the Canticles it says, "I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse". That is, typically Christ comes to His own, in the Supper, and greets them as "my sister, my spouse".
J.T. Exactly. So that a wife is a sister first, and marriage is in the Lord, not in any other way. The Lord Himself and the assembly is the great pattern of it.
Ques. May I ask if you would say a word as to the expression in chapter 12, "the assembly of the firstborn" in relation to your comments as to this chapter 2 and as to the assembly being feminine?
J.T. I think the reference is to the levitical position, according to the type in Numbers. The firstborn were taken instead of the whole people of Israel, and then the Levites were taken instead of the firstborn. Every one of them is thus a firstborn, I think that is what is meant; and the reference in chapter 12 of this book is to eight things we are said to have come to. Perhaps we may speak of it on
{256}
Monday, God willing. There are eight things we are said to have come to, and one of them is what you quote, "the assembly of the firstborn". You might say 'the firstborn ones'.
Eu.R. Is it rather a matter there of the personnel of the assembly -- the assembly of firstborn ones?
J.T. Quite so.
Eu.R. Rather the persons that form it than the feminine thought.
J.T. Just so. We have come to that. There are eight things mentioned, and we have come to them, so that we can talk of them. They are all wonderful things, that we have come to.
J.P.H. Would you mind saying a little as to the working out of the latter part of verse 12, "in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises"? In what way does the Lord do that?
J.T. I think He does it through us, through the saints. We are His body; we are "the Christ", as it says in 1 Corinthians. "The Christ" includes not only the Lord Himself, but the assembly.
J.P.H. Do you mean that normally the utterances of the brethren in the service of God would bring in such things as the Lord Himself would delight to say to God as Man?
J.T. I think so, in the sense that we are "the Christ", that we are members of "the Christ", that we all take part. "We are members of his body" it says, "we are of his flesh, and of his bones". So, as I said, Eve was built, and she was capable of doing things. Adam said, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh". So that what she would do would be representative of Adam. She would be, as it were, one with himself. It was Adam himself. That is the idea, I believe, and it is carried down to the New Testament, and is seen especially in the epistle to the Ephesians.
{257}
A.J.G. So that having Christ's own Spirit we are capable of His thoughts and feelings?
J.T. Just so. "So also is the Christ".
Ques. And to hear Him speak of His joys?
J.T. Just so. What joys He has in us! I am sure the Lord has real pleasure in us even now in this hall, and in all these assembly gatherings, the three-day gatherings especially. The Lord has, real pleasure in us, and God has too. That is the reason why I venture to say that this chapter is full of assembly suggestions.
A.H. Have our hymns a large part in this response?
J.T. I think they will have more part when we have hymns to the Spirit.
W.C. We sometimes say, 'He leads the praise'. The scripture says "He sings". Will you say a word about that?
J.T. The hymn is based on this chapter, of course, and in a certain sense the expression is true. But then, what we have said about being "all of one" is true too. Perhaps we do not much understand that, the idea of Isaac and Rebecca, and the injunction of Abraham as to not taking a wife other than his kindred. The idea of the divine kindred is necessary to the bride of Christ, to the assembly. She is so near to Deity, I might say with reverence, that she can be so spoken of as "his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". In that passage in the end of @Ephesians 1 it says, "And gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all".
Ques. Is the thought of kindred essential if we are to reach union?
J.T. Absolutely, I should say that with the utmost thoughtfulness, that it is absolutely so. That is to say, @Genesis 24 carried into Ephesians, and carried into this epistle too.
{258}
E.C.M. It says in the Canticles that "the time of singing is come". Would you connect that with the Lord here in the midst of the assembly?
J.T. I think it is very nice to bring it up, but there is always the time of love too, as well; that synchronises with that.
E.C.M. So that we join in with the Lord in His singing here.
J.T. Quite so, but He sings through us. We are His body, and He sings through His body.
N.K.M. Would you say a word about the Sanctifier and the sanctified being all of one. I am referring particularly to the thought of sanctification.
J.T. The Lord sanctified Himself too. He says, "I sanctify myself for them", @John 17: 19. The Lord takes the same ground. It is complete separation to one point or to one thing, Christ and the assembly.
F.C.H. Would that involve that we are sanctified for this very purpose?
J.T. One great idea pursued to this purpose.
A.C.S.P. Does the alacrity with which Rebecca sprang off the camel at the sight of Isaac suggest how effective the Spirit had been in making her conscious of her suitability?
J.T. Very good. She sprang off the camel; she thought of him, but then he lifted up his eyes and he saw the camels, that is to say, what carried her. I believe that is where the defect, with many of us, lies. We are not carried by the servant of Abraham, which refers to the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is the power for all these things. He is sent down to be this. As Abraham's servant was sent to get Rebecca, so the Holy Spirit has been sent down here to get the assembly and to bring us to Christ, and He is going to take us up literally presently. It is very imminent. The assembly is the greatest thought that can be brought forward, outside of divine
{259}
Persons. It is almost akin to divinity, but it is not that. It is a creature; and yet it is said to be His body. It is wonderful, I think!
W.F. Does this expression, "in the midst of the assembly" suggest that the service of God is not incidental to the assembly but that it occupies the chief central position?
J.T. Just so. The Lord has taken up the vessel at the moment and He is going to carry on the service, purposely, and for the definite end of pleasing God. The sons too are in keeping with that, in verse 10, and all the sisters -- speaking simply -- at that point should come into the idea of sonship, as well as come into the idea of the assembly, which is a collective thought. They are to come into the idea of sonship, because, as the Lord says, "they who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection from among the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage; for neither can they die any more, for they are equal to angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection", @Luke 20: 35, 36. That is our privilege.
J.S.E. Is it not remarkable that in the epistle to the Galatians, where they were straying away from what is spiritual, Paul has to say to them, "There is no male and female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus".
J.T. Quite so. Very good. That confirms fully what I am saying, and I believe it is hardly touched much by us, especially by our sisters. The question is whether they have really laid hold of the idea that on the one hand they must enter into a change of individuality; that is, into the idea of sons brought to glory; and, on the other hand, they must merge into the idea of the assembly which is feminine. The brothers have to come to the feminine idea too, if we are to approach God in the assembly.
{260}
E.C.M. Would you bring in @Romans 8, "for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God"?
J.T. Very good. That is where the leading comes, not from the hymns.
W.C. Would there be three thoughts, in which each brother and sister has part on the personal side? First the thought of 'man' in "What is man", although that applies to Christ, I take it it is the being taken up by God for His praise; then sonship, connected with the thought of liberty; and priesthood, involving state. Would they combine in each person, and then the assembly be the corporate whole?
J.T. That brings up the whole question of change, and how we *become* changed. It even applies to the Lord Himself; He *becomes* something, and we become something. John says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". We become things in the assembly; and there is a great idea of change in it. In the service of God the power of the Spirit operating leads to the change, so that brothers and sisters are merged into one thing, either into sonship or into the assembly as a collective thought. I hope the brethren fully follow what I am saying, because I am sure it is the truth.
J.S.E. Could another question be brought forward as to this word, "in the midst of the assembly" -- would it be just at this point that the Lord Jesus takes on the service of singing God's praises by way of His own in the joy of this matter of union?
J.T. I think He does. I think the Lord connects it with the thought of the body. All the singing is through the assembly in the sense of the body; He sings through us in the sense of the body.
Ques. Might I ask (if it is not going back) about what the Lord says, "I will declare thy name to my
{261}
brethren". When does He do that? Is that done at the Supper, or in ministry?
J.T. He does not do it at all now; He has done it. It is one thing done. It is a question of declaration; "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". It is declaration, or revelation. The word 'declare' would be what has happened since He has gone to heaven and formed the assembly by the Spirit given, "The Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". The thing is done.
Eu.R. In connection with the 'brethren', we have the expression "all of one". Is that how we merge after the breaking of bread, brothers and sisters taking account of themselves as brethren of Christ?
J.T. Just so. That comes about largely by the use of the mind, because in connection with the Supper it is, 'this do for the calling of me to mind'. The mind is the first thing; it is not the heart, but the mind, the faculty, the power of action. I believe that is perhaps what is missing amongst us, the power of action in the mind, a renewed mind.
F.C.H. There is a hymn we sometimes sing:
<blockquote>'Now the Father's name Thou tellest, <br>Joy is in Thine heart'.<blockquote>
Do I gather that that is not quite correct?
J.T. I am not sure. I do not see that He is telling it now. I think it is a question of revelation, or declaration. It is what is done. The whole matter is done. But then another difficulty I would mention is the idea of understanding the word 'abstract'. Things are said to be abstract, whereas they may not be actually reached. If they are reached in principle, that is what I would say is the abstract idea, and it enters largely into the service of God on the first day of the week, because the first day of the week has a peculiar character. It is a holy day; it is the Lord's
{262}
day, and I believe that it is desecrated so much that it is marred, even in the saints; they neglect the idea of the holiness of it. It is a holy day; it is a day kept for the Lord. It is called the Lord's day, and it should not be interfered with, certainly not by His people. They should not mar it. I think things are hindered greatly because it is marred.
Ques. Would the Lord's words bear on that, "Thou are holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel"?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Do you think that from the Lord's side the declaration of the Father's name was completed in @John 20, when He says, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God"?
J.T. I think that is the idea, and that is before He went up. After that the idea of ascension comes in, and He was ten days in heaven before He acted; so that, when He did act, the thing was completed. He sent down the Spirit. The Spirit took charge of everything and formed everything. The idea of forming things began when the Spirit came down.
J.S.E. Is not the exercise as to the improvement of the hymn book altogether based on the way the brethren are being helped by the Spirit in relation to the truth itself? Does not the fact that in one hymn it says, 'Now the Father's name Thou tellest' and in another it says, 'The Father's name Thou hast declared' all show the necessity for us to apply ourselves more to the scriptures, and then get our hymns compiled on that basis?
J.T. Just so, I think we need help on accuracy, accuracy of quotation and accuracy of thought, too.
F.C.H. There is something very affecting in what has been quoted from @John 17, "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it". What
{263}
comes in between those two statements is all the work and the sufferings of Christ.
J.T. Just so, only we have to keep the words, and we have to think over them. What does it mean? It is not so easy to give an account of it at a meeting like this, because we need to think over it. We have to consider things; as David said to Abigail, "Blessed be thy discernment". We have to discern things, and especially what happens on the first day of the week, because the day has *peculiar* holiness, and we have more power on it than on other days.
R.W.S. What was in your mind as to the saints marring the Lord's day?
J.T. They have recourse to natural thoughts, and lightness too, and that sort of thing, so that the day is marred and hindered. The value of it is hindered.
E.C.M. Would the discernment that you speak of be seen in Mary in @John 20? It says she "comes bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her".
J.T. Yes. She evidently carried the full import of what He said, not only the words but the import of them. She calls Him 'Rabboni', meaning that He was a Teacher. She had the spirit of things, and she carried that real message, in the spirit of it, that the Lord gave her to the disciples. He told her, moreover, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father". He attaches great importance to the ascension, because the Holy Spirit did not come until He ascended.
J.S.E. Is it not interesting that @John 20 deals with the first day of the week from its early point to the evening without one reference to the ordinary circumstances of the disciples?
J.T. Well, I would say that.
{264}
MAIDSTONE -- READING (3)
@Hebrews 3: 1 - 19; @Hebrews 4: 1 - 16
J.T. There are two main thoughts in these chapters. The first is the word of God, and the second the priesthood of Christ. Our remarks therefore should be centred on these points as of immense importance; that is to say, the word of God, by which we are guided and instructed, and the priesthood of Christ by which we are supported. The address at the beginning is encouraging; it says, "Wherefore, holy brethren". Again, we have the word 'wherefore', showing that it is sequential as connecting with what has preceded it, the heavenly calling, as in contrast to what will mark the millennium. Although the millennium will link up with heaven, yet in principle it is the earthly position. So it says here, "partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus, who is faithful to him that has constituted him, as Moses also in all his house". The house undoubtedly refers to the assembly, as it says later in the chapter, "whose house are *we*"; that would be the assembly, and Christ is over it. The thought here again is clearly as in chapter 1, to bring out the deity of Christ, the personal greatness of Christ, and the bearing of it as in the word of God which is for our instruction, and then the priesthood of Christ which is for our support. The object indeed is, as we have already remarked, the service of God, and that we should be instructed as to that. The high priesthood of Christ is in view of that, so that we might be equal to the service of God. The first day of the week, of course, enters into it because it involves the Lord's supper, which is the beginning of the service of God.
A.J.G. Is the word of God involved in this, "Today if ye will hear his voice"?
{265}
J.T. I thought that was the idea, and the 'wherefore' linking on with what we have had already as to the greatness of Christ and the service of God of which He is the Mediator. "Having a great priest over the house of God", as it is said, in chapter 10, "let us approach". The idea of building too is to be noted: "every house is built by some one; but he who has built all things is God". The Lord Jesus having built the assembly, as He says Himself, "On this rock I will build my assembly". He is greater than the minister in it, although He Himself is High Priest in it.
R.W.S. What is the force of "consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession"? Does "our confession" allude to christianity?
J.T. That is right. That is what I understand, as compared with the Old Testament; because the idea of high priesthood began there. But the "our" is to point to christianity; it is what is in the assembly. So that it says, "*He* has been counted worthy of greater glory than Moses, by how much he that has built it has more honour than the house. For every house is built by some one; but he who has built all things is God". That is to say, Christ is God; for He is the Builder of the house. "All things" is the universe.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the Lord's title as "the Apostle ... of our confession". Does that link with the word of God?
J.T. Apostleship is authority as in inauguration, in the sense of one who inaugurates. Of course, it may come down to a minister, such as Paul, and the apostles are all ministers. Christ is the great High Priest, the *great* One.
F.C.H. Would you say a word as to "the house" and also being "companions of the Christ". In connection with the house it says, "if indeed we hold fast the boldness and the boast of hope firm to
{266}
the end", and then in verse 14 it says, "For we are become companions of the Christ if indeed we hold the beginning of the assurance firm to the end".
J.T. So that these things are conditional; the "if" is what is conditional.
P.L. And does it bring in the moral side with us?
J.T. Reading from the beginning of the third verse it says, "For *he* has been counted worthy of greater glory than Moses, by how much he that has built it has more honour than the house. For every house is built by some one; but he who has built all things is God" -- referring to Christ as the Builder, that Christ is God. And then, "Moses indeed was faithful in all his house, as a ministering servant" -- that is to say, there is a difference between a servant and the builder of a house, a servant *in* and the builder *of*. "Moses indeed was faithful in all his house, as a ministering servant, for a testimony of the things to be spoken after; but Christ, as Son over his house, whose house are *we*, if indeed we hold fast the boldness and the boast of hope firm to the end". So that the contrast clearly is in the servant and the builder, the servant *in* the house and the builder *of* it. The builder, of course, is God, and that makes Christ God.
Wm.H. Would the thought of "Son over" suggest the immense superiority of christianity, in the influence He would wield over the house in contrast to Moses?
J.T. Just so. So that in order to get the negative side, I would say that we might well compare what we have -- I mean those of us who are seeking to walk in the truth of the assembly -- with the so-called systems about us. They are all leading to apostasy -- all of them. There can be no protection aside from the presence of the Holy Spirit in the saints. Apart from that, all is tending to apostasy; some are already in it.
{267}
A.J.G. Is the word of God the antidote to apostasy, as bringing in what is living?
J.T. Just so. Very good. The *living* God is the idea. All else is exposed to degeneracy and to a constant tendency to error and corruption; that is what is all around us. The only preservation for all is in the presence of the Holy Spirit, on the ground of redemption. The Holy Spirit is here, as sent down by Christ, and redemption is involved in it.
E.C.M. In @1 Timothy 4 it says, "the Spirit speaks expressly, that in latter times some shall apostatise from the faith, giving their mind to deceiving spirits and teachings of demons". I was thinking of the Spirit speaking expressly, and wondered if the Spirit in that way would assert His authority in the speaking.
J.T. Authority -- yes, quite so.
A.J.G. The Spirit here seems to call attention to the word of God, to the voice of God, as though He is alert as to conditions among the saints, and will call attention to any tendency to disregard the word of God.
J.T. Just so. We should be greatly impressed with the terribleness of the conditions around us. Whatever external appearances they may have, the actual inward conditions are dreadful, and we are all to be warned about it, but especially young people because they are the ones to carry on in the truth. Those who are older are gradually going to be with the Lord, but the younger are to carry on in the truth, and, of course, their youthfulness is intended to be used of God. It is not intended to be weakness but strength, for power is needed, "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you" -- "the word of God". That is the idea; strength is involved in the word of God, and right teaching.
{268}
J.S.E. Is your allusion to conditions the reason why you are so concerned that we should be more simple in the usage of the word "the assembly" rather than clinging to the expression "a remnant"? Is it not as we go on in relation to the word of God that we find ourselves more free in relation to the fulness of the thought connected with the word "assembly"?
J.T. I do not think the Lord intended to have used the idea of a remnant, as conveying the thought of the assembly, because the presence of the Holy Spirit involves the idea of the body and that is a whole thought. It is not a partial thought; it is a whole thought. There is no such thought as the body really in the Old Testament. Actually the word 'remnant' applies there, but now the presence of the Spirit of God here implies the whole thought. This gives great encouragement in our ministry, and it is to keep in our minds that there is a whole thought behind it, and the whole thought is Christ Himself in His body. And so the importance of holding the truth of the body is referred to in @1 Corinthians 12.
W.C. Would the reference here to the Spirit's voice point to the Revelation, where we are called upon to hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies?
J.T. That is what I thought. It is referred to seven times. It is what the Spirit says. What the Lord says is mentioned specifically, but what the Spirit says is left open. We are perhaps dealing with that now, in a meeting like this; we might say, the Spirit's voice *may* be heard, I am not saying it is, but it is aimed at. The Lord, I am sure, never intended the assembly to be brought down to the thought of a remnant, and the revival implies that the whole thought is revived, so that the love of Christ is active in it, "The love of the Christ constrains us", Paul says, "having judged this: that one
{269}
died for all, then all have died", and then he proceeds to speak on those lines in @2 Corinthians 5. The Lord speaks of the assembly as "my assembly". He says, "On this rock I will build my assembly, and hades gates shall not prevail against it", and that is a good assurance that we do not need to drop to the level of a remnant; the whole thought has been revived. Hence the next paragraph here, "Wherefore, even as says the Holy Spirit, Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness ..." and so forth. The "wherefore" here refers to the whole idea, the voice of the Holy Spirit and the whole idea of the assembly.
J.S.E. Did not Mr. Darby reason with the brethren in Dublin on this very point at the beginning, that if they had not the whole thing before them they would go to pieces like the rest of the denominations?
J.T. Very good. It was a constant strain of thought in his ministry. He was raised up for that purpose, I am sure. We might regard apostleship as having *some* reference to him. He maintained the whole thought, and although, of course, there are discrepancies now, and we may as well accept what there is, yet the whole general thought of the revival implied the whole thought of the assembly.
F.C.H. Is that helpfully illustrated in Caleb? He not only followed the Lord his God but he followed Jehovah the God of Israel. He had the whole thought before him, did he not?
J.T. Just so; "our whole twelve tribes". Paul says.
A.W.G.T. Does Philadelphia represent the whole thought and not a remnant?
J.T. It is the whole thought. The Lord regards Philadelphia as the whole. His letter to that assembly is the greatest feature of the letters to the assemblies, and we are in the very midst of it, thank God, and it is because there has been a revival of the truth.
{270}
The whole idea is thus now maintained here in ministry, and, of course, the Lord would keep us to that, and the Lord *is* keeping us to it. At the same time there is a certain responsibility attaching to every one of us, especially those who have gift, to keep to the whole thought and not let it go. So the Lord says here (we should note the pronouns He uses), "Behold, I make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet" -- that is the assembly -- "and shall know that *I* have loved thee". That is the assembly; Christ loved the assembly, "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience" -- here again the "thou" is the same as the assembly -- "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. I come quickly: hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown". So that the whole idea is in the mind of the Lord in these words, and then we are to hear what the Spirit is saying to us. That is to say, all the current ministry, I would say, for well nigh now one hundred and thirty years, has to be listened to, as the Spirit's voice; it is what the Spirit is saying to the assembly.
A.C.S.P. Is that why there is such emphasis in the chapter in Hebrews on the expression "Today"?
J.T. Exactly, "Today" is the thing, and we are not to miss it. The Lord is urging that we should not miss it, that we should not be turned aside. That is our present subject this afternoon. "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling" -- that is implied in the address to the assembly at Philadelphia -- "the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus, who is faithful to him that has constituted him, as Moses also in all his house. For *he* has been counted
{271}
worthy of greater glory than Moses, by how much he that has built it has more honour than the house. For every house is built by some one; but he who has built all things is God". God is Christ here; He built the house, and He is over it as High Priest.
R.W.S. Is it worthy of observation that the material for the house, in the main, seems to be secured from the families of the saints as over against, in earlier days, those coming in from the sectarian positions?
J.T. I think so. Of course. Open Brethrenism arose almost at once after the revival began. It is a most terrible thing to think of too. That system began almost at once, and it remains, and I believe, and it is sorrowful to say it, it is included in the systems that we have already spoken of, in which man's will has liberty. Open Brethrenism makes room for man's will and for certain doctrines that are characteristic, and which will mean that the apostasy will overtake them.
A.W. Would that be in principle Laodicea, which follows Philadelphia?
J.T. Quite so, although Philadelphia, I think will go on to the end.
Eu.R. The house that the Son builds must go through intact? "Hades gates shall not prevail against it".
J.T. The Lord says, "I will build my assembly, and hades gates shall not prevail against it". That is to say, the Lord implies that it shall not be overcome, and that is most comforting, and, of course, the secret is that the Spirit of God is here yet in the assembly. He is in a vessel. All the ministry that is coming to us, I believe fully, implies that the Spirit is with us. I use the word 'us' because of the observation that the truth comes out from time to time to confirm us that we are on the right line of things, and surely we are to be confirmed that our
{272}
position is right, I use the word 'our' because there is consciousness that the Spirit of God is with us.
A.M.P. Does the Spirit's ministry constantly emphasise the whole constitutional character that belongs to us as obeying the truth?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Is there a need for overcoming all that may feature of apostasy, in order to hear what the Spirit says to the last four assemblies?
J.T. I think overcoming is the secret of the whole matter, because the overcoming implies that the whole truth is preserved, at least in principle, in the overcomer. In view of the Lord's remark, the overcomer must mean that. "He that overcomes" -- the Lord would not use that except in the sense that the Spirit was there to stand by the truth.
J.S.E. Is there a parallel here with what came before us at the last reading in London, in relation to the mountain that Jesus had appointed them? Does the priesthood of Christ peculiarly stand available where the conditions suited to the house prevail?
J.T. Quite so; it is in keeping with the house. The house is a whole condition, and the principle in keeping with the house implies that the priesthood of Christ is maintained.
J.S.E. I was just linking it in my mind with the authoritative touch we had in London, that, although the number was broken, the Lord says, "*I* am with you all the days".
J.T. Just so. The eleven disciples are there, and the Lord speaks to them as if the whole were there, but it says "some doubted". Of course, we have to admit that, because there is a doubting condition generally, we might say, but it does not interfere in the Lord's remarks in @Matthew 28. It does not interfere with the whole idea of the assembly, because Matthew's gospel has the whole idea in it.
{273}
It is the assembly gospel, as we rightly say. The whole idea is maintained, and I think it is one of the greatest comforts that we have, that the whole idea is maintained, even although there may be discrepancies. The eleven involves the whole company, the whole thought to be maintained.
P.L. Do you have that in the presence of the apostasy in Dan and others, in the book of Judges? It says, "Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it" -- that is, the ark -- "in those days". Is that the whole thought maintained in priestly power?
J.T. That is very good. If you will be kind enough to read it.
P.L. @Judges 20: 27: "And the children of Israel inquired of Jehovah (and the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days, and Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days), saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And Jehovah said, Go up; for tomorrow I will give them into thy hand".
J.T. Undoubtedly that refers to what we have just been reading here. So that, "Wherefore, even as says the Holy Spirit, Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness; where your fathers tempted me, by proving me, and saw my works forty years. Wherefore I was wroth with this generation, and said, They always err in heart; and *they* have not known my ways; so I swore in my wrath, If they shall enter into my rest". The "if" there implies the negative -- "If they shall enter into my rest. See, brethren, lest there be in any one of you a wicked heart of unbelief, in turning away from the living God". That is the allusion really which you have made, so that the warning is to ourselves today, but it goes on further, "But encourage
{274}
yourselves each day, as long as it is called Today, that none of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. For we are become companions of the Christ if indeed we hold the beginning of the assurance firm to the end". So that the "if" is a condition. And then it goes on to say, "in that it is said, Today if ye will hear his voice, do not harden your hearts, as in the provocation; for who was it, who, having heard, provoked? but was it not all who came out of Egypt by Moses?" That is when the great falling away took place. The same thing is happening in christendom, but the true idea of the assembly still holds, as the true idea of Israel also held in the days of Moses.
E.C.M. Have you the two thoughts in Ezekiel, where he says, "I heard one speaking unto me out of the house; and a man was standing by me", @Ezekiel 43: 6. Would that be the Spirit speaking, and would the priesthood of Christ be suggested in the man standing by?
J.T. Just so. It seems, therefore, to be a great appeal to us, in our own day, in view of the volume of ministry that has been coming to us from one source and another, as to whether we are keeping the word, because the word of God is involved in it.
Wm.H. Does the thought of the word of God involve this complete thought?
J.T. I think so.
Wm.H. Those who came out of Egypt only went part of the way. They did not accept the glad tidings in full, did they? It says, "for who was it, who, having heard, provoked? but was it not all who came out of Egypt by Moses? And with whom was he wroth forty years?" And then in chapter 4 it says, "the word of the report did not profit *them*, not being mixed with faith in those who heard".
J.T. Just so. So that "the word ... mixed with faith" is of immense importance, because it is a
{275}
dispensation of faith we are in. Although faith existed from the outset, according to @Hebrews 11, yet the Odd Testament was not the dispensation of faith, it was the dispensation of law, but we are in the dispensation of faith. Ours is a dispensation of faith, and it secures the presence of the Holy Spirit. Faith secures the presence of the Holy Spirit. And hence the Lord Jesus has sent Him down from heaven.
E.P. Do we see the overcomer in Paul when he writes in @2 Timothy 4: 7, "I have combated the good combat, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith"?
J.T. Good. We are to keep to that, and do everything possible. There is one man positively right throughout. There were discrepancies even in Paul, we know from the book of Acts, but at the same time he was right throughout, "I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. Henceforth the crown of righteousness is laid up for me", the apostle could say.
E.P. So we get here the crown too, the same as in Philadelphia?
J.T. Just so.
R.W.S. And because the word of God is living, might we expect fresh unfoldings as we are true to previous light?
J.T. As we are true to previous light -- quite. The word of God is revived. The whole idea of the assembly was revived in the revival, and what can be said too is that the truth is being kept. It is really continuous in the ministry, up to the present time, by one source and another, and the thing now is that it may continue, "If indeed ye abide in the faith founded and firm, and not moved away". It is a continuance in that sense, because there is always an "if", which we must observe.
{276}
A.J.G. It is remarkable that this 4th chapter seems to contemplate a period of revival, because it says, if "those who first received the glad tidings did not enter in on account of not hearkening to the word, again he determines a certain day, saying, in David, 'Today', after so long a time"; as though a time of revival emphasised the "Today" and the importance of it.
J.T. Just so, and the recurrence of the name "David", in the book of Revelation, is very striking, "*I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star", the Lord says.
A.J.G. Why do you think David has such a place in Revelation?
J.T. I think there must be some reference to Christ in David, "*I* am the root and offspring of David" -- the offspring, and the root. There must be something of Christ in David, in that sense; it is peculiar.
A.H. In verse 7 of chapter 4, which has just been quoted, it says, "saying, in David". Is that a reference to what you have just remarked, as to the authority of the word of God in the ministers?
J.T. Well, quite. So that the thought is that it should be clear, and that we are holding the right principles, because there is a question of principle. The truth of the assembly is not being given up; it is being held, and God is with the brethren on account of that, and I believe He will be with us to the end. I verily believe that the Lord will be with us to the end, and so there is a further word as to "them also that love his appearing".
F.C.H. So that diligence is in contrast to negligence in this epistle?
J.T. Quite so. So the description of the word of God that we have in verses 11 - 13 is very striking, "Let us therefore use diligence to enter into that rest, that no one may fall after the same example of
{277}
not hearkening to the word. For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow" -- again a figure -- "and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". Then again, there is another "therefore", "Having therefore a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession. For we have not a high priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart". That is Christ. "Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help". It is a wonderful finish to the chapter, and to the section we are now dealing with.
C.S. Would you say a word with regard to the rest of God which is referred to in these chapters, and our entering into rest.
J.T. I suppose it is a question of what we are coming into, and what we have been brought into in having the Spirit, through redemption. What we have in truth -- to be simple about it -- is reality, and the whole truth in principle. It is no question of boasting at all, but of facts. It is a question of what we have in the power of the Spirit, because the Spirit is allowed in us. He has His own place in us, making room for the assembly.
A.M. In the reference to Joshua in verse 8, do we get a suggestion that it is not enough to be in a mere position? May we not settle down in a mere position without being in the reality of things?
J.T. Well, we are not doing it, thank God! It is no boast to say that.
{278}
A.M. I was only thinking of the warning note to the saints in these days, that we may rest in a position such as that into which Joshua brought the people in his day.
J.T. That is quite so, but I do not think it is true to fact, because God has carried the thing through since the revival without any discrepancy really, and it is being carried through now. There is no question of attaching importance to any person, but the truth is being held, and God is doing it for us. The Spirit of God is being accorded a place amongst us, and He is going on, and the truth is going forward.
A.J.G. Do we not in fact sometimes have the sense by the Spirit in assembly that we do touch the scene of God's rest?
J.T. Just so. That is just what I am trying to say, because I have not a doubt but that it is so, and that it is God that is doing it. The Spirit of God is doing it, because He is allowed a place amongst us. You cannot get it in Open Brethrenism. You cannot get it in any of the systems. It is no question of boast, it is a question of facts that we are entitled to speak of. It would be unfair to the Lord if we did not speak of it, because He is doing it for us.
J.C.T. He says in @Ezekiel 43: 7, "And he said unto me, Son of man, this is the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever". He secures them, does He not? And is this the way in which you were saying God secures His rest in relation to the recovery?
J.T. Just so. God is faithful, as we get in the epistle to the Corinthians, "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son". The first epistle to the Corinthians asserts that, that God is faithful, and we can rely on that faithfulness, but then, of course, there is faithfulness
{279}
on our part too. There is such a thing as that, thank God. We can reckon on it and we can speak of it. There is that faithfulness and it has continued on since the time of the beginning of the revival -- not of the Reformation, but of the revival. The word, 'revival' is the proper word to use. It is God that has done it for us.
C.H. And do we not owe a great deal to the word of God, in its living character?
J.T. Quite so, and hence the word as to the Scriptures: "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching" and so forth. We have often quoted that.
A.J.G. Has the word of God a double bearing, first bringing out positively God's thoughts regarding His people, and then secondly disclosing to us anything in us that is hindering us from entering into them?
J.T. Quite so. It is the faithfulness of God, "God is faithful". It is a comforting thought! He will not give us up. The Spirit has been sent down from heaven, and He is not going until the assembly is taken up.
Ques. You have been emphasising the need of holding to the whole truth of the assembly. Does not that correspond with holding fast the boldness and the boast of hope firm to the end?
J.T. Just so. Then verse 16. "Let us approach therefore with boldness" -- notice that, *with* boldness -- "to the throne of grace" -- the throne of grace is a remarkable thing, that grace is on the throne, and it is Himself in power. Himself on the throne, "that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help".
G.H.S.P. Are we right in looking upon the unbroken loaf at the Supper as bringing before us the whole thought of the assembly?
{280}
J.T. Just so. I am afraid that some of those brethren that we have been speaking of do have a broken loaf. I remember being in France, and they strongly resisted what I was saying to them there, because they had a broken loaf. I was trying to show them that it should be a loaf and not a piece of bread. Does that agree with what you have in mind?
G.H.S.P. Yes, I was thinking of the distinctive place that the Supper has, and wondering whether there is not to be touchingly brought before us, week by week, the whole idea of the assembly as we come together.
J.T. Exactly. Hence there should not be a broken loaf or a piece of bread, but the whole loaf, because Christ is seen in that. The loaf is the body of Christ, "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?".
H.F. Have you in mind that we should be so conversant with the word of God that we should be able to use it in measure as He Himself used it when He was tempted of the devil in the wilderness?
J.T. In every temptation the Lord answers the devil Himself from the word of God.
H.F. "It is written" occurs three times.
J.T. Just so.
{281}
MAIDSTONE -- READING (4)
@Hebrews 5: 1 - 14; @Hebrews 6: 1 - 20
J.T. Yesterday we touched on two important points in chapter 4, namely, the word of God and the priesthood of Christ, and it is well to be recalled to them. The priesthood of Christ is continued in the succeeding chapters, especially under the heading of Melchisedec, which the Lord will undoubtedly help us to speak on intelligently. The word of God is peculiarly presented according to what is said in verses 11 - 13 of chapter 4, "Let us therefore" it says, "use diligence to enter into that rest, that no one may fall after the same example of not hearkening to the word. For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". That is to say, the word here runs into the idea of God Himself; it is no less than God Himself -- "his eyes, with whom we have to do". We do well, therefore, to think of it in this way and to lay ourselves out for the searching character of the word of God, for it is no less than God Himself with whom we have to do.
Ques. Might that particularly have to do with the Holy Spirit?
J.T. It is undoubtedly. It has to do with the Holy Spirit, because it is the searching character of it here, near us, as it were -- beside us. It is the Spirit sent down from heaven really, but it is God Himself as viewed here: "all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". It is the nearness of a divine Person that is implied, and the searching character of the word too.
{282}
P.L. In the word would you say God draws near to us, and in the priest we draw near to God?
J.T. Well, just so.
E.C.M. In connection with the man convicted in @1 Corinthians 14 it says, "falling upon his face, he will do homage to God, reporting that God is indeed amongst you". Would that be the result of the penetrating power of the word?
J.T. Just so.
R.W.S. Would that likewise be the Holy Spirit?
J.T. It seems so, but, of course, we must not ignore too much the idea of God as God. Whether we are speaking of the Holy Spirit or speaking of God as such is a question to be determined, "To us there is one God, the Father"; that is generally the idea of God, when there is no specific word stated as to the Person who is speaking.
F.C.H. Would it be right to say that there are certain passages where we can in our minds include the Holy Spirit in the thought of God, but it is a little difficult to make them exclusive to Him?
J.T. That is right; it is a question of discernment as to each instance in which the thought of God is introduced or spoken of. So that where it is God without any qualification, the context, I think, would indicate whether it is to be regarded just as God -- God as such. The passage I have just cited is in @1 Corinthians 8: "to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for him". Of course, that is clear -- the Father is mentioned -- "and one Lord, Jesus Christ" but there is nothing said of the Spirit. The Spirit is not mentioned in that particular passage.
A.W. "A habitation of God in the Spirit", @Ephesians 2: 22. Is that the Holy Spirit, or is it God in the Person of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. That is God, but if the whole paragraph is read, you would get the full thought, I think the
{283}
word 'God' is proper there. We say, 'in the Spirit' -- the word 'God' remains in the mind. It is God in Spirit, of course, but "a habitation of God" is the leading thought.
C.H. Is the word of God intended to bring us into the presence of God?
J.T. I think so; that is the way it reads, "There is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". That is God -- God as such.
Eu.R. Would you say something as to the action of the Spirit or the word of God in penetrating to the division of soul and spirit. What does that involve?
J.T. Of course, it is just God, simply, and that we are not going to escape His discerning eye. The word is: "and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow", there we have come to figures -- they are spiritual thoughts -- "and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart". It is the power of God; we must not forget that God is God, and that is the great general thought when the word is used. There is always something to indicate it if the Spirit of God is in mind. I would think what we have here in this remarkable passage in @Hebrews 4 is generally the idea of God Himself.
Wm.H. Does the thought of the word of God come in to help us in the discernment of what is inward?
J.T. Just so. It is an inward thought; it is not an external thought. God sometimes deals with external thoughts -- even our bodies, but here it is an inward idea.
Wm.H. At the end of verse 11 it says: "that no one may fall after the same example of not hearkening to the word". It would seem as if the word would come in to help us in discerning things in their springs, do you think?
{284}
J.T. Just so. The word 'hearkening' is stressed greatly in chapters 3 and 4. The great thing among the early Jews that we are dealing with in this chapter of the Hebrews is that there was a great danger of them falling away or turning away from the truth. You can see it in chapter 6, in the most striking way, how terrible the thing was, and there is really no forgiveness. Sin in Hebrews is generally unforgivable, *generally* unforgivable. It is apostasy, the Jew turning away from christianity to the old system.
J.J.T. The Lord Jesus, in the first temptation, said, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word ... of God", as though the *living* is the point there.
J.T. Just so. It is as if the word of God is food for the soul -- "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which goes out through God's mouth". It is a most particularised thing -- what comes from the mouth of God -- pointing to the human body as a figure, and God is allowing Himself to be pictured in the thought of the human mouth.
W.C. Do we get an instance of the action of the word of God in @Acts 5, where Peter laid bare the inward motives of Ananias and Sapphira? He says, "Why has Satan filled thy heart ... ?", and then, "Why is it that thou hast purposed this thing in thine heart?" The inward motives were being revealed in the presence of God in the person of Peter.
J.T. So I would think it would be God in the full sense of it, as we speak of it generally.
J.S.E. Would the virgin in @Luke 1 give us an illustration of this penetration to the division of soul and spirit, when she says: "My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour"?
J.T. Quite so. It is a sort of prophetic word. It is really, you might say, a word directly from God.
{285}
"My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour". What have you to say more about that, please?
J.S.E. I was thinking of the way that Gabriel came to her with the word of God -- the full expression of the mind of God as to the incoming of Christ, and it had this feature of penetration with her, so that in her contribution she could speak of her soul as distinct from her spirit, and yet both of them were really feeling the value of the communication.
J.T. So that it was really an oracular speech, you might say. Although the angel is said to have spoken certain things to her, yet this was a word oracularly rendered by Mary. There are many such instances of these oracular words in Scripture, especially in the Old Testament, and so the "oracles of God" refer to them.
J.S.E. I was thinking of its bearing upon us in this way, that our greatest snare all the time is gravitation towards what is material. But does not the word of God tend to our liberation from that, so that we can go on with what is spiritual and heavenly?
J.T. Just so, and as I was saying, there is that which has the character of an oracular statement or address. I think Mary's word was just that, and, of course, it is right that we should have it, so that even in ministry we may have such statements by the Spirit Himself operating in the servant's heart. There may be such things as that, because we have come back to the truth of the Holy Spirit. He is really amongst us, and the ministry ought to take the character that the mind of God is conveyed in it.
A.M.P. Would the penetrating character of the word of God lead to that self-knowledge and self-searching which would render us fit for our part in the divine system?
{286}
J.T. Quite so. The ministers in @Ephesians 4 would refer to the gifts that have come down from (you might say) an uncreated condition. They have come down from what is above, so that the gifts which the Lord Jesus has Himself given to men have to be regarded as having a peculiar place as come out of such a relation, and there is peculiar power in the ministry, therefore. So it says: "*He* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ". All that has in mind what is, in some sense, oracular ministry.
A.J.G. Would you say such power is essential because of the greatness of the result that is to be brought about -- "the body of Christ"?
J.T. Quite so.
F.C.H. In connection with the word of God and the priesthood of Christ, is it in your mind that if we are prepared to accept the word of God in its penetrating character, we come into the gain of the priesthood of Christ?
J.T. We do; we should see that now as we come on to chapter 5, where the thing is enlarged on. It says, "every high priest taken from amongst men is established for men in things relating to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins; being able to exercise forbearance towards the ignorant and erring, since he himself also is clothed with infirmity". That is an ordinary priest, not Christ, but it is leading up to Christ. So it goes on (verse 3), "and, on account of this infirmity, he ought", -- the ordinary priest -- "even as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins. And no one takes the honour to himself but as called by God, even as Aaron also. Thus the Christ also has not glorified
{287}
himself to be made a high priest; but he who had said to him, *Thou* art my Son, *I* have today begotten thee. Even as also in another place he says, *Thou* art a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedec. Who in the days of his flesh, having offered up both supplications and entreaties to him who was able to save him out of death, with strong crying and tears; (and having been heard because of his piety;) though he were Son, he learned obedience from the things which he suffered; and having been perfected, became to all them that obey him, author of eternal salvation; addressed by God as high priest according to the order of Melchisedec". Now all this is, I think, most important, as coming very close to us, especially bringing the thought of priesthood in Christ Himself. There is what characterised Him in the flesh first, and then, of course, what characterises Him now, that He is a priest according to the order of Melchisedec.
A.M.P. Is the reference to the order of Melchisedec to raise the level of priesthood to what is called for in the christian system?
J.T. Just so. It is a question of order. It is not the function in which priesthood is exercised according to the order of Aaron, but the general thought is Melchisedec, but Melchisedec really will lead on to the world to come, of which we speak. At the same time it is the *order* characterising Christ. It is not the function, not how it is exercised, but the order of it in Christ in heaven.
Ques. Is that to assert that the Priest is Himself a divine Person?
J.T. When we come to look at it I am sure we shall see that in chapter 7 which develops the order of Melchisedec. If we look at it for a moment we shall see. In verses 1 to 4 we have a description of a supposed person, and that he is assimilated to the Son of God, so that it becomes mysterious, and we
{288}
have therefore to be reverential in alluding to it. The allusion, of course, is to the book of Genesis, first of all, and then @Psalm 110 is quoted where Jehovah is swearing that Christ's priesthood is according to the order of Melchisedec. We therefore have to look at it from all these angles so as to get the full thought of it, because what is presented in Genesis is figurative; the person presented is assimilated to the Son of God. It is figurative, really, of the Lord Jesus, but no one can say who the actual person is. We are not told in Genesis who the actual person is, because he is said to be without father or mother. It is a suggested idea just as we speak of the seraphim; it is a principle, it is not a question of a real person, but still the principle is there. Who can tell who the actual person, mentioned in the 14th chapter of Genesis, is? He is a figure, assimilated, according to this chapter, to the Son of God. We cannot say that he *is* the Son of God, but it is just put in that way, and, of course, it is the Lord Jesus that is in mind. The passage goes on to say that he has come from Judah, so it is the Lord Jesus actually in the figure -- I mean to say, as we look at it as it is presented in chapter 7 -- it is the Lord Himself.
W.M.B. Would the Psalm stress the idea of His resurrection? It says, "Jehovah said unto my Lord, Sit at my right hand, until I put thine enemies as footstool of thy feet".
J.T. Very good. As I was saying before, it is Christ above in heaven, there for us. It is not the function that He exercises, what He represents in interceding for us, but to bring out the order of it.
A.J.G. And especially, would you say, to emphasise that He lives, as it says in chapter 7: "but there one of whom the witness is that he lives".
J.T. Yes, quite so.
{289}
J.P.H. It says in chapter 7, "Without genealogy; having neither beginning of days nor end of life". Does that refer peculiarly to the Lord?
J.T. It does, but the reference is to the actual facts recorded there, that there was no father or mother or genealogy mentioned as to this man that appears in Genesis. It is to bring out just the wording, but when we come to the facts we know that the reference is to Christ, because he is assimilated to Christ. He is not literally Christ in the figure, but he is assimilated to Christ.
Rem. And he bears the characteristics of Christ; he is King of righteousness.
J.T. That is right; the reference is to the characteristics. He is said to be "King of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from smiting the kings, and blessed him; to whom Abraham gave also the tenth portion of all; first being interpreted King of righteousness, and then also King of Salem, which is King of peace; without father, without mother, without genealogy; having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but assimilated to the Son of God". The word 'assimilated' refers to characteristics given -- the wording given. We cannot say who the actual person is; it is what he represents, and, of course, he represents Christ.
Ques. Would you say another word as to "without genealogy"? We have the Lord's genealogies in the gospels, but does this stress His Deity?
J.T. There is no genealogy given in Genesis; that is what is meant. If you attempt to give a genealogy for Christ, not as born in this world, but what He is in His Person, you cannot compass Him. You cannot get round what the Person is, in that sense. He is a divine Person.
G.P. Does the idea of mystery enter into it?
J.T. Yes, but it is a mystery that the Spirit of God would enable us to understand. Therefore in
{290}
connection with the Lord's own Person as born here, He has come from Judah, He has come through David.
Ques. Would you say a word about the bread and wine which he ministered to Abraham?
J.T. Well, we often speak of it. You might say it re-appears in the Lord's supper, although the ingredients of the Lord's supper are never given to us; it is just the cup -- the vessel that contains it.
P.L. "Who shall declare his generation?" Does that fit in?
J.T. Just so. "His life is taken from the earth". Who can declare it? We are dealing with a divine Person, and we have to take our shoes from off our feet, lest we should say anything contrary. We must just take it as it is. "Who shall declare his generation?" He is God Himself.
A.J.G. Is it not striking that the priesthood of Melchisedec is introduced in Genesis in connection with the one who was a picture, or a type, of the partakers in the heavenly calling, Abraham, and then we hear no more of him until @Psalm 110; and then, in the days of the Spirit, the truth relating to him is opened up to those who are partakers of the heavenly calling?
J.T. I think that is very good.
F.C.H. Is there not something very choice, that both these expressions are addressed prophetically to the Lord Himself and addressed emphatically, "*Thou* art my Son" and "*Thou* art a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedec".
J.T. There cannot be a single question about it. It is only that we should habituate ourselves to deal with things as they are dealt with in Scripture, because we are enabled to do so by the Holy Spirit. So that we may say we quote this and that and the other thing, but have we the ability to follow the thing out as it is given -- the actual wording given in
{291}
Scripture? Of course, when we come to these passages that you have already quoted as given here, we may well follow it throughout chapter 7, but then we are dealing with chapter 5 and chapter 6, and we might as well go back to those now, especially to bring out what the Lord's priesthood is, how it is depicted in chapter 5. We need to see how it worked out practically and actually in the Lord's own history here upon earth, and now in heaven.
P.L. Is He the only one who has been called to the priesthood? Are we priests because we are sons?
J.T. It is the high priesthood that is in mind; it is not ordinary priests, because Aaron had sons, too, that were priests, but it is the high priest that is in mind, as it says, "every high priest".
P.L. Yes, I meant we are not called to the priesthood. Does He not stand out alone in having been called to it?
J.T. We are certainly not called to priesthood, although we might say the facts indicate that we are priests; our calling involves that -- I mean to say the full thought of calling has to be considered.
P.L. What I meant was that I thought we were perhaps like the sons of Aaron. We are priests, because we are sons.
J.T. I am not sure that that is literally right. Anyway the idea of calling applies to us as christians: "Consider your calling, brethren". It is a question of the use of the word 'calling'. We might say it includes priesthood to be literally right, because we are priests. We are priests because we have the Spirit and because we are sons.
J.S.E. Our Lord Himself is priest by way of His sonship, is He not?
J.T. I think it would be hardly correct to confine it to that because what we have here does not confine it to that, although sonship is mentioned. If we read again verses 1 to 14 of chapter 5 we shall see
{292}
that we have the priesthood here given to the Lord as called. As has been said here already, although sonship is regarded, in a certain sense, as the basis, yet when we come to the facts, the Lord's Person is the basis of it. It is a question of what He is personally, but especially what has been said as to "without father, without mother", and so forth. It is a question of what He is personally.
A.H. In verse 10 of chapter 5 the writer says: "addressed by God ..." Does that support what you have in mind as to the magnitude of the priesthood of Christ?
J.T. "Addressed by God", yes, quite so. But then we cannot just pass over what is said there -- "addressed by God as high priest according to the order of Melchisedec". That is to say, the priesthood is stressed in the fact that He is according to the order of Melchisedec, and then it goes on to say: "Concerning whom we have much to say, and hard to be interpreted in speaking of it, since ye are become dull in hearing". That ought to speak to us, as to whether we fully understand, or whether we may be dull of hearing in the facts presented to us in this remarkable chapter, as indeed in all these chapters in Hebrews, up to chapter 8, particularly. So that we ought to keep to the facts mentioned, and the actual context of them.
Ques. The unchanging character of the priesthood seems to be stressed in relation to the order of Melchisedec. Is that the great advantage of christianity, that there is no change of priest?
J.T. Just so. There had been a change, and that has been pointed out, but He is established in the power of an endless life, as the later passage will tell us.
Eu.R. Does not "become higher than the heavens" also emphasise that?
{293}
J.T. Just so; it is a divine Person. Only a divine Person can become higher than the heavens, because it is an uncreated condition. Of course, we can speak of the heavens which are visible, but what is higher is left open; we cannot describe it really.
Rem. So that this Person is the guarantee for the continuance of the operation of the divine system.
J.T. Yes; quite so.
A.J.G. And there is no discrepancy between the way God has come out in Christ as the Apostle and the way we approach in Christ as the High Priest.
J.T. Quite so.
P.L. Is that prefigured prophetically in connection with the Exodus? "This is that Aaron and Moses, to whom Jehovah said ...", @Exodus 6: 26. Is there a prophetic allusion to the Person of Christ?
J.T. Very likely; it is to make sure that there is a certainty about it. "Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession" -- that is the Lord Jesus, and He includes the two ideas of Moses and Aaron. One is authority and the other support -- support in the way of priestly power and grace.
A.J.G. In view of the personal greatness of Christ, is it not particularly affecting that He should have learned obedience?
J.T. It is, indeed. I was wondering whether we have taken it in as it was read -- so as to acquire the full meaning of what is said there. It really refers to the Lord in Gethsemane. So that if we look at verse 7 of chapter 5: "Who in the days of his flesh, having offered up both supplications and entreaties to him who was able to save him out of death, with strong crying and tears; (and having been heard because of his piety;) though he were Son, he learned obedience from the things which he suffered; and having been perfected, became to all them that obey him, author of eternal salvation". The sufferings are very affecting, and should not be
{294}
passed over lightly. It is remarkable that the word, 'save' should be used in verse 7. These are most remarkable statements and very touching, and yet the literal truth of them cannot be questioned; the reference is to Gethsemane; it was before His death.
Ques. Does the expression, "offered up both supplications and entreaties" suggest anything priestly? Is there any priestly suggestion in that?
J.T. He is not a priest to Himself; it is simply the power of it that we realise. He was not asking for anybody else, He was asking for Himself: "having offered up both supplications and entreaties to him who was able to save him out of death". I would not like to apply the idea of priesthood to the Lord Himself, for His own support. I think it would be very unwise to do it. It is better to take the wording here, and bow to it, and then be affected by it, that He actually endured these things. I believe the allusion is to Gethsemane.
Ques. The expression "His flesh" implying how He felt things truly?
J.T. Well, quite, but it was before He died; it was before His death, not after. These things happened in Gethsemane, really. They may have happened elsewhere, but they are not recorded, but they *are* recorded as in Gethsemane.
A.J.G. And He went through everything on the principle of obedience, so that there is a moral link, is there not, between the priest, Christ, and those who obey Him? It is those who obey Him who get the support of His priesthood.
J.T. Quite so; very good. And I am sure you will agree with what I said, as to these things requiring our deepest feelings as to the Lord Himself in what happened in Gethsemane; and that it should be recorded in view of leading up to the thought of high priesthood -- not priesthood, but high priesthood.
{295}
N.K.M. Is the thought here of obedience closely linked up with piety? "Having been heard because of his piety".
J.T. Just so. That is what is meant.
A.J.G. Is it not remarkable that we get a threefold account of Gethsemane in three of the gospels, with slight differences as though to impress us with the scene?
J.T. You feel it is a moral necessity to be impressed with the Lord's sufferings, including, of course, that they lead on in Matthew and Mark to the forsaking. That is not mentioned here, but they do lead on to it in the gospels of Matthew and Mark. So that Gethsemane is especially in mind, and it should be in our minds, so that we should be genuinely affected, to come into accord with what the Lord suffered -- the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow.
P.L. Would the horns of the golden altar typify that -- the strength in suffering? He was heard for His piety.
J.T. Quite so. I think that is a good remark, because it is quite right to use the word 'piety' in connection with the Lord. He prayed to God, He besought God; the fact is the Lord exercised faith, I believe, fully, for He is the Author and Completer of faith. He exercised faith so as to become near to His brethren -- "in all things to be made like to his brethren". It is very touching, I think, and very instructive and encouraging, too.
J.P.H. Would you say another word about verse 8, please -- the remarkable expression: "He learned obedience from the things which he suffered".
J.T. I think it is that He had been in the form of God. We know that: He was in the form of God, and, of course, He was not in obedience in the form of God, but as in the form of man He learned obedience. While He was in the form of God He
{296}
was not under obedience, but as having become Man He did obey. That is the idea of it really, that He learnt it; the word 'learnt' is remarkable. He actually experienced the thing, not in the sense of learning to obey, but in the actual experience of it.
A.J.G. In becoming Man He enters, for the first time, into circumstances to which obedience applies.
J.T. Very good. That is well put, and should be well understood too.
J.S.E. Would @Philippians 2 bear upon this for our meditation -- "emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in the likeness of men; and having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death". Would that fill out this in some detail?
J.T. I think that would be covered, pretty much, in what we said as to the form of God. It says in that chapter in Philippians, "Who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself ... becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross". That is, in the form of God He was not in obedience; there was no question of obedience then, but in becoming Man He takes the place of subjection to God, and of obedience.
F.C.H. Is that remarkably brought out in Mark's account of Gethsemane? "And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee: take away this cup from me; but not what *I* will, but what *thou* wilt".
J.T. Very good.
E.C.M. Would you say a word as to "author of eternal salvation".
J.T. Well, "author" there implies that He is the Beginner of it and Establisher of it. It is not temporal salvation, but eternal salvation. The word, 'eternal' is a peculiar word in Hebrews.
{297}
Ques. What is involved in the expression, "having been perfected"?
J.T. Having attained or reached the idea that was in mind for salvation; that is to say, the accomplishment of redemption. As risen from the dead, He is perfected. He spoke of it Himself, saying, "the third day I am perfected", @Luke 13: 32. That would mean that He was risen from the dead the third day, and the idea of redemption was accomplished.
A.J.G. Would it also include the thought of His exaltation?
J.T. I think it would, so that the Spirit would come down.
A.J.G. I mean the position in which His priesthood is exercised now.
J.T. Just so; He is a priest on high. It also says. "If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father", but that is not exactly priesthood; that is advocacy, although it is very like it.
R.W.S. What is the difference, please, between advocacy and priesthood?
J.T. Advocacy is the authority or power you have to do a thing; you are in the place officially to be able to do it. "An advocate with the Father" is simply that the Lord has power to address Him, and is enabled to get deliverance for the person who has sinned. The word 'priesthood' is further; it is the full official thought, as we get it in this chapter. The epistle to the Hebrews is full of the thought of priesthood, not of advocacy. John speaks of advocacy in his epistle.
J.S.E. The word 'advocate' is 'paraclete' according to the note in @1 John 2.
J.T. It is the same word.
A.J.G. Would it be right to say that priesthood is for those who obey Him and advocacy is for those who sin?
{298}
J.T. Well, just so. It says: "If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father", but the Spirit is here too as an advocate. He is our Paraclete, not in the sense of securing immunity from judgment but to help us and look after things for us.
Ques. Is priesthood linked with the "elements of the beginning of the oracles of God", (chapter 5: 12)?
J.T. It is linked verbally in the chapter; the 'for' links it up. "For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have again need that one should teach you what are the elements of the beginning of the oracles of God". That is, all of us need this teaching; the idea is presented in the chapter in the plainest language.
Ques. Perhaps the question is, Is priesthood one of the elements? What are the elements of the beginning of the oracles of God? Is priesthood one of them?
J.T. The beginning; it is the beginning of christianity. That is what the Lord taught, we might say, before He died. The gospels are full of the Lord's teaching -- the beginning of what He taught, and then the apostles, of course, taught it too. It is what begins the thing. The inauguration of christianity implies the beginning of christianity, which would be the full sense of the oracles of God. The epistle to the Romans in chapter 3 speaks of these oracles, too, but I would like just to understand what you have in mind. Have you any other thought than what we are saying?
Rem. The expression, "the elements of the beginning", would appear to suggest that something is contained in them.
J.T. Surely, there are elements; I would say, new birth, for instance, and all the instruction that comes as to it before redemption is understood or known. There are some things which people have an understanding about before they get the Spirit even.
{299}
A.J.G. The beginning of chapter 6 rather exhorts us to leave the beginning of the Christ -- "the word of the beginning of the Christ" -- and go on to what belongs to full growth.
J.T. Just so; that indicates what is meant. It applies to some in whom God is working, like a person born anew. Well, he has not got the Spirit, and he does not know redemption, but the elements are there, though. I think that has to be followed up.
A.W.G.T. Does it mean, too, that instead of remaining in the initial epistles like Romans and Corinthians, we should proceed to the higher epistles. Is that contained in it?
J.T. I think it is rather the initial epistles; it is what is more initial, especially what relates to new birth in a believer's soul, because "The wind blows where it will, and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes: thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". Things are not very clear; hence the first thing is, unless one is born anew, he cannot even *see* the kingdom of God, and then again it says, "Except anyone be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God". The word 'cannot' there in both cases would be indicative of the elements of the beginning of the oracles of God, implying that they have to be understood initially.
Eu.R. Christianity proper is characterised by full growth; we are exhorted to go on to full growth.
J.T. That is chapter 6. What we are dealing with now is chapter 5, because our brethren here that are enquiring as to the elements of the beginning of the oracles of God, are referring to chapter 5. So that in chapter 6 we probably touch it, but we have to go on to chapter 7.
N.K.M. Would you just say a word about the "word of righteousness", in chapter 5, verse 13: "every one that partakes of milk is unskilled in the
{300}
word of righteousness, for he is a babe". We have had reference made to the word of God in chapter 4. What is the word of righteousness?
J.T. We are speaking now of babes. "Every one that partakes of milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness". He is hardly initiated into it; he is just a babe; he has got to learn everything. That is what the passage runs on to, "but solid food belongs to full-grown men". So that the contrast is solid food, which belongs to full-grown men.
{301}
MAIDSTONE -- READING (5)
@Hebrews 6: 1 - 20; @Hebrews 7: 1 - 28
J.T. In view of what has been remarked earlier in regard of chapter 5, it may be said profitably that our Lord exercised faith. He is said to be "the leader and completer of faith". I make this remark because it may be thought that it is degrading to regard Him as exercising faith, but that is not so, because it says He was "in all things to be made like to his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God". So that faith applies to Him, indeed, as remarked, He is the Leader and Completer of it. The remarks that have been made as to chapter 5 in connection with what is said about the Lord in such a remarkable way in the days of His flesh, would fit in with these remarks. It cannot be said that He exercises faith now, but He clearly did, because it says He is the Leader and Completer of it.
R.W.S. In @Psalm 22 -- "thou didst make me trust, upon my mother's breasts" -- is that alluding to faith?
J.T. Just so.
P.L. And as the Author has He been the Source of all faith in the generation of faith? Has this to be viewed retrospectively from Adam onwards, or Abel onwards?
J.T. I suppose it is one of the things that attached to Him as the Messiah here. Faith came down from the outset and it is seen extended in this epistle to the Hebrews. We may, therefore, be assured that the Lord having come here as Man, and walking here as a Man in dependence on God, exercised faith.
Ques. Would you think that is seen on the cross in Luke, when He says. "Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit"?
{302}
J.T. Just so -- in dependence on God.
H.W. Are you thinking that throughout the whole of His pathway faith marked Him? There are so many references in the Psalms, are there not, particularly in the sorrow Psalms. In @Psalm 69, for instance, we get, "I wait for my God".
J.T. Yes; well, I think it is quite clear, but I have made the remark as to it lest there may be those here who either do not understand or do not think that the Lord walked by faith. I know that that has been said, and I think it is wise for all of us to get things clear in such a meeting as this, because the Spirit of God is here to help us; He is ready to help us on all these points.
Ques. What does the expression, "the leader and completer of faith", include? I was thinking of the word "completer". Does it suggest that He has been into every circumstance that faith could possibly be tested in?
J.T. That is to say, He has been through everything, and whatever He did go through, He did it well. "I have completed the work" -- for instance, the Lord says, "which thou gavest me that I should do it". Things are finished and completed. He did it perfectly, whatever He did.
F.C.H. How do you regard the expression in @Romans 3, "the faith of Jesus"? Is that something different?
J.T. It is different; it is 'of' there. It is the faith, really, that lays hold of something. It is a time of faith, and, of course, "the faith of Jesus" is simply that it is the faith that would lay hold of the truth, according to Romans in view of the gospel. But what we have already said applies to Him as a Man walking here before He died. He walked here on the principle of faith, such as the godly men of the Old Testament exercised.
{303}
Eu.R. @Psalm 16 verse 1, "Preserve me, O God: for I trust in thee".
J.T. That is a clear indication that He did exercise it.
E.C.M. Is the thought of God's pleasure linked up with it? Without faith it is impossible to please God.
J.T. Well, just so. That would show negatively that He exercised faith.
W.C. Would it specially be seen in the temptation in the wilderness and in Gethsemane?
J.T. Yes. Satan would seek to take Him out of the hands of God. So it says: "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which goes out through God's mouth". He was truly Man, and Satan would have set it aside by saying, "If thou be Son of God, speak, that these stones may become loaves of bread". I think we should proceed now with chapter 6 and touch chapter 7, although we have dealt with chapter 7 somewhat already. So that the first word in chapter 6 is, "Wherefore, leaving the word of the beginning of the Christ" -- we have the same idea in "the elements of the beginning", but here it is "the beginning of the Christ", referring to Him, not only in His walk here on earth, but what He is now in heaven -- the beginning of what He is. So that it goes on to say "Let us go on to what belongs to full growth, not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works and faith in God, of the doctrine of washings, and of imposition of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment; and this will we do if God permit. For it is impossible to renew again to repentance those once enlightened, and who have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come, and have fallen away, crucifying for
{304}
themselves as they do the Son of God, and making a show of him". These are most remarkable statements, and it seems to me it would be well worth our while to look into them from the beginning of the chapter. There are many statements that will be questioned in the minds of many, as to certain things said here, but it is a very solemn thing. "For it is impossible" it says in verse 4, "to renew again to repentance those once enlightened, and who have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come, and have fallen away". The possibility of a person so described falling away is perhaps what we do not take on, or understand fully.
Ques. Would you mind repeating what you said just now as to "leaving the word of the beginning of the Christ".
J.T. Well, just what He is, and viewing Him as the subject of the gospel, "The beginning of the Christ" -- what has taken place in Him. It is not only His walk here on earth, but His present position on high, and the beginning of it has to be thought of here.
J.P.H. Is it that certain things are to be regarded as settled, and not to be questioned, but to be understood, and the saints going on from them?
J.T. Yes. Certain things which are spoken of as "the beginning of the Christ", certain things about Him. The thought is to reach full growth, but "the beginning of the Christ" would be what belongs to babehood; persons who are in need of milk, and unable to lay hold of strong food.
A.M.P. Would faith in God be the initial act of faith?
J.T. That is right.
A.M.P. I thought in christendom it is regarded as the final matter in this sense.
{305}
J.T. It is. It is only initial things that are mentioned here. It is not the full thought of anything, but the initial things, for faith goes on to the end of our journey. It is the period of faith, for we are really in the dispensation of faith.
A.L.R.T. Is the suggestion here that if we do not go on we are in danger of falling away?
J.T. Exactly. In fact it says "it is impossible to renew again to repentance those once enlightened, ... and have tasted the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come, and have fallen away".
A.H. Would falling away be a return to judaism?
J.T. It would imply that. Of course, morally it would imply what is current in christendom. Methodists are given to speaking of such things as falling away, and falling from grace, whereas the truth of the gospel implies that if we are saved, we *are* saved. The Lord says in @John 10, "No one shall seize them out of my hand ... and no one can seize out of the hand of my Father". It would be positive error and unsettle souls if anything contrary to that were admitted.
A.J.G. If we are sealed with the Holy Spirit we are sealed in view of the day of redemption.
J.T. Just so. It seems as if we are marked off as belonging to God and belonging to Him eternally, so that we can never be lost.
Ques. Does it mean that the foundation is sure, and we are to go on from that point?
J.T. Just so -- "the firm foundation of God stands".
N.K.M. What is meant here by the heavenly gift -- "who have tasted of the heavenly gift"?
J.T. I would say it is the Holy Spirit. In fact it says in verse 4, "made partakers of the Holy Spirit", "Tasted the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come" -- the heavenly gifts are
{306}
included. What is meant really is, suppose a person is here today, right here in this hall, and he is uncertain about his salvation; he is listening and the Holy Spirit is here, unquestionably here to help us, and this person that I was assuming is here. He leaves the meeting and becomes cold, or becomes uncertain as to his salvation; well, he has had the opportunity of tasting of these things. He is tasting in the sense that he is enjoying the atmosphere of the Spirit of God here at the moment, and if he leaves -- that is the thing -- he *has* tasted of the things. If he now turns away from it, that is what is in mind here, because in a meeting like this, and at any time where meetings are held, the Holy Spirit is here in the midst of the saints and any man of that kind may be turned aside after having tasted the thing. That is what is really meant in this passage.
F.C.H. It refers to persons, you mean, who are in the presence and power of these things, and then give them up.
J.T. That is right -- tasted them.
A.M.P. The word for 'partakers' is not the word for 'full partnership', but for an external association.
J.T. That is right.
P.L. Would Simon Magus illustrate such a man?
J.T. I would say so; Peter's word was very strong as to him. He had already tasted of the thing, and he would like to buy the power to give the Spirit.
A.J.G. Does not christendom as a whole benefit greatly by the presence of the Spirit, although entirely indifferent to it?
J.T. Just so, and I was remarking, there is a certain sect called Wesleyans. The very name indicates a false system; it is not christianity; it refers to John Wesley. They take it on as a creed, and they are very apt to assume that persons can be saved today and lost tomorrow; it is a common thing with
{307}
them. They speak about 'falling away', and refer to it in formal words -- 'falling from grace'.
Ques. Would you say that if we fall from grace, there is nothing else to save us?
J.T. There is nothing else; just so. If we fall from it, in the sense of giving it up. Of course, it is not to be denied that a person may grow cold and may become deceived and darkened in his soul and yet he might be the Lord's. That is not what is meant in what has been said. What has been said is just what is meant, that many assume to be saved one day and lost another, which is a false doctrine; for it is taught as a doctrine.
J.S.E. Has the Holy Spirit in the earlier chapters plainly shown that judaism was valueless. Christianity is the great system in which God is known, and if there is a falling away from that, there is nothing left.
J.T. Just so. To return to judaism would be apostasy, really. That is just what is meant in this chapter.
G.P. So that in the next chapter you get the idea of "save completely". Is that the power of christianity?
J.T. Just so. That is christianity that is dealt with, and our great priesthood in Melchisedec -- the Melchisedec priesthood. The terribleness of what is involved in this chapter is seen in verse 6: "And have fallen away, crucifying for themselves" -- as far as they are concerned, "as they do the Son of God, and making a show of him. For ground which drinks the rain which comes often upon it, and produces useful herbs for those for whose sakes also it is tilled, partakes of blessing from God; but bringing forth thorns and briars it is found worthless and nigh to a curse, whose end is to be burned". It is utterly worthless; "nigh to a curse" would imply that it has really come to the idea of curse.
{308}
C.H. Would the contrast to this condition be seen in verse 9: "But we are persuaded concerning you, beloved, better things"?
J.T. Quite so; that is the saving side, and all the way down now we can rest upon that; "For God is not unrighteous to forget your work". He comforts us, in that sense -- "and the love which ye have shewn to his name, having ministered to the saints, and still ministering. But we desire earnestly that each one of you shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end". Now we have the word 'hope' and that is the thing we might well notice, because it is a thing that belongs to christianity. We have faith, hope, love -- it belongs to christianity properly.
H.P.W. That is a very sweet word -- "the full assurance of hope".
J.T. Quite so, "That ye be not sluggish" -- because that is the danger, being sluggish, "but imitators of those who through faith and patience have been inheritors of the promises".
C.H. Would an appreciation of the word of God preserve us from even starting in this direction? I was thinking of the way the apostle refers to it in verse 5 -- "the good word of God", as though he speaks appreciatively of it.
J.T. Quite so; it would preserve us. That fits in, therefore, more fully with the passage that we have just read down to verse 12.
A.J.G. In chapter 7 it speaks of "the introduction of a better hope by which we draw nigh to God". Is not that really the secret of salvation, to draw nigh to God?
J.T. Quite so. Hope is therefore power in the soul. Then from verse 13 it leads on at the end of the chapter to the idea of Christ being the forerunner as a Priest for us: "Both secure and firm, and entering into that within the veil, where Jesus is entered
{309}
as forerunner for us, become for ever a high priest according to the order of Melchisedec" (verses 19, 20). The end of chapter 6 is a beautiful finish and an assuring finish: "as anchor of the soul" -- beautiful thought -- "both secure and firm, and entering into that within the veil". We often speak of that: 'inside the veil, and outside the camp', "Entering into that within the veil, where Jesus is entered as forerunner for us, become for ever a high priest according to the order of Melchisedec". It is a beautiful sentence, assuring us of the truth of the gospel, the firmness of it. It is like a foundation, as it says: "The firm foundation of God stands". But then it is very beautiful that we go inside the veil. Many of us stay outside, but here the point is going inside the veil. 'Outside the camp, inside the veil', 'Outside the camp' means that we have given up christendom, really, as a camp. That is what it is, and as giving it up we have already entered inside within the veil. That is our place.
R.G.B. So that in chapter 10 it refers to our having "boldness for entering into the holy of holies ... through the veil". Christianity properly belongs to within, would you say?
J.T. Quite so. Christianity properly belongs to within, and here it is the same thing -- "within the veil".
W.C. Is this a reference to the type of the city of refuge? The one who fled there remained till the death of the high priest, but the priest here lives for ever.
J.T. Yes.
W.F. Does this expression, "within the veil", become the more important as the apostasy increases? That is, there is a position inside where the apostasy is not experienced.
J.T. It is very good to think of that, because the apostasy is current now, around us. Paul refers to
{310}
it where the Thessalonians were afraid that the day of the Lord had come, and he points out to them that it would not happen unless the apostasy came first. The imminence of the apostasy is a terrible thought, and it is largely, I believe now, centred in Russia. That is to say, communism is the great apostasy that is current. There is no other element of evil, as far as I see, worse than the idea of communism, and it is centring in Russia. We may as well say so, because it is the truth, and the world is threatened by it. But the Lord says to Philadelphia, "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". I think that is one of the greatest comforts that we can have.
A.M. Is the repeated reference to the personal name 'Jesus' in this epistle, really over against the apostate principles around?
J.T. Just so. We had it, I think, yesterday. "We see Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour" -- we *see* Him, as if we have to understand what that means. Stephen saw Him. He does not call Him Jesus; he calls Him the Son of man, and that is another thing to think of. But Jesus is the One we see, according to the second chapter of this book.
R.W.S. We are to go on then with our meetings, with the service of God and the meeting for prayer, in the presence of communism; just to proceed with them, and God will see us through in it.
J.T. Proceed with our general practice, just so.
Ques. Is the "forerunner for us" to help us as to what we are in the mind of God?
J.T. The forerunner implies that the place is secured. It is a certain matter, that He has gone in first and we are all to go -- as it says in @John 14: "I go to prepare you a place; and if I go and shall prepare you a place, I am coming again and shall
{311}
receive you to myself, that where I am ye also may be". That is what is meant.
Ques. Is it encouraging with regard to our brother's remark, that we are to go on, as it says: "For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us", @2 Corinthians 1: 20. Would that encourage us to go on?
J.T. Surely, and what follows that is that we are anointed and sealed, and have the earnest of the Spirit. Those three things are an assurance to us.
I think we should go on with chapter 7. We touched on Melchisedec already, and now we might as well just return to it again because it is so vital to understand. There need be no question in our minds as to Melchisedec, that he really refers to Christ Himself from verse 14: "For it is clear that our Lord has sprung out of Juda, as to which tribe Moses spake nothing as to priests". The matter is wholly clear now that our priest is not a levitical priest; He is the Lord Jesus Himself who sprung from Juda.
R.G.B. Does the greatness of the system require such a great Person as priest?
J.T. That is just the thought, and of course we have had that already, but it is brought in here again apparently to strengthen what has already been said. We may be perfectly sure now as to who Christ is, as a great Priest over the house of God. It is not simply a high priest, but a *great* Priest -- morally great.
Ques. This epistle refers a good deal to the thought of perfection. It is referred to in verse 11 here: "If indeed then perfection were by the Levitical priesthood". Is it right to say that Christianity is a system of perfection?
J.T. Quite so; it is a perfect system. It says in the end of chapter 11, "That they should not be made perfect without us". Perfection is that we
{312}
attain the full thought in mind in what is said. So it is said in Matthew: "Be *ye* therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect". It is just that we have arrived at the full thought that is indicated in the teaching.
Ques. So in the beginning of chapter 6 where it says. "Let us go on ... to full growth", the word might read 'perfection'. It means arriving at christianity proper, does it?
J.T. Quite so, and therefore what we had yesterday is all the more sure to us, that the Spirit of God is amongst us. We are going on with what is, in itself, perfect. We have not a doubt about it, that we are going on with true christianity, and we should not give it up for a moment.
A.J.G. The head of the system being the Son would involve great dignity and liberty marking the system.
J.T. Quite so.
A.M. Is it to be regarded as something entirely new, and not just an advance, or an increase or modification, of what has preceded? Is not that stressed?
J.T. It is entirely new; quite so. The word 'new' is applied.
Ques. Is that indicated in @Revelation 5 where there is no one found worthy to open the book but the Lion of the tribe of Juda?
J.T. Quite so; it is another allusion to the greatness of Christ. But "the lion which is of the tribe of Juda" is remarkable, because the Lamb is in mind, and a lamb as a diminutive thought. It is very remarkable that He is called a Lion, too, meaning strength; infinite strength is there. No one but He is able to open the book, because He has got power.
A.J.G. He is said to be "the root of David" in that scripture, "And one of the elders says to me, Do not weep. Behold, the lion which is of the tribe
{313}
of Juda, the root of David, has overcome so as to open the book, and its seven seals".
J.T. It is remarkable, and we all should be comforted by it, that so much is made of the greatness of Christ, the deity of Christ, that He is God Himself. Under various terms the idea of power is so presented in Him.
J.S.E. "How great this personage was". I wondered if we could have a little more as to these frequent references to Melchisedec, all the time with Christ Himself in the Spirit's mind.
J.T. Quite so, and 'was' is a literal allusion to the personage that is found in Genesis. It is a literal allusion, for he was a great personage, but in truth when we come down to verse 14 here it is the Lord Himself personally that is in mind. It is not the figurative person in the book of Genesis, but the Lord Himself, who is of the tribe of Juda. It is a literal reference to the Lord Himself as sprung from Juda.
P.L. And the greatness of the company is seen in the glory and dignity of this Person. It says He "became us".
J.T. "Became us" -- very good. In the 'us' the dignity and greatness of the people are seen, and so we often say, quoting from the Old Testament, "this thy great people". I am sure you have that in mind. It is not that we want to draw attention to ourselves, but still the fact remains that those who have the Holy Spirit are a great people. They are a heavenly people, too; they are fit to go to heaven, because that is what is coming to pass almost immediately, that we are going to heaven. "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord
{314}
in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord". That is our hope.
J.C.T. Does not Melchisedec come forward when Abraham is seen as completely superior to the whole world system?
J.T. Just so. He is greater than the King of Sodom, any way. He would not take anything from him. That is a good point for us, that we will not take anything from the world. It is not great enough for us.
W.F. In chapter 2 there is something that became God, and in this chapter there is something that becomes ourselves. Would you be free to say a further word as to that expression? I was referring to chapter 2 first of all: "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings". And now in chapter 7 we have, "For such a high priest became us".
J.T. Yes; it is because of our greatness. It means that the greatness of the saints, really those of the assembly, requires such a Person as head -- that is, Christ Himself. And so in the end of the first of Ephesians it says of the Lord: "gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". That is to say, the saints are the body of Christ and have part in the headship. They are not deified, they are merely creatures, but they have part in the headship. It is a marvellous thing that that can be said of the assembly. We should have it in mind, for we need to accept that in view of the service of God, when we are exercising it, that we have part in the headship.
Ques. You have been speaking of christianity as the system of perfection. Would you say a word on the last expression in the chapter: "A Son perfected for ever"?
{315}
J.T. We have been speaking of the word 'perfect' and the meaning of it, and, of course, you can see that that meaning enters into what you are speaking of. "The Son perfected for ever", refers to His having attained to what is intended in the purpose of God.
A.J.G. His glorious position in manhood in the presence of God, and that is to remain for ever.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. And that position based on redemption?
J.T. That would be right, but I think it would be better to base it on the Person of Christ, what He is personally.
Eu.R. Does christianity as a system of perfection involve the opened heavens, Christ in glory and the Spirit here?
J.T. Just so. But what are you referring to the opened heavens for? I know it is the truth, but we are trying to keep to the accuracy of the passage we are dealing with. The book of Acts might be more accurately said to be the opened heavens, and the book of Revelation also. In fact, it is a thought running through the whole of the New Testament.
A.L.R.T. Would you say a word as to "become higher than the heavens". It is the same verse which speaks of what is becoming us.
J.T. That is a good question. "Higher than the heavens" means an uncreated condition which is only possible for a divine Person, but if we turn to @Ephesians 4: 10 we get a further word there. "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things; and *he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ; until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the
{316}
Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". We have already touched on that in the earlier readings, and it is the same thing that is found here in our chapter. That is to say, that Christ -- a divine Person -- can go beyond the heavens, but at the same time there is the statement in @Ephesians 4 that the gifts were from there. That is to say, there were gifted persons and they are specified -- apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, these also come from Christ in the created condition, so that we are very near to it. Just as we have often said as to the Godhead of Christ and what the assembly is; the assembly is very near to Godhead, but it is not Godhead. It is not as far as Godhead; it is Christ's body, nevertheless, but it is just a creature. We have often said that -- and these remarks also can be said, or dealt with, in the same way. So we have to seek to tax our minds, in dependence on the Holy Spirit, so that we may get understanding as to all these remarkable things, especially as they have to be treated as mysterious; because the assembly is said to be the mystery.
C.S. Would you say a further word to help us as to the part which the assembly has in the matter of headship.
J.T. I quoted from @Ephesians 1, but, if you read it yourself, then, we will all hear it.
C.S. @Ephesians 1: 22: "And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all".
J.T. 'To' there is in relation to the assembly -- as head of the assembly. So that she has part in the headship.
H.W. Had Eve a part in the headship of Adam?
J.T. Just so; "Let *them* have dominion", it says; that is, Adam and Eve. The word 'them'
{317}
covers both -- both Adam and Eve. The word 'man' covers both.
Ques. Would you be free to say who it is that "fills all in all", in that verse: "the fulness of him who fills all in all". Is that God?
J.T. I would like the brethren to say just what they might think about that, because different things have been said about it. The passage runs properly from "the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of the might of his strength, in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead, and he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". Now, the question is, who the 'him' is there -- I would be glad to hear what the brethren say.
Ques. Did you not say in Manchester that it was Christ? and I think also at other times you have said so.
J.T. It does seem so, too. That is what I believe, anyway.
C.H. Is it confirmed in verse 10 of chapter 4 of the same epistle? "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things". Is that the same expression?
J.T. Quite so. That confirms what we have said. "The fulness of him" is a word that would refer to Christ. "Fulness" is a peculiar word in that sense, and in the passage the context would show clearly, I think, that "him" refers to Christ.
{318}
HAMPTON -- READING
@Hebrews 8: 10 - 13; @Hebrews 9: 6 - 28
J.T. The brethren will observe that certain passages in these chapters have been omitted, because they refer to the old covenant; we do not want to speak of that now, but to get the import of the epistle, leaving the old covenant as most here understand what that refers to, and to get the meaning of the new covenant.
Now let us apply ourselves to verses 10 - 13 of chapter 8, "Because this is the covenant that I will covenant to the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord: Giving my laws into their mind, I will write them also upon their hearts; and I will be to them for God, and *they* shall be to me for people. And they shall not teach each his fellow-citizen, and each his brother, saying, Know the Lord; because all shall know me in themselves, from the little one among them unto the great among them. Because I will be merciful to their unrighteousnesses, and their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more. In that he says New, he has made the first old; but that which grows old and aged is near disappearing". The old covenant it is said is near disappearing, but we are connected with real christianity. Paul no doubt being the writer of this epistle had the full truth in mind in what he wrote.
A.H. Is there a contrast in verse 6 of chapter 8, "Mediator of a better covenant, which is established on the footing of better promises", and verse 6 of chapter 9, "Now these things being thus ordered, into the first tabernacle the priests enter at all times, accomplishing the services"?
J.T. Just so. In that verse in chapter 8 Paul is dealing with the new covenant, whereas in chapter 9
{319}
verse 6, it is an allusion to the first tabernacle; that is, what was said to be the holy place, into which the priest entered at all times; then he goes on to say, "The Holy Spirit shewing this, that the way of the holy of holies has not yet been made manifest while as yet the first tabernacle has its standing". All then was "imposed until the time of setting things right" (verse 10). In verse 11 we come to the real point before us, "But Christ being come high priest of the good things to come, by the better and more perfect tabernacle not made with hand" -- notice that -- "(that is, not of this creation,) nor by blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood, has entered in once for all into the holy of holies, having found an eternal redemption". What a remarkable passage for our minds to rest upon: "eternal", a word peculiarly used in this book.
Ques. Is what is said here intended to lay the basis for christianity in the minds of the Hebrews?
J.T. That is the right word. Contrasting Christ's one offering with the oft-repeated Old Testament offerings.
E.S.H. Is @Leviticus 16 the type? It speaks of Aaron entering the holiest. He went in only once a year, but Christ has gone in having obtained eternal redemption.
J.T. That is the basic word -- redemption -- Christ has obtained eternal *redemption*.
Rem. Christ having come we should be engaged with the better things.
J.T. Yes, better things, not old things. The better things refer to what is heavenly, that is, the heavenly side of the truth, which is christianity, as it says in verse 24, "For the Christ is not entered into holy places made with hand, figures, of the true, but into heaven itself". It is the physical heavens that are referred to, we have the first, second and third heavens, but "heaven itself" is a mysterious thought.
{320}
It is where Christ is now. According to @Acts 1: 9, "a cloud received him out of their sight"; He was concealed by a cloud, what happened after that we do not know, but He will come again and "every eye shall see him" (@Revelation 1: 7); that is what we are looking for.
Ques. Can you help as to the force of chapter 9 verse 7?
J.T. It alludes to what marked the tabernacle; the first tabernacle refers to the holy place, and the second to the holiest of all. In chapter 10, verse 19 we are in the spiritual thing which is christianity, though the typical language of the literal thing is used. We have to ponder over the truth, as to the cloud receiving Him out of sight, and how He reached where He is now.
Rem. In this epistle it is shown that the way into the holiest, the presence of God, is open for those whose sins are remembered no more.
J.T. We have the new covenant referred to there in chapter 10 and in @1 Corinthians 11 also; the question is whether it should be connected with the Lord's supper. The Lord has connected it with it Himself.
Rem. He would take us from old ground and relationships in our minds and hearts, and establish us in new relationship; "he has made the first old", @Hebrews 8: 13.
J.T. Just so.
E.S.H. Is the force of the new covenant applied spiritually to give us liberty to enter the holiest?
J.T. That is it. We have to differentiate as to the truth and see in christianity the force of the word, 'new'. Things are spoken of as new, and we have to compare spiritual with spiritual, and see how the new covenant applies to us.
N.K.M. The new covenant was literally made with the house of Israel.
{321}
J.T. Just so.
E.S.H. In @2 Corinthians 3: 18, where it speaks of looking on the glory of the Lord, is not that really the holiest?
J.T. Very good. We have to understand what the holiest means. It is the real presence of God, and is understood by the spiritual.
Ques. Do we understand the matter from the typical side first before the spiritual as seen in Ephesians, where the saints are spoken of as quickened together with Christ?
J.T. That is spiritual. There is what the natural mind, and also the spiritual mind, has to consider in regard of the heavens. We have to consider where the heavens are. In chapter 1 it is said that God made the *worlds* by Christ. We are not told how many there are.
Ques. Is it said to enhance the greatness of the Person in our understandings?
J.T. Just so, but we cannot neglect the natural side, the heaven that we can see, and we do not see very far with our natural sight.
N.K.M. Do you think if we had that more before us, it would enhance the spiritual side?
J.T. The spiritual side has to be understood.
E.S.H. He made all things; does that imply He used the worlds?
J.T. Certainly.
E.S.H. He has gone above all heavens. It is wonderful, and enhances the greatness of God and of Christ.
J.T. @Genesis 1 does not tell us how many worlds there are, 'Expanse' is the word used, meaning a wide place for operations.
H.F. Stephen in @Acts 7 fixed his eyes on heaven.
J.T. Very good, he beheld the heavens opened -- what did he see? He saw the Son of man. How would he explain it if he were here this afternoon?
{322}
We need to depend on the Holy Spirit who is in us to understand these things. Then again it says, "No one has seen God at any time", @John 1: 18.
H.H. Is it to make us more acquainted with elevation?
J.T. To make us more acquainted with the Scriptures. How many of us read carefully, and understand what they mean?
A.T.G. What is the significance of the eternal covenant? @Hebrews 13: 20.
J.T. The word 'eternal' means there is nothing after it as a covenant. There is so much we have not looked into ourselves, and so much we do not look into.
H.H. The Hebrews had not seen what the Holy Spirit had showed.
J.T. Very striking -- what the Holy Spirit shows, what He does and says is mentioned several times in this book.
T.S.E. What about verse 24, as to heaven itself followed by the expression, "to appear before the face of God for us"? Is it to show the impossibility of entrance before? "Thou canst not see my face; ... and live". Christ has entered into heaven itself. He is there now before God's face for us.
J.T. In @2 Corinthians 4: 6 we have a similar expression, "in the face of Jesus Christ". What is seen in the face of Jesus Christ? Here it is the face of God, but in Corinthians it is what we may see; there is so much we could see but do not see.
J.S.E. Is not the power of the Spirit needed? It is not the face of Jesus as He appeared to men.
J.T. There is what may be seen in the literal firmament, the expanse of @Genesis 1: 6, according to @Psalm 19, but now it is "the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". It is spiritually now, and reflected in our hearts.
{323}
Rem. What we are dealing with is what is in our hearts, put there by the Spirit.
J.T. In 2 Corinthians, chapter 3, Paul says, "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". So that transformation should first be *in* our hearts, and then shine *out* to others.
Ques. Is it the reflection of what is in the presence of God that shines out?
J.T. Very good. If we put all the thoughts together, we see what is shining, first in our hearts, and then shining out for others to get the good of it. The shining is there, shining forth in the face of Jesus Christ.
Ques. What is the present thought of the holy of holies?
J.T. "Now these things being thus ordered, into the first tabernacle the priests enter at all times, accomplishing the services; but into the second, the high priest only, once a year, not without blood, which he offers for himself and for the errors of the people, the Holy Spirit shewing this". How did He do it? By types and shadows. But now see verse 11. "But Christ being come" -- now we are getting the reality -- "high priest of the good things to come, by the better and more perfect tabernacle not made with hand, (that is, not of this creation,) nor by blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood". Let us think of that: "Has entered in once for all into the holy of holies, having found an eternal redemption", and so on. We have the word 'eternal' several times. It may apply principally to Israel, it is a spiritual thought, and does not necessarily mean continuance, but that there is nothing after it. If we want to find out what goes beyond it, we shall have to go to Ephesians.
{324}
Rem. @Hebrews 9 gives the full bearing of the death of Jesus. There is hardly a chapter in the New Testament like it in this respect.
J.T. Yes; it would be well to read from verse 9 again -- "The which is an image for the present time, according to which both gifts and sacrifices, unable to perfect as to conscience him that worshipped, are offered, consisting only of meats and drinks and divers washings, ordinances of flesh, imposed until the time of setting things right", that time is christianity. "But Christ being come high priest of the good things to come, by the better and more perfect tabernacle not made with hand", -- the spiritual side -- "(that is, not of this creation,) nor by blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood, has entered in once for all into the holy of holies", that is the presence of God, known in the power of the Spirit, and what we have on the first day of the week, beginning with the Lord's supper. If we can only see how this comes into the service of God, beginning with the Lord's supper, we shall all get help. Then following that in the service we go on to the Father.
A.H. In chapter 8: 2, we have, "Minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man". Would that be realised when the saints assemble for the service of God each first day of the week?
J.T. Yes. The sanctuary is there as we sit around the Lord's supper, and the service of God begins to operate, and the sisters take on the matter of sonship, the same as the brothers.
N.K.M. In chapter 8: 2 it says, "Which the Lord has pitched and not man"; when was that?
J.T. The Lord there would refer back to Jehovah and it *should* be understood in christianity as referring to God, it is not the Lord Jesus. The Lord Jesus in this passage is the Minister of the sanctuary.
{325}
Ques. Was the pitching of the tabernacle seen at Pentecost?
J.T. Just so, it was there.
J.S.E. It is all to get us into the joy of what is fully established in christianity, the system itself and all the service that goes with it and the features of the assembly, and what belongs to it.
J.T. You must bring in the saints, one hundred and twenty people with *names*, as mentioned in @Acts 1; that is the beginning of it, and if you know them you are glad to see them. The Lord can see them when He comes in. The assembly is made up of the saints.
Ques. Every one having direct access to God's presence -- "having ... boldness for entering into the holy of holies", and that belongs to no other family but the assembly, would you say?
J.T. Just so, we wonder at it. It is all spiritual, and we are to make room for the Spirit, who is *in us* and with us.
A.M. Does not the tabernacle set out unity in a wonderful way? Then as the service proceeds, the unity becomes more evident.
J.T. Well, a hundred known persons together, some brothers and some sisters, each a vessel of the Spirit of God who is there to act in us and for us. If you think of the assembly, something must happen when the Lord Jesus comes in. You must get the thought of the saints, and not figures as seen in Hebrews which are quoted from Exodus. We are to dismiss the old thing and get at the reality of what is in the saints.
Ques. Is it seen in @Acts 20, "We being assembled"?
J.T. Just so.
Rem. No longer types but the thing itself.
J.T. We have to work the truth out in view of eternal conditions.
{326}
Rem. The Supper should be a very dignified occasion, the matter of our deportment and so on entering into it.
J.T. That is what you get in @Acts 2, verse 4, "They ... began to speak with other tongues", that is, they became intelligible to one another -- realistic -- we have to leave types and shadows and come to realities. First we read of three thousand and then five thousand, all of them saints. Let us try to get our minds fixed on the saints and the Holy Spirit operating in them, and in us, in our bodies which are temple of the Holy Spirit.
Rem. We should experience these operations of the Spirit in the assembly.
J.T. Yes. @Ephesians 2: 6 reads, "And has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". That is our place; it is to be known by the Spirit now. Stephen saw the Lord Jesus standing, but here in Ephesians we are seen sitting down.
A.H. What does it mean? In the old economy no one sat down.
J.T. Not even the High Priest. We have to get the thing spiritually. We need to be born again, indeed we need more than the new birth, we have the Holy Spirit in us, and He affects us, so that as entering into God's presence our faces begin to shine.
A.H. Is the reference to "his own blood" and "an eternal redemption" intended to affect our hearts?
J.T. Yes, for redemption was not possible in any other way.
Rem. It is the greatest expression of love -- divine love claiming its own property.
J.T. Yes, and so the blood is brought in -- "precious blood", Peter says.
E.S.H. Does "by his own blood" link up with the new covenant in His blood?
{327}
J.T. It refers to the fact that *He died*. The spear of the soldier brought forth the blood -- without blood-shedding there is no remission.
A.H. Can you give us a word on verse 24 to the end of chapter 9?
J.T. We read, "For the Christ is not entered into holy places made with hand, figures of the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear before the face of God for us: nor in order that he should offer himself often, as the high priest enters into the holy places every year with blood not his own; since he had then been obliged often to suffer from the foundation of the world. But now once in the consummation of the ages" -- what phraseology! -- how far back in the ages can we go?
Ques. Does "once" only refer to Christ?
J.T. Yes, "But now once in the consummation of the ages" the 'once' is over against the numberless times things were done in Old Testament period. It is a beautiful passage, and so we read, "Christ ... shall appear to those that look for him the second time without sin for salvation". He will appear and we shall see Him, and the question is whether we *love* His appearing; what a glorious sight it will be. He will come out of heaven; we have it in the words of our hymn, 'We greet the day that's nearing' (`200:4).
A.H. No more questions left to resolve?
J.T. No.
Ques. Do we greet Him in that light at the Supper?
J.T. We do. So according to @2 Corinthians 3: 18, "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face". That is a spiritual matter now, but we look for Him to appear soon according to this, verse 28.
Ques. In verse 24, "To appear before the face of God for us", is the point, not exactly the efficacy of the sacrifice or any thought of sin, but our having
{328}
liberty in the presence of God, where Christ now appears?
J.T. Yes, and another thing, John says, "No one has seen God at any time", but in @Matthew 5 it says the pure in heart shall see God, so we have to understand this, and also how the children's angels always behold the face of the Father (@Matthew 18: 10). The Lord says, "My Father" -- it is wonderful that the children should be represented there.
Rem. The expression, "my Father", is very impressive.
J.T. Just so, "No one", as John says, "has seen God at any time", but there is some sense in which we can see and we have to find it out.
Rem. Our establishment in the divine system is really in the knowledge of God. "All, shall know me in themselves, from the little one among them, unto the great among them", @Hebrews 8: 11.
{329}
SOUTHAMPTON -- READING (1)
@Hebrews 10: 1 - 39
J.T. This epistle has been before some of us considerably during recent weeks, and it is thought that we might finish it at this time, especially as there is a certain conclusion reached in the truth. Severe judgment, too, is announced, or threatened -- severer perhaps than we might have expected or anticipated, but it seems as if God evidently intended to be severe in what He says in this epistle about what was happening, especially as to the Jewish element in christianity turning aside. We have the idea of the severity of God in the epistle to the Romans, and this particularly applies to the epistle to the Hebrews, because the Hebrew christians were turning aside, as we have said. It corresponds with what is so prevalent now in nominal christianity, the turning aside and giving up of the truth on every hand. At the same time, there is great encouragement to those who are seeking to walk in it. It is therefore thought that we might be encouraged to look into the remaining part of the book and to think on what is evidently open to us. There are certain things we shall see in the later chapters, but at this time it is in mind to think about entering into the holiest, which is the greatest privilege open to us. It is not intended to enlarge on the judgment, but to see just what is said in this chapter in the sense of entering the holiest. That is a Jewish phrase, we may say, because the allusion is to what happened in the Old Testament times when the priest entered. But what happened then, as seen here, was just a shadow of good things to come, and we are in the midst of the good things. The Lord is encouraging us too, I believe, as many of us here would testify, in going in for the truth as to the service of God.
{330}
Ques. Is the "full assurance of faith" in verse 22 in contrast to the fearful expectation of judgment to which you referred?
J.T. Yes. "Let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith". That is what is in mind; that is to say, from verse 19 the bright side of things is dealt with, so that we have, "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies" -- that is what is specially in mind -- "by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, and having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach". That is the point -- "let us approach" -- let us draw near to God.
A.J.G. Would you say that entering the holy of holies has a great effect upon us in relation to the service of God, and also a great effect upon us as in the testimony?
J.T. Just so. These chapters have been much on the minds of the brethren, as you will know, since Mr. Raven's time, and they have been enlarged, and I believe perhaps the brethren are more conversant with them even now than they were in his time. The matter first of drawing near, having liberty, is for the enjoyment of ourselves and for the satisfaction of God, the Father. I mean, it is what is for the satisfaction of God, and then, as you have said, for the testimony too, because all this would affect our testimony in our everyday walk. The first day of the week was intended evidently, in the mind of God, for His service, that we might be free for it -- old and young -- and then that we might enter in, the way being opened to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus. It is "the new and living way" -- not what is current all round us. What is current is just a return to old ways, judaism or heathenism, but what we have is "the new and living way", not that it is begun recently, but it is the new and
{331}
living way. It was there at the beginning and it is now here. God has greatly revived the truth for us, and it is for us now to lay hold of it and not to give way nor turn back. That is what is greatly stressed, we might say, in this chapter.
A.S.T. Would you say a word as to what is involved in "the holy of holies" for us.
J.T. It is just the presence of God. It is the holiest of all, rightly said, "the holy of holies". It is a comparative thought. There are, of course, outward things, such as the gospel and such as Bible readings and the like, but "the holy of holies" is opened up to us, especially on the first day of the week, for our own enjoyment and for the Father's pleasure. And it will appear in the way we take up things on the Monday, and all the other days of the week.
Ques. Is the greatness of the work of Christ and the greatness of His position on high to induce this boldness with us?
J.T. Very good. The greatness of the work of Christ.
Rem. I was thinking of the emphasis on the blood, the efficacy of His work, and the glory of His place on high, all resulting in a boldness to draw near.
J.T. Just so. Boldness is a peculiar thought to apply to the relations between God and His people, but it says that we have boldness.
Rem. John tells us that "as *he* is, *we* also are in this world", and says, "That we may have boldness in the day of judgment".
J.T. Just so -- "as *he* is, *we* also are". It is marvellous, "as *he is*, *we* also are in this world" -- not in heaven, but in this world, showing the provision made to keep us, for we are in a world of evil.
Ques. Is entrance into the holiest to be enjoyed individually or collectively, or both?
{332}
J.T. Both, surely; but the principal point is the saints as together. So we have that touched on later in the chapter, where it says, for instance, in verse 32, "But call to mind the earlier days in which, having been enlightened, ye endured much conflict of sufferings; on the one hand, when ye were made a spectacle both in reproaches and afflictions; and on the other, when ye became partakers with those who were passing through them. For ye both sympathised with prisoners and accepted with joy the plunder of your goods, knowing that ye have for yourselves a better substance, and an abiding one. Cast not away therefore your confidence", so that I think it would just be well to keep the end of the chapter in mind as bearing on the positive side at the beginning of the chapter.
A.H. Reference has been made to the blood. There is a remarkable expression in verse 13 of chapter 9. I wondered if you would say a word as to it: "For if the blood of goats and bulls, and a heifer's ashes sprinkling the defiled, sanctifies for the purity of the flesh, how much rather shall the blood of the Christ, who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God, purify your conscience from dead works to worship the living God?"
J.T. "To worship the living God". That is a wonderful expression, and that, as I was saying, comes in particularly on the first day of the week. I think the days of the week have not been fully taken into account, especially the first day, and how it opens up the way for the saints, for the services, morning, afternoon and evening, to be practical; but the first of the week implies the morning; and then what comes in later for the instruction of saints, and then for the gospel. I am referring just to the practical way it is being done at the present time, which I believe God approves. Chapter 9 helps greatly, and then chapter 10 continues, "Having
{333}
therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way". What a glorious thought is there in comparison with what is current about us -- where you have either judaism or heathendom practised, or the gross worldliness that is now current in the world, even on the first day of the week. The Lord's day is ignored, really, whereas we, as loving the Lord, think of the Lord's day, and that He has a day that He has set apart for Himself. God began with the idea of day, He began with light, and so we have it in the New Testament, "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all".
Rem. So that each day works out from the results of our entering into the presence of God in His service on the first day.
J.T. Just so. It is a glorious day, and the saints, I believe, are enjoying the reality of it, and what is available to us, because surely God has some meaning in it to use the word, 'first day of the week'. We get it in John and in Mark.
E.T.S. Should we make time for entering into the holiest daily?
J.T. That is another matter, our making time, but the first day of the week is a thing to ponder over now, because evidently the Spirit of God intends us to stress it. It says in @Acts 20, "the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread"; that is a thing, I think, which should be specially stressed at this time.
A.M. Are the references to His doing the will of God according to @Psalm 40 and the offering of the body of Jesus Christ to be in our minds in connection with the Supper?
J.T. We may well now consider the first paragraph of the chapter, "For the law, having a shadow of the coming good things, not the image itself of the things, can never, by the same sacrifices which they
{334}
offer continually yearly, perfect those who approach. Since, would they not indeed have ceased being offered, on account of the worshippers once purged having no longer any conscience of sins?" "Once purged" -- notice that. "But in these there is a calling to mind of sins yearly. For blood of bulls and goats is incapable of taking away sins. Wherefore coming into the world he says, Sacrifice and offering thou willedst not; but thou hast prepared me a body". That is, the Lord takes this ground, that God had prepared Him a body -- marvellous thing to think of, His precious body! Here the point is, not that He was a babe simply (He *was* born a babe), but He has got a body capable of service. His body is capable of service, of doing the will of God. So it says. "Thou tookest no pleasure in burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin. Then I said" -- this is the Lord Jesus speaking to God -- "Lo, I come (in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do, O God, thy will". So that the first day of the week, is, I think, the thing that ought to be particularly stressed.
A.J.G. So that in Christianity the calling to mind is not of sins, but of the Lord Jesus.
J.T. Just so. Very good. If there be sin in a meeting, of course that has to be remembered, and attended to, but a calling to mind is what is positive and what is for God. It is remarkable how God has graciously taken account of what is to be done when sin occurs in any company. He has provided for that, and we must not ignore it, because it has to be attended to, and it is, too. The brethren, as a rule, have learnt to take account of things that are happening that are displeasing to God, for the first day of the week is marred and all the services of it if such things are not attended to. But, thank God, this is being attended to, so the service is to continue week by week, and then following on that, the Bible reading and the gospel, as we have said, and the
{335}
prayer meetings on the Monday, and the Bible readings on the Wednesday or Thursday. So that God has indicated to us, and we follow the indication, as to these days that are being used in His service. Days are to be taken account of, because God has made days and made light and darkness, as @Genesis 1 plainly shows.
J.S.E. Do our minds become expanded as we think of the first day of the week in the light of the statement, "From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, let Jehovah's name be praised", @Psalm 113: 3.
J.T. Very good. The sun runs its course.
J.S.E. I was thinking of this matter of the holy of holies, and the first day of the week. The whole course of the day is linked up with it amongst the saints in all parts of the earth.
J.T. Just so. You say in all parts of the earth, but, of course, Asia is pretty well dark, we have to admit that, but there may be a little light, even in Asia, in China and India. Generally speaking, however, Asia is dark, although that is where Christianity began.
Ques. Does that show the full result of turning away from Paul at the outset? There is practically nothing left in that district where he laboured, because all have turned away from him.
J.T. Just so. The truth is seen as coming into Europe, at Philippi. So that the light began to shine and it still continues to shine, and especially in these countries in which we are, and the outgoings of them. We can thank God for what He has done in these countries. He has undoubtedly raised them up so as outwardly to protect His testimony.
Ques. Is the privilege of entrance into the holiest distinctive to Christianity?
J.T. Quite so. It will not be in evidence in the beginning of the millennium. That will be on lower
{336}
ground. We are now on the very highest ground, in the testimony of God.
A.J.G. So that the living way particularly involves the Spirit, does it not?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. And would "the full assurance of faith" being mentioned suggest that it is peculiarly applicable to the present time?
J.T. Just so. This is the period of faith.
J.S.E. A remark was made on Lord's day as to the word 'eternal' and I think it was to the effect that there was nothing beyond it. Is this suggestion of a "holy of holies" to remind us that there is nothing greater than the presence of God, either in time or eternity, and that it is open to us now, the way being established by the blood of Jesus but being shown to us by the Spirit? Is that right?
J.T. That is right. There is nothing beyond eternity; what is called eternal, and the idea of what is eternal is stressed in this epistle. There is nothing beyond it.
J.S.E. I was thinking of the two expressions -- the one in this chapter, "He takes away the first that he may establish the second", and in the previous chapter, "the Holy Spirit shewing this, that the way of the holy of holies has not yet been made manifest while as yet the first tabernacle has its standing". But now that it is taken away and the second established, does not the Spirit have a right-of-way in showing the way into the holiest and helping us into it?
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit will do both. The first is light, and then the support of the Spirit which would imply life.
L.H.R. How would this compare with access to the Father, in Ephesians?
J.T. It is the same principle. Ephesians really is the clearest of all for christianity. It says, "For
{337}
through him" -- that is, through Christ -- "we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", @Ephesians 2: 18. Three divine Persons are engaged in that.
Ques. And is not the blood mentioned in the earlier part of that chapter in the same way as it is mentioned earlier in the chapter we are considering? "But now in Christ Jesus *ye* who once were afar off are become nigh by the blood of the Christ".
J.T. Just so. So that we might as well refer to the actual service, the actual function on the first day of the week, so as to see how things are done, because we have been shown how to do things. The epistles to the Corinthians, of course, are intended for that, and in chapter 11 of the first epistle we have, therefore, the breaking of bread. "It is not to eat the Lord's supper", it says, because they were not doing it properly. That is to say, time was when it was not being done properly; but, thank God, we have light as to this, so that we know what to do, and God is helping us to do it. In the actual setting of the Lord's supper we begin with taking account of each other. We meet each other, and we take account of each other, and if there is anything at all that has to be adjusted, then it ought to be adjusted, so that the way would be clear for the Lord to come. He comes in after us. We make the way for Him, and the Spirit supports us in that, so that we know what to do, and then we are able to do it. We are clear of any hindering elements, and we may be occupied with one another, according to what grace has made us, and redemption has made us, so that the way is clear now for the Lord to come too. He comes in, and then all the great things are opened up in the Supper itself and in the things that follow, a word of ministry, as we might say, to affect or remind us of what is needed, and then the Minister of the sanctuary is to be there. We must have a minister of the sanctuary, and that is the Lord Himself. He
{338}
is now arranging things for God, as we are too, but He is arranging things peculiarly for God. He is said to be "minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched" -- that is to say, which God has pitched -- "and not man". So that, I think, in looking at the thing that way, we get what is concrete and what is to be understood among the brethren, the concrete way of the Lord's supper and the ministry, and all that enters into the first day of the week.
A.H. Would what you are just referring to help us in the matter of taking on change?
J.T. Just so. I am glad you mentioned that, because we must take on change. John says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". That is change.
E.C.M. Would it be right to say that God bringing many sons to glory is involved in the Lord Jesus saying, "Lo, I come to do thy will"?
J.T. Just so. So that the two things are found in chapter 2 of this epistle, the brethren and the sons of God.
J.S.E. You made a remark in London as to the glory of the Supper laying hold of the brethren in these last days, and then I think you intimated that it was the secret of the unfolding of the truth as we go on with the Supper in its own glorious setting in simplicity. The Spirit has freedom to unfold the truth of the service of God to us.
J.T. I think the Lord has opened up things for us in Corinthians, so that taking the Supper at the very outset of the service of God ought to be specially in our minds at this time, so that we may be ready for this great matter, and the great pains that divine Persons have taken to establish the second. That is, what the service of God is; not what will be opened up presently in the millennium, but what belongs to christianity, where the Father, and the Son and the
{339}
Spirit are all active. Then there are the great servants that have been used to bring the truth to light to us, especially the epistles to the Corinthians, the first epistle now particularly. It is wonderful that God has so wrought, I might say, in our own times, to bring about all this, and all the pains that divine Persons have taken in detail even. Such matters as marriage and all other things like that we are to have right, in view of the assembly, and we should come together on the first day of the week, as the disciples came together on the first day of the week. @Acts 20 is of great importance as showing what happened, and how Paul entered into it, and how the breaking of bread was deferred so that things should be done aright.
H.F.N. Would you say a word on the thought of the great priest over the house of God? You have spoken of the Minister of the sanctuary, how does that bear upon what you are saying?
J.T. The Minister of the sanctuary is not Paul or any of the apostles; it is the Lord Jesus who is the Minister of the sanctuary. Things are, therefore, done under His guidance. It is remarkable how Paul is taken up after the twelve, and particularly fitted for the truth of the service of God in the assembly. The ministry of the assembly was committed to him.
A.J.G. Does the Minister of the sanctuary specially consider for God, and is the great Priest on our side?
J.T. Just so. It is in order that things might be properly done. The whole thing in christendom so-called is just a travesty of the truth, and it is the divine thought that the brethren have been helped to get the truth, and especially through the *Collected Writings*. Then there is what has come in through Mr. Raven and later, so that things should be done rightly, because it is due to God that everything
{340}
should be done properly as He intended it to be done. The Lord Jesus is appointed the Minister of the sanctuary; He has, of course, died for us, but then He is the Minister of the sanctuary and that is another matter. It is a great office that He fills.
J.A. Could you give a word on why God loves to be approached? We can understand the conditions that He requires, but why does He love to be approached?
J.T. Because of what He is. God is love and He loves to have us approach Him. He delights in us, I believe He watches every one of us, and the Lord Jesus too. We are known in heaven, every one of us, and we are seen as we approach God, for we know how to do it.
R.T. Would you mind saying a word, please, regarding the latter part of verse 20, "the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh".
J.T. Well, you get first of all what is called the shadow of things to come, not the very image; we have to do with the shadow. Then you have to learn to see that the shadow is the shadow of something. You have to learn to get that something -- what it is and how it is visible in your eyes -- and to learn to think of the glory of it, the grandeur of it, and be ready for it, because the saints are made fit to have part, and to have part properly.
A.C.S.P. Do the three exhortations run together? First, "Let us approach"; then, "Let us hold fast the confession"; and then, "Let us consider one another for provoking to love and good works".
J.T. Very good. We are put now to do the work and do it properly. The Lord has shown us the way, and the apostle Paul is a great minister, in that he is used for that purpose. Well now, the next thing is, are we learning to do things properly?
{341}
Ques. Does going through the veil imply priesthood on the part of the saints?
J.T. I would think so, I would think the priesthood is the technical name for doing things right, and the idea of setting things right too.
Ques. And does the veil have the effect of excluding all else?
J.T. Just so. All else must be put out, and that is why in christendom now, for the last one hundred and twenty years the brethren have constantly to keep on teaching others as they want to come into the fellowship, how to do things, and how to be subject. It is the learning to do things that is a great matter, especially with young people. Things are not done just any way you wish to do them; they are to be done according to God. God has ordained the order of things and He has ordained the minister too, and then the Spirit of God Himself carries on things. Paul and the apostles all have gone, but the Spirit of God remains. He remains here amongst us.
A.J.G. And does the fact that the Lord is said to have dedicated this way imply the feelings on His part that have entered into it?
J.T. Just so. In a certain sense the Lord is not different, I think we can see, in the days of His flesh, how He acted with the disciples, and how He was set for getting them to do things aright.
F.W. I should like to know if we have a different thought here from what we have in Corinthians? It says there, "Let a man prove himself, and thus eat". But I wondered here if it does not all depend upon the great Priest: "having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith". Is there a difference there?
J.T. There is a difference, because the epistle to the Hebrews is intended for Jews, whereas 1 Corinthians is intended for gentiles. We are gentiles, and,
{342}
as we were saying, the Lord has graciously opened up the truth for us and it is for us, having learnt, to know what to do when the time comes for the service on the first day of the week. @Acts 20 is the great pattern for the gentiles.
A.S.T. Would you say that the experience we have in the holiest has a bearing on what follows? It says, "Let us hold fast the confession of the hope unwavering", and then, "Let us consider one another for provoking to love and good works". I was wondering whether the experience we have in the holiest would help us in relation to that.
J.T. We see what is within. For instance, if any one of us at the present time were to go to heaven, literally, as Enoch did, well, what would happen? We should see what is being done. Peter saw what was done; he was in ecstasy and he saw things being done. There is a terrible thing just now (I heard of it just today), a certain great system is assuming that the virgin Mary has gone into heaven bodily. It is a terrible thing to think of that. We do not go in bodily yet. Presently we go in bodily, according to @1 Thessalonians 4; but we shall be changed to go in. But if it were possible for any one of us to go in now, what would we see? We would see what goes on in heaven, and what goes on in heaven should be reflected in the assembly. That is really the great point, that what goes on in heaven is to be reflected in the assembly.
Ques. In speaking of things being done rightly, have you in mind in the assembly particularly?
J.T. Particularly, because the assembly is the vessel in which God is operating, and I believe the idea began in @Genesis 1, where God called the expanse heavens. The word 'expanse' would mean it was to be a sphere of operations for God, and then these operations are going on now. He called the expanse heavens. The idea is to give plenty of
{343}
liberty for things to be done, but done according to God.
H.F.N. You said some years ago that you could tell, by the part a brother took in the service of God, as to whether he had been in the holiest. You would say that today, would you not?
J.T. I would certainly say so, and really that would imply that you go into heaven itself. We get it in the previous chapter; verse 24 says, "For the Christ is not entered into holy places made with hand, figures of the true, but into heaven itself". Well now, if any one of us were allowed to go into heaven itself now and had the ability to go in (which we shall have when we are changed), well then, we should see what is going on, there and the next thing is whether we could reflect that here in the assembly, because what is in heaven is to be reflected in the assembly. God has provided for that, and the elders and all that we have in the way of additional services are to provide for that, so that things are to be right, and that according to God. We shall see it all presently, when the Lord comes and changes us. The word is: "We shall all be changed". The Spirit quickens us, but then the idea of change is to be kept in mind.
J.R.U.B. In Corinthians Paul says, "Let all things be done comelily and with order".
J.T. Very good. It is a question of God, and God is said to be the God of order. And then, "If any one think to be contentious", Paul says, "*we* have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God".
Ques. Is the fact that Jesus is said to be our forerunner a reminder that His place is ours? It is only a matter of time, and we shall all eventually be there. Would this help us to fill up the interim more spiritually?
J.T. Quite so. Think of what we have and what has been inaugurated for us through the great servants
{344}
that God has raised up. They have gone, of course, but the Lord Himself is in heaven, and the Paraclete, the Spirit of God, has come down here, has been *sent* down, meaning that He is under orders. The blessed Spirit Himself graciously takes that attitude. He is under orders, to see that things *are* done.
M.K. Is the holiest entered into by us together, as by the whole company, or by individuals? If it is by the whole company, how do we address God at that time? Is there something beyond access to the Father in addressing the Father?
J.T. If we are speaking about the assembly, you begin at the Lord's supper, and it is a matter of the Lord Himself. He is over the services, and He comes in after we do. We have to come in as ready to recognise how we are to learn things. Then when He comes in, of course, He is in charge; He is the Minister of the sanctuary, and presently He will approach the Father. He knows how to do that, but the Spirit of God is the Spirit of adoption, and we can use that Spirit of adoption, or the Spirit of sonship. The Spirit of sonship is ready to take us on, and to show us how to do things.
F.T. Would you say a word as to why it is put like this, "the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh". It does not say 'His body' there. I wondered if you could give us a word as to the meaning of that.
J.T. The word 'flesh' would be human condition. It is not an angel, it is a Man, in human condition, I suppose the word 'flesh' is used to make it more real, or literal.
A.J.G. Does it involve that the Lord took flesh and blood condition in order, by His death, to set aside that condition for us?
J.T. Just so.
{345}
F.T. Does not the greatness of the fact that He went into death for us, laying down that condition into which He came for us, appeal to us specially?
J.T. That is right. He went that far. So that He is still in flesh, although it is not flesh and blood now, but flesh. It is the condition of humanity, which applies to Him even now in heaven, He is in that condition. He does not die any more, but the idea of flesh continues.
J.S.E. Have you in mind @Luke 24, "a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having" in saying that He is still in flesh, but not flesh and blood?
J.T. Just so, I mean, the Lord continues in human conditions; not that He cannot change; and retire into eternal conditions, because He is God. At the same time, when we come down to the actual facts, it is Christ in flesh that has effected everything.
Rem. The great fact of the incarnation is involved in the expression, "in flesh".
J.T. Just so. That is what I am thinking about, the word 'flesh' implies His incarnation.
Rem. So it says, "The Word became flesh". He took that condition.
J.T. Just so.
A.S.T. Is that why the name of Jesus is carried right through?
J.T. Very good. That is just it. Things are made very real for us. It is a question of what God intends to come to us, the youngest of us, so that we might lay hold of what is said.
Ques. Is the expression in John's epistle, "Jesus Christ come in flesh" in line with what you say?
J.T. Quite so. It is just the words.
Ques. On our side, is there significance in the way verse 22 is put? It says, "Let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience, and washed as to our body with pure water".
{346}
J.T. All that applies to just what we are saying. The words are remarkable. They are brought down to the youngest of us, as well as to all of us. This chapter is wonderful, as opening up the truth of the service of God and making way for it. The actual details of the service however are to be looked for in 1 Corinthians, whereas here the doctrine is stressed. It is the doctrine of the facts involved.
J.S.E. Could we come back to this matter of His flesh for a minute, please, and ask about @Psalm 16, where the Lord prophetically says, "My flesh moreover shall dwell in hope"? Has that any bearing upon this?
J.T. Well, it is remarkable the idea of hope being brought in. That would be more for meditation, and feeding on the facts of the Person of Christ in the Psalms. It is a great book for experience. The Psalms are full of things of that kind, so as to instruct us and make us conversant with what is in heaven.
A.H. You used an expression at Maidstone that I think helped us very much, in referring to certain sections of this book, as being sequential. Do verse 19 and what follows come under that heading?
J.T. Quite so.
A.H. I was thinking that as that is apprehended, it lends enrichment to the service, which this section seems to deal with.
J.T. Just so. I would just remark again as to verse 23, "Let us hold fast the confession of the hope unwavering, (for he is faithful who has promised;) and let us consider one another for provoking to love and good works; not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together" -- I wanted just to stress that -- "as the custom is with some; but encouraging one another, and by so much the more as ye see the day drawing near". I thought we might just stress that, and then I would say another
{347}
word, "For where we sin wilfully after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains any sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and heat of fire about to devour the adversaries". So that the thing is most solemn, and I think it is just right that we all should be reminded of it. These chapters are intended to impress those of us who have been brought into the truth in these last days, that we should not neglect our privileges, or forsake the assembling of ourselves together, and should not allow disorder in the assembly itself.
{348}
SOUTHAMPTON -- READING (2)
@Hebrews 11: 1 - 3; @Hebrews 12: 22 - 29; @Hebrews 13: 10 - 17
J.T. These passages afford material for our consideration in view of completing the epistle. First we have the continuance of the thought of faith, and although the whole of chapter 11 is taken up with the subject, it is thought that these three verses give a lead as to it. Then what we have come to, in chapter 12, is also in mind in the verses read, and finally the verses read from the last chapter furnish the completion of the subject, as it will be seen. They refer to our leaders, and to the thought of the sacrifice of praise to God, and it is thought that that would furnish a good finish for us.
Faith, of course, is the great feature of the dispensation from the standpoint of light. Presently we shall have a change, as most of us will be aware, with a view to the millennium, and after that there is something that is needed to complete all the dispensations. We say 'all' because there are a certain number of dispensations and the end is said to have come on us; that is to say, those of us who form the assembly are to bear the burdens of the end of the dispensations. There will be an eternal condition, of course, the new heavens and the new earth, and that will have to be considered by itself, but there is no time for that now. But faith is the main thought now as the governing principle of the present dispensation. Of course the Spirit is the power, but the governing principle is faith. So we have here: "Faith is the substantiating of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen". It is well that each of us, especially the young people, should have these words in mind. They are easily received into the mind, and ought to be kept there as governing the
{349}
dispensation in which we are. Then we have a history of faith running through the whole chapter, so that we can fix our minds on certain personages from the very outset, from Abel onwards. It is always wholesome that young people should have in their minds certain persons whom God has used and whom God has set forth as models to us. But before finishing, it was thought that we should come to what is in the last chapter, that is, the altar, and the exclusiveness of it. "We have an altar" implies the exclusiveness of '*our* altar'. That might well be fixed on with chapter 10, which we had this afternoon. That chapter finishes with this -- "But the just shall live by faith; and, if he draw back, my soul does not take pleasure in him. But we are not drawers back to perdition, but of faith to saving the soul". That is a very good and wholesome word, especially for the young people. Constantly we hear of persons drawing back or turning aside, and these verses are intended to check that in us. Then we have the full account of faith, or we might say, the history of it in chapter 11. It has forty verses, and you could hardly get a chapter in the Scriptures more calculated to provide wholesome, happy, conversational ministry than this one. It contains so much in the way of holy, spiritual thoughts that can be very easily taken in.
A.H. In chapter 10 verse 37: "For yet a very little while he that comes will come, and will not delay". Does the apostle bring that before us to encourage us in the line of faith, and then bring in the witnesses of chapter 11?
J.T. Yes, just so. It is especially calculated for young minds, because what is said can be easily retained and connected with historical things -- spiritually historical things -- and these persons can be spoken of as guides that God has given for us, whom we should follow.
{350}
F.W. Would it be right to say that faith involves experiences with God, and the result would be praise to God?
J.T. Very good. Experience with God is the idea of the book of Psalms. There are five books and they are full of experience with God, worked out in men.
N.K.M. Would experience with God be involved in what he said in verse 2. "For in the power of this the elders have obtained testimony". Would they be those who had experiences with God?
J.T. Just so. The elders are always to be a guide to the young. In the so-called christian world, the word 'bishop' is used, but the word 'elder' is the proper one. They are specially spoken of in @Acts 20 in relation to the Ephesians.
A.H. Will you enlarge upon that expression, "Obtained testimony"? Is it that they had the inward confirmation?
J.T. Yes, that is the idea. It is what these honoured men are; they are known in heaven. The list is given from the very outset and goes right down to the very end of the Scriptures. They are doers of exploits, spiritual exploits, affording distinctions to those that have them, and God loves to give these distinctions.
A.J.G. In the faith that marks these men and what they did, was God building up in the way of testimony constructively the features of this present dispensation?
J.T. I think that is right, because it is the dispensation of faith. This is the only dispensation that can be called the dispensation of faith. Would you say that?
A.J.G. I think so, I wondered if it would help if you would enlarge on that and show how it differs from previous ages when these persons walked by faith.
{351}
J.T. Well, quite so -- they walked by faith. God taking account of them because of their exploits and because of the way they are distinguished. God loves to think of them and of these great features before Him, beginning at the very beginning with Abel, I believe God would encourage models, like Paul, who could say, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ" -- he is the great model for us, under Christ. I believe that every young person should have it in mind to have him as a model, because he is a man like ourselves. He is not a divine Person, he is just a man like ourselves, and he enjoins that we should be followers of him, as he was of Christ.
Ques. Does the narrative in chapter 11 bring these personages near to us, so that chapter 12 says, "Let us also therefore, having so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us"?
J.T. Just so, I suppose surrounding us would be the idea that you can take account of them, and speak of them. Instead of speaking of certain men in the world, distinguished by the world's history, we take pleasure in men that are distinguished in heaven -- known in heaven, and we shall see them there too. We shall see Enoch and all the others. It is a glorious thought to have in our hearts -- what we are coming into in the sense of sight-seeing -- persons who are now to be imitated. So that it says in the chapter that has just been referred to, "Let *us* also therefore, having so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us, laying aside every weight, and sin which so easily entangles us" -- that is especially intended for the young -- "run with endurance the race that lies before us, looking stedfastly on Jesus" -- again we have it, as we have had it already -- "on Jesus the leader and completer of faith". Sometimes it has been suggested that the Lord did not have faith, but this is a clear statement that He had, and that He exercised faith.
{352}
J.R.U.B. Does not Luke's gospel specially illustrate the faith which the Lord exercised. His life being traced from boyhood right through to the end?
J.T. Just so.
I.S.E. This chapter deals with certain persons and then brings Jesus before us as the leader and completer of faith. Is the Spirit intent on drawing our hearts and thoughts now right away from any material system and fixing them steadfastly on Jesus as the Originator and Completer of faith, so that we go on on that line ourselves?
J.T. There could be no greater Guide or Example for us. He is the Leader of it and the Completer of faith, and He is there to be watched and seen and contemplated at any time. As John says: "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". There is the standard and example for us, and One to be, so to speak, holily admired.
J.S.E. Is it a view, if one may so speak, of another glory of this Person who has already been presented to us as the great Priest?
J.T. Just so. He is the great Priest, and we are also called 'priests'. The priest is a technical name for a person of skill, who has to say to God and to say to men too. "Such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens"; that is our Priest.
Ques. May I refer to the note to the word 'stedfastly' in the beginning of chapter 12: "Looking stedfastly on Jesus"? It means looking away from other things and fixing the eye exclusively on one. One system fades away and another one, centring in Christ, fills the vision. I was wondering whether it would bear on what you have just said.
J.T. Yes, I think it is a wholesome thing to think of being in heaven. There are certain ones that have
{353}
gone into heaven. The Lord Himself, of course, has gone into heaven, as it says, "angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him". He has gone into heaven personally; the cloud received Him out of their sight. That gives rise to a great deal that has to be understood in our souls, how He went up, and what is the termination. In Stephen's case He was seen standing. But the Lord has sat down, too, it says, "*He* ... sat down".
M.K. I should like to ask if faith, as the gift of God, is given by measure? If we look down at this wonderful chapter of those who had faith, one feels how little faith we have got. I was wondering whether we have a measure of faith; some have greater faith than others.
J.T. Well, that is quite true, clearly.
M.K. I was only wondering how we arrive at it. Whether it is a matter of being tested or whether the faith is given by measure. I was thinking of the faith of Abraham in offering up Isaac. I did not know whether we have such faith; have we all the same faith and the same measure of faith?
J.T. We have not got the same measure of faith, clearly; nor do I think you can get it in Scripture that we have.
M.K. Then it means that it is given by measure by God, is that so? Some do have a greater measure than others.
J.T. Well, that is quite true.
Rem. The scripture proves that, does it not: "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith", @Romans 12: 3.
J.T. A measure of faith -- very good. That is the thing exactly.
{354}
A.J.G. Then in addition to that we have in @2 Thessalonians 1: "We ought to thank God always for you, brethren, even as it is meet, because your faith increaseth exceedingly". So that faith can increase if it is used, can it not?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Is it not remarkable that God should have these men that He can bring forward, and histories well authenticated, to show what He really had in them, substantially?
J.T. Just so, and then what pleasure He has in us, too. Think of the idea of greatness; we have had the *great* priest, and the idea of greatness is usually set out in the Lord Jesus. Whatever you look at, you can get the example of it in the Lord Jesus as Man.
F.V.W. Beginning very early, "Thou art he that took me out of the womb; thou didst make me trust, upon my mother's breasts. I was cast upon thee from the womb", @Psalm 22: 9, 10. That would show how early it was with Jesus, prophetically.
J.T. Just so.
G.C.S. Is the increase of faith seen in Abraham? He is called the father of the faithful, and from verses 8 - 17 in this chapter it looks as if it is the increase of faith until it comes to the greatest thought in the offering up of Isaac. Is that so?
J.T. Yes, it is remarkable that Isaac is not said to have come down from the mount with his father; he stayed up, as it were. That is what you get in Genesis. Abraham had the greatest exercise about him, and then you get Rebecca immediately in the end of the same chapter -- the bride.
A.J.G. Does that typically refer to the "some better thing for us", which is referred to in verse 40, the assembly's distinctive portion?
{355}
Ques. Is it not remarkable that, whilst the chapter deals with persons who have faith, the actual matter of creation is brought in in verse 3?
J.T. It is the beginning of the subject: "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God". And then another thing comes in immediately as to the worlds, and that is, how many there are -- can we say? We are just left to consider whether they can be numbered, but apparently they cannot be numbered. It says in chapter 1, "By whom also he made the worlds"; the Lord Jesus did that -- God did it by Him. So that we just have to leave it as an indication of His greatness -- that *He* did it. So that everything that comes up that can be seen in man is first seen in Him fully, and perfectly. We thus have the idea of admiration, so that our hearts rejoice in such a Person, and that He is our Saviour and Lord. "He is thy Lord, and worship thou him". Well now, we have not time to go over the ground in chapter 11. It is so marvellous and full, but we have to come on to the other scriptures that have been read. In chapter 12, we get the things we have come to, and then in chapter 13, the final thought is "we have an altar", implying the exclusiveness of our altar. That is giving us a distinction above all others, even in the future. No one has an altar like ours. So that the very greatest things next to the Lord Jesus are set out in those who form the assembly. The hope is that the end of what we have been engaged with today may lead to admiration in our hearts, especially with the young people -- admiration of the Person of Christ. God is pleased to give us these names that all lead up to Him: "the leader and completer of faith".
A.H. Is the reference in verse 22 of chapter 12, "Ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God", to emphasise the living character
{356}
of this dispensation as over against the deadness of judaism?
J.T. Very good, I would say that fully, and then following that we have the "heavenly Jerusalem", because such has come down from God out of heaven. She does not begin on earth; she has come down from God out of heaven, and we have come to that. So that if anybody raises questions as to anything in this world, it simply fades into oblivion in the light of Christ and His things -- the things above.
A.H. Would you say that these things that are referred to, to which we are said to have come, could be brought in under the heading of the 'unseen world'? I am enquiring because you have been drawing our attention to the need for being acquainted more with heaven, and what is proper to heaven. Is this what faith apprehends -- the unseen realm?
J.T. Well, yes -- that which is not seen. "The things that are seen are for a time, but those that are not seen eternal". 'The unseen world', if you are entitled to call it as you are; well, we have come to that. It is the thing that we live in, as it were; it is one of the things in connection with which we are living.
Ques. I suppose in a certain sense the assembly is seen?
J.T. It is, indeed. We are indwelt by the Spirit of God, and besides we are all born again. I mean to say, that transaction takes place in every one of us, but then the total, of course, is the assembly. We have not come to the end yet, we have to wait for it, but it is going to be finished. It is very glorious to think that it is presently going to be finished, every 'stone' will be found there. Peter speaks of that -- "living stones". They will all come in in time, but we have to wait for them, however. So that the end now is the time of waiting -- waiting for the most
{357}
glorious thing. It is not a divine Person, of course, but the assembly is the most glorious thing beside divine Persons.
Ques. Have we come to these things in coming into the assembly, where the presence of the Spirit is?
J.T. Just so. I can see that it is similar to what we are coming into, when we are changed according to @1 Thessalonians 4. We will be like the Son, like the Lord Jesus, as it says, "We shall be like him". John says, "for we shall see him as he is". What a glorious anticipation! "We shall see him as he is" -- not as He *was*, but just as He is now.
H.A.H. Would mount Zion coming first refer to the immovability of this glorious system?
J.T. Very good -- the immovability of it. "Ye have come to mount Zion". It is not a simple mountain; it is a spiritual thought; it really belongs to heaven.
N.K.M. What does mount Zion imply? You said it was a spiritual thought.
J.T. Yes, it is. It is brought into the New Testament. It began with David, as far as I remember, but it belongs to the New Testament.
H.A.H. It is said to be "the joy of the whole earth" in @Psalm 48.
J.T. Yes.
E.C.M. "Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion more than all the habitations of Jacob", @Psalm 87: 2. Are not the gates of Zion, over against our dwellings, connected with the divine dwelling place?
J.T. Just so.
A.J.G. Does it refer especially to the sovereignty of divine mercy?
J.T. Just so; 'sovereignty' is just the word.
A.J.G. The end of @Psalm 78 seems to indicate that. It refers to the blackest period in Israel's history when the ark was lost and God greatly abhorred Israel, and then it says in verse 65, "Then the Lord
{358}
awoke as one out of sleep, like a mighty man that shouteth aloud by reason of wine; and he smote his adversaries in the hinder part, and put them to everlasting reproach. And he rejected the tent of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim, but chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved; and he built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever".
J.T. That is, David and Solomon are in mind. Solomon is the builder of the house; Solomon was accepted instead of David himself, showing that it is Christ that is in mind for the builder of the house.
Ques. Is it not brought in here as in contrast to mount Sinai, the mount that could be touched?
J.T. Quite so, that is what is said there. "For ye have not come to the mount that might be touched and was all on fire, and to obscurity, and darkness, and tempest, and trumpet's sound, and voice of words; ... but ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem".
J.S.E. Does mount Zion link us on with the sovereignty of divine mercy and divine love so that we could observe with freedom the whole range of divine thoughts, ourselves being the subjects of them? I wondered if that is why the things we have come to begin with the thought of a mountain.
J.T. And so we have the idea of greatness in the divine realm, and the personages -- persons who are great, beginning with the Lord Jesus Himself. The young people ought to come into this, and be delivered from the world and all its greatness which is passing away. The greatness in the divine system is headed by the Lord Jesus, and we are amongst the great personages ourselves. The proper way is to look at the thing as it is, that we are amongst them ourselves; we belong to them. Think of the glories that we are coming into! I believe this list in @Hebrews 11 is to enhance all that in our minds, so that we
{359}
refuse and turn away from what there is in the world, whatever it may be, because it is passing away, and the lust thereof. The word in John's epistle is, "Love not the world, nor the things in the world ... the world is passing, and its lust". We are so apt to be taken with what is immediately under our eyes, and that is what belongs to this world, and it is passing away.
A.J.G. So that we can well afford to glory in belonging to the city of the living God.
J.T. Quite so. I suppose the divine end is seen in the mount of transfiguration -- how the Lord came out there. Those that saw Him knew Him. There were Moses and Elias, and the disciples knew them, so that we can say, without question, that we shall know all these great ones. We shall know the Lord Himself, supreme among them.
Ques. Does it not appear that the assembly is made up of personages? The word here is, "and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven".
J.T. I suppose it might be read 'firstborn ones'. The allusion is to the Levites -- every one of them was a firstborn. It is an extraordinary thing -- the firstborn -- "the assembly of the firstborn". I think it is the plural idea. What a scene of attraction and glory is open to us, so that we are delivered from this present evil course of things.
Rem. So that our affections and intelligence are fully occupied in this system and thus we are kept out of the present world in every sense.
J.T. Very good. So these distinctions are marked off throughout the Old Testament as indicated in this eleventh chapter in the great personages that shine out there. Great women, too, are mentioned as well as great men.
E.T.S. Why are the myriads of angels brought in here?
{360}
J.T. I think it is what God has. The word 'myriads' would be to indicate what He has got. Sometimes the question is, how many angels are there? We cannot tell how many there are, and we cannot even tell when they were made. But we can tell about men, and of course that brings us into the realm of Christ, where Christ is; He is greater than an angel. It says that "he has not subjected to angels the habitable world", but Christ is the One; He is the head of everything.
A.S.T. Could you say that the myriads are needed because of the services they render to the "holy myriads" (@Jude 14)?
J.T. Well, that is the idea, but the expression "holy myriads" refers to what God has.
Ques. Do the angels suggest to us God's hidden reserves, entirely outside the range of the natural mind? The Lord could speak of being furnished with more than twelve legions. He did not require them, but they were evidently there.
J.T. Quite so, and we know how one angel destroyed one hundred and eighty-five thousand men: That shows the magnitude of this system. It is well to talk of this, because the young people here ought to become enamoured with all these things, and drawn into them. They should see that they belong to them, to the whole scene.
Ques. Is it rather like the prophet asking for the young man's eyes to be opened? Seeing the chariots of fire around the man of God left a lasting impression on him, did it not?
J.T. Just so, exactly.
Rem. It says, "to myriads of angels, the universal gathering". Universal gathering seems to bear upon the angels.
J.T. Well, that shows what we have come to -- the magnificence of it.
{361}
Ques. Do you think it all seems to have in view that we should "serve God acceptably with reverence and fear", as we get in the end of the chapter?
J.T. Just so. Then as has just been remarked, the myriads of angels are covered by the idea of the universal gathering, showing the number there are of them.
Ques. Does their being called the 'universal gathering', also show that nothing could arise in any part of the world where their services are not available? I was thinking of the pressure the enemy is bringing on many in different parts, and whether this should not encourage us to a more universal outlook.
J.T. Just so. Fear comes into the heart; we have been through two great wars and it may have distressed us from time to time, but these great things that we get in this chapter, show that we belong to what is greater than anything of the kind that we might be afraid of. The Lord said, "Fear not those who kill the body and after this have no more that they can do". They are limited. But then when you come to God and His things and the angels, it fills you with feelings of victory, but victory in the true sense of what is in heaven.
E.C.M. Is it not very beautiful that the Lord Jesus in @Luke 22 accepted angelic service? It says. "An angel appeared to him from heaven strengthening him". Is that not a great encouragement?
J.T. Quite so.
J.D. In chapter 1 of Hebrews it says. "And again, when he brings in the firstborn into the habitable world, he says, And let all God's angels worship him".
J.T. Quite so: "Let all God's angels worship him". So that the Christ is supreme, whatever way you look at things. But then He is a Man -- think of Him -- and marked by lowliness; so that we might well follow such a spirit.
{362}
Ques. Is it not affecting that He is spoken of as "Jesus, mediator of a new covenant"? I wondered whether it would be an appeal to our affections that the glories that He has officially do not add anything to His Person. What He is in Himself personally is the thing that holds the heart.
J.T. Just so. You cannot add anything to God -- He is God, "He is the true God and eternal life". You cannot have greater than that. But still He has come down to us as a Man, and it is to give us something to be charmed with -- that is the idea of it. We are to be full of the thought of His greatness and glory and attractiveness, because the word 'beauty' is attached to Him several times.
H.F.N. Is the thought of God here the great objective in this epistle? Is that the point to which we come in the Hebrews?
J.T. I think that is right.
H.F.N. Would "God, judge of all" involve that we have reached the settlement of every moral question that has been raised in the universe? Is everything solved for us when we come to God?
J.T. Solved -- yes.
N.K.M. Would you say a word about "the spirits of just men made perfect"?
J.T. 'Just men' -- you have in your mind, I suppose, it is the idea of *such* men. It is not great exploits, but "just men made perfect". I suppose that would be in resurrection. We must apprehend these just men, that they are made perfect; anticipatively they are made perfect. It is anticipative of the resurrection. The dead in Christ shall rise first, and all the just men will be there.
A.J.G. It means that we have come to that in faith in our souls.
J.T. I think that is the idea.
A.J.G. So that we shall see Abel and Enoch, as you were saying -- "just men made perfect".
{363}
J.T. We would greatly like to see the young people begin to admire divine Persons, and then divine things, coming down to ourselves even -- those who form the assembly, for the greatest family outside of divine Persons is the assembly. God is "bringing many sons to glory" -- *many* sons. He is bringing them to glory.
A.H. Are the great truths of christianity, as over against judaism, involved in this expression, "We have an altar"?
J.T. Well, just so. "We have an altar" -- it is an exclusive idea. "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle". That is to say, the Jews, or whoever there may be around us who serve the tabernacle -- anything of that kind, they have no right to our altar; it is something entirely beyond anything they have. Take the Romish system; what kind of altar they have, and what show they have! But it says here, "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle", and I would say that that especially refers, at the present time, to the Romish system. They have no right to what we have, but we just take it on, and think of ourselves in that light because it would tend to enlarge us spiritually and holily, too; it would enlarge us in holiness.
Ques. Would you link the altar here, in any way, with the Lord's supper?
J.T. Yes, I suppose so. It is something that is used to offer on. I think the Lord's supper is involved in it. We have that. The altar would be something that we offer at; it is, so to speak, a religious term, but the point is that we have it. That is to say, the apostles 'we' peculiarly belongs to Hebrews. "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle" -- that is to say, they have some religious system of things, but it is not to
{364}
be compared with what we have. I think that is the way the thing should be reached in our souls. And it goes on to say. "For of those beasts whose blood is carried as sacrifices for sin into the holy of holies by the high priest, of these the bodies are burned outside the camp. Wherefore also Jesus", -- here again we have Jesus -- "that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate; therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach". I think that is an excellent passage for all persons who want to come into fellowship. It is a question of what they come into; what is ready for them in the fellowship we are already in -- that is, we christians who have the Spirit of God. So it goes on to say: "Therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach" -- whatever the world may think of Him or have thought of Him -- that is it, "His reproach" -- "for we have not here an abiding city" -- that is, here on this earth. However great the city may be in London and New York and so forth, we are not thinking of them -- "we have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing his name. But of doing good and communicating of your substance be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased". And then it goes on: "Obey your leaders". Earlier it was, "Remember your leaders", but now we are to obey them. That is to say, God has given them power, and they are to be obeyed; it is a very remarkable thing, as we may well observe. "Obey your leaders, and be submissive". It is the character, or spirit, of the person -- "be submissive; for *they* watch over your souls as those that shall give account" -- that is the leaders of the saints shall give account to the Lord -- "that they may do this with joy, and not groaning, for this would be unprofitable
{365}
for you". I think we might well stop at this, because it is very wonderful for us to get it in our souls and go forth with it.
H.W. Have you in mind that the use of the definite article -- 'the coming city' -- indicates God has just one city in mind?
J.T. I think so. It is the one we have already talked about in chapter 12 as among the things we have come to. "To the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem" -- that is the city.
A.H. At Maidstone you used the expression, 'inside the veil, outside the camp'. Is that the moral order of the truth?
J.T. That is right -- so we have it here. "Therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach: for we have not here" -- that is, here on earth -- "an abiding city, but we seek the coming one" -- that is, the heavenly Jerusalem; that is our city, "By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God". So, as I was thinking, this paragraph indicates to us, as it were, what we should depart with. If we are about to depart from one another for the moment, this is the thing to depart with. "But of doing good and communicating of your substance be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Obey your leaders, and be submissive; for *they* watch over your souls as those that shall give account; that they may do this with joy, and not groaning, for this would be unprofitable for you".
A.J.G. Do you think that in every locality leaders should accept responsibility before the Lord for the saints in the locality?
J.T. I do, and also, I suppose you would say, enlarging on to the whole universal company, because we ought to be universal. We are going to be that, and we are, indeed, in truth. You would say that, I am sure.
{366}
A.J.G. Quite so.
J.T. We are coming to a universal company; the greatest company on earth, from every point of view we may think of. The greatest company there is in heaven or on earth.
Rem. It makes the position outside the camp very attractive.
J.T. It does, indeed.
J.P.H. Would you just say one word, please, as to this touching allusion to the blood? "Wherefore also Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate". Is His blood shed to set us apart in a holy way, for the holy things that you have been speaking of?
J.T. I think so; by that you should weigh the chapters in the gospels just immediately before the Lord's death; what shame attached to it. He was bearing His reproach. It says even the disciples all forsook Him and fled -- a most touching thing -- He was left alone. It is a very good thing to have in our minds to sober us, what the Lord went through just as He was about to be put to death. There was the mockery heaped upon Him too by Pilate and the priests; all this is a very wholesome thing to think of. It sobers us, and it enlarges us too as well, because we become more and more like Him.
Ques. Would "the fruit of the lips confessing his name" extend to young believers doing it for the first time?
J.T. Well, just so, get them to confess. It is a good thing to get people to confess, and to make a confession that brings them into reproach, because Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt.
Ques. And is verse 16 of chapter 11 encouraging in that connection? It says, "God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God".
J.T. Just so.
{367}
Pages 367 - 403 -- "Ministry in U.S.A. and Great Britain 1932 to 1937" (from Volume 190).
"WHAT ISRAEL OUGHT TO DO"
@1 Chronicles 12: 32; @2 Kings 7: 1, 3 - 10, 16
I have been thinking, dear brethren, of "what Israel ought to do". This problem ever faces the people of God. What ought to be done in regard to this world's affairs is a problem facing many persons, many governments, many corporations, businesses of various kinds -- what ought to be done. We have come to a time bordering on what the prophetic word portrays: "men's hearts failing them for fear". It is a time when we can almost hear the rolling and the roaring of the waves spoken of in the prophetic word. In the midst of all this, it is a matter of supreme importance "what Israel ought to do", for Israel exists. From the time that name was given to a man under great pressure, the idea has continued and shows itself in a time of pressure. At no time in the history of Jacob did he realize pressure more than on that memorable night at Peniel. But enlargement, as the psalmist says, became his. That well-known verse, "In pressure thou hast enlarged me" (@Psalm 4: 1), was verified. He became ennobled by Him who alone can ennoble; that is God; and he obtained the necessary income to sustain his ennoblement. And from that day to this, the idea of the Israel of God subsists and will subsist. It has yet to go through its severest pressure, for we are drawing near to the time when that supreme experience will be gone through by the Israel of God. The book of the Psalms, written by many authors in varied circumstances and covering a long period of years, is intended to help the Israel of God as needed. Our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, in Spirit, had part in
{368}
these Psalms. He knows well what Israel will have to endure. Indeed, He has in His own words portrayed that time of pressure, the like of which men have not yet experienced, but He will go through it in Spirit with His own and carry them through. These are very elementary thoughts for all of us present who understand the prophetic word, but they have a practical bearing, for the Israel of God exists now. James wrote to "the twelve tribes which are in the dispersion", and Paul said, "our whole twelve tribes serving God incessantly day and night". And we also say, *Our* twelve tribes -- for it is no question of numbers, but of quality. And so in this passage in Chronicles there are only two hundred persons mentioned from the tribe of Issachar. It was a largish tribe. Others came forward in numbers on this occasion; the twelve tribes are mentioned; indeed you might say fourteen, for we have Ephraim and the two half tribes of Manasseh, and Levi, as well as all the others. So that the Israel of God is represented in the chapter, all moving in principle, toward Christ. That is the test. There is no movement of value save that which is in relation to Christ. And this chapter portrays a great movement of the tribes beginning at the south, and moving up to the north, including the priestly tribe in military service, not Levi, but the Levites. That is to say, the refined of the refined are there. The Levite, in this section, sets out the thought of refinement, corresponding with the epistle to the Philippians, which speaks of that which is "more excellent". There are the "excellent" and the "more excellent" among the people of God. And so here, the Levites are in the movement, and this drift was towards Hebron where, in type, the Messiah was to be anointed the second time. It was a great day and the tribes turned out in military array. Amongst them are these Issacharites, without any great numbers or military pretence.
{369}
There were one hundred and twenty thousand from the other side of Jordan, of the Reubenites and the Gadites and of the half tribe of Manasseh who joined this noble throng, but Issachar had just two hundred. These are the ones, dear brethren, with whom I wish to engage you. They are very much like Gideon's three hundred mighty men. They were the refined of the refined, the result of a gradual reduction from thirty-two thousand to three hundred. And so Issachar's two hundred are men like that, and it says that they had understanding of the times; not to know what the nations of the world ought to do, but what Israel ought to do. It is not that we are not sympathetic with the nations. We are; we pray for those that are in authority that they may be guided; and God *does* guide them. But these two hundred men were occupied with what *Israel* ought to do. Israel is a people that have a spiritual origin and history, and the name Israel was given of God. They have a spiritual destiny, and particularly the Israel of God, of whom the apostle speaks, saying, "Peace upon ... the Israel of God", @Galatians 6: 16. The Israel of God, as walking by the rule of new creation, are blessed with peace, and these two hundred Issacharites represent the wisdom that is to mark these people. But it is no question of numbers as to them. There are numbers in the chapter, for it would seem that well over three hundred thousand came to Hebron to transfer the kingdom to David. That is to say, royal power is in their hands, publicly, now. David had been recognized as king by Judah for seven years in Hebron, a spiritual setting. Now these hosts have come to turn over the kingdom of Israel to David -- not simply by the power of the sword, but by *moral* power. It is not only a question of military power, but of moral right. The kingdom is to be put in hands that can use it according to God, and these two hundred Issacharites are in the
{370}
midst of the throng. They surge toward David at Hebron. They are few in number, like the five barley loaves and two small fishes of which Philip said, "But this, what is it for so many?" @John 6: 9. But these men have understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do. Such people are very rare. Of them alone is this said in all Scripture. It is not that the others are to be disparaged, but the distinction of the Issacharites is unique. They have understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do. Therefore, in this vast assemblage at Hebron they would be sought out. "All their brethren were at their bidding", it says. We are not told how many brethren they had; if you have wisdom, it is for all the brethren -- the whole church. The question is if brethren are at the bidding of those who have wisdom. *God* gives wisdom. "For to one, by the Spirit, is given the word of wisdom", @1 Corinthians 12: 8. But to get the gain of this, it must be "at their bidding". That is to say, the Lord selects those to whom He gives wisdom. Some may say he is only one of the Issacharites. But he is more than that. Any one of these two hundred would far exceed in value any ordinary Israelite, and any true person would value them and seek them out. Deborah is an illustration. She had understanding of the times and Israel came to her. She did not go to them; they came to her. So that we have to learn to distinguish, and to value, and to regard what is more excellent -- what *God* gives. We are thankful to get the good of it. However many their brethren may have been, they were all at the bidding of these two hundred who knew what Israel ought to do. So that if I have gift from God, I hold it for all Israel (and every christian belongs to Israel) for there is great stress publicly and it is a question now of what Israel ought to do. Any uncertain one in that vast throng might go to one of that two hundred and he could tell him what
{371}
Israel ought to do. I feel that we are not sufficiently collective in our thoughts. It is not a question of what *I* ought to do, but what *Israel* ought to do. And we are not to do it in any mere personal or official way, but for Israel's sake. The Lord Jesus died for Israel. Israel is worth serving, therefore, and if we are told what Israel ought to do, we do it.
Well, I want to show, in a very practical way, from the passage in 2 Kings how this works out. It is not very complimentary to imply that one's audience belongs to the same class as these four leprous men. But they were not any worse, in one sense, than the king in Samaria of whom Elisha said, "This son of a murderer has sent to take away my head". These four men were not any worse off than those inside the gates. They were better off, for they had the advantage that they knew they were lepers and they were in the position proper to lepers, for they were outside the gate. "Simon the leper" was in Bethany and the Lord Jesus was in his house and was entertained there, and evidently entertained very well. He was called Simon the leper. I do not say that the leprosy was operative; indeed, I would say that it was not. Sin does not work in christians, characteristically, but it *is* there and anyone who denies it is deceiving himself. But these four leprous men were outside the gate, where they should be, but I want to show how this Issacharite principle worked out in them in a practical way. It may work out in the most unintelligent of us, for there are grades of intelligence, as it says, "Set those to judge who are little esteemed", @1 Corinthians 6: 4. But the first thing is to look around and see how things are spiritually. How many of us do look around and see what can be done? We may be in a plight, spiritually. A most extraordinary state of things may exist. The situation is extraordinary. The famine was in the city and the enemy outside, and here are four lepers and they begin to look
{372}
around. They reason intuitively. You will understand what I mean. It is not a question of gift, or of an intelligent brother telling you what to do. It is a question of the work of God beginning to move in our souls. And that is the thing for which to make room. It says that the prodigal "came to himself". Well, these men speak about going into the city, but they say, "We shall die there". That part of the environment may be left. It is a settled matter. It is a great matter in determining things to narrow down the field of inquiry. So that as I look abroad on the religious system. I say, Well, that is a settled matter; denominationalism is not of God, and not of the Spirit. That was settled two thousand years ago, I cannot go there! Well now, here are four isolated men with no ecclesiastical ideas attaching to them. But they say, "If we abide here, we shall die". We cannot stay where we are. And so they have settled *that* matter. They cannot stay in that isolated position or they will die. If there is anyone here clinging to an isolated position, listen to this word: You will die! Well, there is only one other thing left in this matter of inquiry. The matter is narrowed down to the camp of the Syrians: "If they save us alive, we shall live; and if they put us to death, we shall but die". They would lose nothing. You may say that it is a very poor way of arriving at the truth, but it is a very *sure* way. They decided to take that course. There was one door of hope open, and it looked rather hopeless, but they took that way and as they began to move, God moved, and as God begins to move the things are settled. God has great facility for making a noise. God made the Syrians to hear a noise of a great host. Think of that wonderful noise from heaven on the day of Pentecost! I would like to have heard it -- "as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house". A divine noise is to be noted. Something is going to
{373}
happen after it. But as these lepers moved toward the camp of the Syrians, God caused a noise to be heard. You can understand how God would cause that noise to be heard by every Syrian in that camp. And they fled. And when the four lepers arrived in the camp of the Syrians there were no enemies there. And so it is with us. Where we thought there were enemies, we find no one -- no enemies. That is the meaning of it. But there were horses there, and there were asses there, and they were tied. That is to say, there was the means of service all ready for them. And so you will find that where the Lord is working with us, there are horses and asses tied; but there is more than that. There are tents full of wealth.
Well now, I want to show that these four lepers had in them what every one of us has; that is selfishness. "They went into one tent, and ate and drank, and carried thence silver and gold, and garments, and went and hid it; and they came again, and entered into another tent". Look at them! They were not moving in the power of the Spirit of God when they were doing that! Selfishness is not of God, and yet it is liable to spring up in the most spiritual. I mean to say, beloved, that leprosy is there. When the test comes it shows itself. There was selfishness. But they judged it. That is a fine feature of every true christian -- he walks in self-judgment! I would to God that every one of us here could say what they say. Listen to what they say, "We are not doing right". That is, they were judging the leprosy. "This day is a day of good tidings", they say, "and we hold our peace". The point is, how is it in regard to the king's household? I am not thinking now of the king that was in Samaria, but of what he represents, "We are not doing right" if we are living to ourselves. We are not with God if we have light and are not using it. These men were in
{374}
the midst of plenty and they were selfish, and they say, "We are not doing right; this day is a day of good tidings". The word "good tidings" is a fine word. Think of it in the mouth of a christian! When I judge the leprosy, God takes me on, and it is a day of good tidings. And so they say, "Let us go and tell the king's household". That means that we tell all christians. And so they went and called to the porters. They were observant of order and that is sure to mark godly persons. There is to be respect of order. We are to do violence to no one, "And the porters cried it and told it to the king's house within". I dwell on this wonderful position, and how the divine nature, in figure, was operating in them and bringing them into the position of evangelists who carried glad tidings to meet the greatest possible need. There was no pretence about it, no force, no disregard of order, and it got to the ears of the king. And thus I want to show how the intuitive movements of a christian, working in him, conform exactly with the word of God. It is a great discovery to find that, in moving intuitively in certain exercises, you are moving exactly in accord with the word of God. Every movement in my soul that is in keeping with the divine nature leads to conformity with the word of God. These four lepers were moving in keeping with the word of God, for the prophet had said there should be plenty of food in the gates of Samaria at a certain time. And it came to pass as the man of God had spoken. I cannot conceive of anything more comforting, or more encouraging, than that the work of God should go on in such despicable people, such outcasts; and that it should conform exactly with the word of God. It is a matter of knowing what Israel ought to do. And that includes every true christian, even though he may be unintelligent, for he has divine instincts and he will come into conformity with the word of God. What
{375}
happened in the gate of Samaria was according to "the word of Jehovah". Let us recognise and follow divine instincts in our souls, and act according to the word of God.
{376}
THE SPIRIT IN THE BOOK OF JUDGES
@Judges 3: 9 - 11; @Judges 6: 34, 35; @Judges 11: 28, 29; @Judges 13: 24, 25; @Judges 14: 6, 19; @Judges 15: 14 - 16
J.T. These scriptures, I believe, give us all the direct references to the Spirit in the book of Judges. There are indirect references, but these give us the Spirit as operating in certain of the judges. I thought it would help us to consider Othniel, Gideon, Jephthah and Samson, so that we may see features with which the Spirit identifies Himself, and the circumstances that call forth His activities. What is said is intended to bear on ourselves, showing how the teaching connected with the Holy Spirit applies to us in similar times. The constant exigencies of the testimony and of the service of God call forth special activities of the Spirit, so that we are to be ready for such emergencies. It is only in the power of the Spirit that they can be met according to God. These four men are illustrative of what is needed to meet difficult conditions. Othniel is like the leader at the outset, as having spiritual history, and Samson at the end as having a history dating back to his parents.
A.M.H. Is it not noteworthy that the Spirit is not said to be upon Othniel in relation to any exploit, but in relation to judgment?
J.T. Yes; it does not say that the Spirit *came* upon him, but that the Spirit of Jehovah *was* upon him. With Gideon it is said that the Spirit of Jehovah *came* upon him; also in the case of Jephthah, but as to Samson, the first mention is that the Spirit of Jehovah *began to move him*. It would appear as if Othniel represents one to whom the Spirit was known earlier; it was not a sudden coming upon him to meet an emergency, but the Spirit was there, possibly in relation to what had been said
{377}
about his earlier history in the taking of Kirjath-sepher. Possibly it would thus allude to his previous history, which is worth considering, for brethren who serve in this way should have in mind that earlier history is necessary.
A.M.H. Is such a qualification particularly necessary for judgment?
J.T. That is how the matter stands. "The children of Israel cried to Jehovah; and Jehovah raised up a saviour to the children of Israel, who saved them". And then his service is mentioned. "And the Spirit of Jehovah was upon him, and he judged Israel; and he went out to war". The judgment of Israel was first. The spirit of judgment is necessary in those who go out to war; that is, they are to have a right judgment of the saints.
J.W.P. Would you suggest that the same emergencies that arose in the days of these judges are likely to arise in our day, and have to be met?
J.T. That was what I thought. These four men represent the mind of God, and what is needed for the Spirit's activities. Othniel has a history that every brother and sister should enter into -- a family history. The Spirit of God touches on this -- his antecedents and character. His father-in-law and uncle was Caleb, a man of peculiar qualities in the testimony.
J.T.S. Is there significance in the fact that he was the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother? Would it not be an encouragement to younger men to seek to qualify?
J.T. I suppose so. Kenaz was the younger brother, and the idea of the younger has a place. His wife and what marked her would enter into his exploits; all these would account for the Spirit being upon him as the emergency is mentioned. He is ready, a trusted man, evidently, being raised up to
{378}
save, and he did it. It is an important matter to do what we are called upon to do. He justified the call; he saved Israel.
E.J.F. What had you in mind about family antecedents? Were you speaking of it in a spiritual way, and also in the ordinary way?
J.T. The selection of wives and husbands enters into all this much more than we are apt to think. Othniel has a remarkable family setting, and is remarkably successful, free from any blemishes or mistakes. The order of his service was that he judged Israel and went out to war, and Jehovah gave Chushan-rishathaim into his hand. God acted for him under those circumstances, and the land had rest for forty years.
Ques. You referred to conditions with which the Spirit of God could identify Himself as illustrated in these men of whom you have spoken. Must there be a previous history with God before the Holy Spirit can identify Himself with one's service in this way?
J.T. Yes, I had that in mind. Paul spoke about prophecies going before and the laying on of hands in regard to Timotheus. The man of God was indicated beforehand, and the elderhood committed themselves to him. The prophecies going before would mean that he was divinely pointed out as known of God. The secret history we have with God must underlie all service.
H.C. "From a child thou hast known the sacred letters". Would that correspond to the overthrow of Kirjath-sepher, the city of books?
J.T. Yes, he was not given to light, useless and damaging literature, but nurtured in the sound words of the Scriptures.
J.T.S. Should our young men be exercised about these matters if thinking of marrying?
{379}
J.T. That is a principle dating back to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The wife should be a sister before she can be a wife, as Paul says, "... a sister as wife". Sarah was related to Abraham and was called his sister; Rebecca was related to Isaac; Rachel was related to Jacob. There should be a spiritual affinity. A wife may be much help and on the other hand she may do much damage. Hence the importance of a right selection. Achsah would be a spiritual wife. She wants springs of water; she wants spiritual things as her dowry.
We might now consider Gideon; his history shows that a younger son or daughter may influence a parent rightly. But his qualification is seen in that he is threshing wheat in the winepress; that is to say, he was doing something to defeat the enemy. He could not cope with him outwardly, but he was doing something to defeat him. However little it may be, it was directed against what the enemy was doing -- he was saving the food from the Midianites who were endeavouring to destroy it.
J.W.P. How does that apply today?
J.T. Being on the alert as to what the enemy is doing. We may be quite oblivious to what he is doing, but he is always active, and it is important to know what he is aiming at. Gideon discerned that, and was acting against the enemy. It was in secret and under great difficulties, but he was doing it. Then he is able to overthrow the altar that his father had erected to Baal -- a wider and more dangerous operation, but he did it. The Midianites were innumerable; that is the enemy was working in a large number of people. The question is, What is he doing today? and with what am I going to check him? I may not be able to overthrow him, but I should do what I can to check him. Such Midianite activities would tend to corrupt the local meeting; if allowed unjudged, they are very damaging.
{380}
Ques. So there is need for blowing the trumpet?
J.T. That is the idea. The Spirit of Jehovah came upon him and he blew the trumpet, and the Abi-ezrites were gathered after him, and he sent messengers to Asher, and to Zebulon, and to Naphtali, and they came up to meet him. The blowing of the trumpet would be some ministry that calls attention to the evil and arouses the saints. Gideon sets himself to do it, for evil must not be allowed; it must be met.
I.R. Would a prophetic word call attention to that?
J.T. I believe the Lord is using the ministry meeting to meet local conditions. There may be ministry that has a wider scope, but the Lord would provide for local conditions.
B.S. Would that be the outcome of a brother coming to a definite judgment himself, and then acting upon that judgment?
J.T. Yes; that is what we see from this scripture; there is nothing said as to how he came to be threshing the wheat, but the fact is that he was doing it in the winepress to secure it from the Midianites. Gideon was definite in what he was doing; he had formed a judgment as to what was needed. Evidently he was an obscure man, but he was doing that which he had found to do in his own locality. The Angel sat under the terebinth that was in Ophrah, that *belonged* to Joash; so that it is a local position. He determined to do something, and he was doing it, and that causes him to do greater things; so that he overthrows the altar to Baal in his father's house. And then the Spirit tells us that "all Midian and Amalek and the children of the east were gathered together". The enemy is now attacking in large numbers, and at this juncture the Spirit of Jehovah came upon Gideon, as honouring all that preceded.
{381}
W.S.F. Would Midian answer to natural relationships? They were descendants of Abraham.
J.T. That is a good suggestion; relationships can be very damaging.
W.S.S. Gideon "blew the trumpet, and the Abi-ezrites were gathered after him". Would this suggest that he was a brother who had power in his own locality?
J.T. That is a good point; at the outset where the collective idea is introduced in Exodus, we have reference to the neighbour next unto us; so that a man who found his passover lamb too large divided it with the neighbour next to him; there were other neighbours, but it was with the one next to him. So that Gideon has secured a footing in his father's house, and in his own locality; a very important matter. His local brethren were with him.
W.S.S. He was a brother in his own locality first and foremost, and then he seems to have discernment as to the whole position and the places where messengers should be sent. He does not send them over the whole of Israel.
J.T. And all are affected: "they also were gathered after him". The messengers spread abroad what was needed. There is the blast of the trumpet, but it requires a host of publishers; there are others who take up the truth and spread it.
A.H.G. Although an obscure brother, he knew that Asher and Zebulon and Naphtali would hear the message.
J.T. He had a right judgment of what was in these places. We hear of messengers in the days of Josiah, who were sent, but were of little effect; here we have sympathy and the messengers were heard. It is a very important thing to find genuine sympathy among the brethren.
H.H. Would ministry of the trumpet character bring that to light?
{382}
J.T. That is the idea, the trumpet is the ministry. In @Numbers 10 we have the silver trumpets, which denote the rights of love; a most touching way to appeal to us, by the love of Christ. The love of Christ constrains us -- it is the testimony of it presented in a powerful way in ministry.
W.S.S. Is the attack of the Midianites a serious matter at the present time?
J.T. I think they represent natural relations who go in for social matters. They were people who had kingship and titles, and that sort of thing; they were a snare even to Gideon later. They descended from Abraham. They allure us, leading us into social things instead of spiritual things, and if we are occupied with social matters we do not go in for what is spiritual.
E.J.F. In times of local difficulty must we see to it that the food supply is maintained?
J.T. Yes; that is it. Shut out all these social matters, ornamentation and so forth.
Eu.R. It says the people were gathered after Gideon. Does that indicate a special place of leadership?
J.T. Yes, that is another feature of the book. Deborah and Barak in their song said, "Leaders led in Israel". Othniel was a saviour and he saved the people; Gideon was a leader and he led; that is what marks him here. They came after him, and others met him. Then the army was tested; that enters into the Spirit coming upon Gideon, for he is a leader but he is ready to have his army reduced to a small number, so that the victory and the surpassingness of the power may be of God and not of us. The allusion in @2 Corinthians 4: 7 is to him. The vessel is broken, and the power of God is seen in it. He represents that side. The power of God is seen in reducing the army that was to meet the Midianites
{383}
who had a great host. Gideon meets them with three hundred. It is a question of God's power.
H.C. Is that what Paul alludes to: "We ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead"?
J.T. Yes, that is it, it enters into the second epistle to the Corinthians: "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body" (chapter 4: 10). And it says, earlier, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels". The allusion is to Gideon; so that he gets an outstanding place in that he is alluded to in the New Testament.
Then, in regard to Jephthah, we should note that he is a man who understands Israel's history. His upbringing had great disadvantages and he suffered from the disadvantages, and in his service he is occupied a good deal with himself. He made a bargain before he took leadership, but he understood the history of the testimony. He quoted Scripture to meet the point at issue -- a very important matter. All may not be conversant with what I am alluding to, but it says in chapter 11: 12, "Jephthah sent messengers to the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight against my land?" But Jephthah knew the history of Israel, and to meet the attack he brought in the thought that Israel walked through the wilderness.
H.H. Is there the possibility of quoting Scripture wrongly and supporting evil?
J.T. We may do that; very often it is done, but Jephthah knew the scriptures which related to the matter in hand, and spoke very touchingly about Israel's walking, "When they came up from Egypt, then Israel walked through the wilderness". That is the principle applicable to the wilderness -- we *walk*
{384}
through it. He said, "Israel walked through the wilderness as far as the Red Sea, and came to Kadesh". Then he touches on the false brother who would not let Israel pass through the land. "And Israel sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land ... . And they walked through the wilderness and went round the land of Edom and the land of Moab, and came by the east of the land of Moab". Israel had the real spirit of a brother, they would rather suffer than provoke a quarrel. Jephthah pursues the history and establishes the righteousness of the issue for which he is contending. It is most important in local issues that we get everything clear and not call evil good, and good evil.
H.H. He would stand for the inheritance in every feature.
J.T. You do not allow the saints to be robbed of their inheritance; there is the heritage which the Lord has given us.
H.H. And he understood boundaries, which is very important in these days.
J.T. Yes; it is remarkable the place they have in relation to our local meetings.
Ques. How do you understand Jephthah's character in this setting, seeing that his brethren would withhold his inheritance from him?
J.T. He bears the features of Christ, in a sense, in all this, although in a very crude way. He was unfairly treated, being cast out of his father's house because of his mother. Although he had rights in his father's house he did not assert them; I think he bears something of the character of a saviour at the outset, but he never seemed to be formed like Othniel and Gideon. We must be prepared to suffer from our brethren, but in doing so we need to be preserved from a hard and wrong spirit.
{385}
Ques. Did he profit by the suffering from his brethren?
J.T. Yes, I think he learned something of the way the children of Israel walked, in having to go round in order to avoid conflict. But instead of being like Gideon's father, Joash, who rendered thankful testimony (@Judges 6: 31), he fled to Tob. He did not gather a valiant people around him. If one is suffering at the hand of his brother, he may gather up substance, spiritually, and be helped in that way. But Jephthah failed there. Still, he could speak of Israel walking, and walking round in order to avoid conflict with brethren.
H.H. Does the sacrifice of his daughter accentuate the thought of suffering?
J.T. He committed himself to that, but why should he speak of offering up whatever came to meet him? I think it indicates the character of the man, that there was lack of formation, and yet God used him. We must not be surprised if God takes up unlikely persons in His service.
Now we should consider Samson, I think he represents Christ in a distinctive way in the sense of nazariteship. In Samson we are to learn that there is a feminine side; that the servant comes in through nazariteship; not only as expressed in himself, but in the mother -- raising the whole question as to how far we learn, through the Spirit of Christ, to refuse what is legitimate in itself in view of devotedness, so that the children are nazarites. A local gathering may be more formed in its subjective or sisterly qualities than in lordship. The name of Samson's mother is not given, but Manoah's name is given several times, I think it is to bring out what may be subjective in a gathering, though leaders may be wanting. Leaders are fully owned; they are not set aside; they are brought into the matter and they are followed, but the Angel appeared to
{386}
Manoah's wife twice, and not to Manoah except when he was with her.
W.S.S. Your reference to the Spirit of Jehovah beginning to "move" him, might come in here. The footnote states that the word for "move" is expressive of powerful emotion.
J.T. Yes; it foreshadows the Lord Jesus. What powerful and spiritual emotions marked Him, even before He entered on His service! What we are speaking of now is deeper in Samson than in any of the other servants. It is a question of what has been imparted by the mother, and raises the question in our local meetings of what the general state is, and whether there are any leaders. Why did not the Angel come to Manoah? He was the responsible element. He came to Manoah's wife twice, and there is something in that. The general state in the sisters may do more in a meeting than the brothers who take the lead.
A.H.G. Does a right state subjectively lead to the production of leadership ultimately?
J.T. Yes; Samson is the product, but the parents go through much; Manoah was brought into the thing. God is not going to set the elders aside, but He will bring them round. Feelings are developed in Samson. Spiritual feelings are needed first, and then action.
W.S.F. Does the path of separation correspond to nazariteship?
J.T. Yes, but nazariteship goes deeper, involving the denial of things that are legitimate in themselves.
Ques. How do you distinguish between the Midianite element which Gideon faced and the Philistine with which Samson had to do?
J.T. The Philistine is the big man whom Satan would use. The Philistines had a status in the land and continued until David's time. Samson did not bring them to an end, but the Spirit began to move
{387}
him and he began to overcome them. It is the idea of beginning in a right way. Chapters 14 and 15 tell us that the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him three times. He is the only one of whom that is recorded. His history is a remarkable one; there is this remarkable power, a power you do not get in any others. It suggests that young brothers and sisters should begin right. The Spirit of Jehovah began to move him in his own locality.
Rem. Timothy has been mentioned as having spiritual features. Paul had great desire to see him, remembering his tears.
J.T. That is good. You are directed to the Lord Himself; what feelings, unutterable feelings, must have marked the Lord throughout in what He found here! The gospels give us some instances, but what must have been His deep feelings! The reference to 2 Timothy is good. Timothy is the man for the last days. He was one who cared with genuine feeling how the saints got on. God is bringing this kind of thing to our attention in view of the continuance of the testimony here. Young men should come forward in this way, taking on nazariteship and making way for the Spirit to move them. @Romans 8 tells us that the Spirit witnesses with our spirits that we are children of God. He gives us to know what a place we have with God; and He makes intercession for the saints with groanings which cannot be uttered.
Rem. The Lord, beholding the city, wept over it.
J.T. Yes, much could be said on that line. I believe the impression we should get is that there should be deepening feelings as to matters which arise, and then the power coming in, as seen in the slaying of the lion. The lion turns not away for any. The Spirit of Jehovah came upon Samson. And the Philistines, however many, cannot stand
{388}
before him. Then we are told that he slew more in his death than in his life. It is a question of what one man can do.
A.H.G. Is that very much the character of the last days?
J.T. Yes; we may say we have not many, but it is what *one* can do, one who feels things in secret with God -- who takes on nazariteship.
E.J.F. How do you apply the fact that he slew more men in his death than in his life?
J.T. It is all a matter of what one man can do. Samson, in principle, was laying down his life for the brethren.
Eu.R. Is it in the light of the universal position?
J.T. Yes; he judged Israel. In the face of Philistine opposition he carried on the judgment of Israel.
H.H. Was it an unselfish death, reminding us of the death of Christ?
J.T. Yes.
{389}
THE MAN OF GOD
@1 Timothy 6: 11; @2 Timothy 3: 16; @1 Kings 17: 24; @2 Kings 4: 40
These scriptures speak of the man of God, and in the New Testament this title is applied to one man only, and he a young man -- Timothy. So that it is not beyond the range of the young that are here tonight. Had it been applied to Paul or John, many of us could understand it more easily, perhaps, but it is significant that it is only applied to a young man in the New Testament. What I have to say, however, will bear upon all who are present. We will speak of Timothy first, then Elijah, and then Elisha. The term is applied to Elisha more than to any other man in the Scriptures; perhaps half of the references to the man of God in Scripture refer to Elisha. Evidently his ministry is, in general, the divine ideal as to the man of God.
Now what may be remarked at first is, that the man of God, in the first mention of him in the New Testament, is asked to flee certain things. When we are asked to flee things, we are in imminent danger of them. No time is to be lost, or they will overtake us. And if they overtake us, disaster will ensue. So Timotheus is addressed as in peril. The word is, "O man of God, flee these things". They are things that are particularly used by the enemy against young men and women. In the next epistle the exhortation is to flee youthful lusts. It is not stated what they are. But here the preceding verses indicate to us the things from which to flee. Indeed, the apostle's allusion to the subject of master and servant leads him to speak of certain things which seemingly accumulated force in his mind as he wrote. It is characteristic of him, that as a great thought came to him it gathered force in his mind,
{390}
running on, sometimes, to the expression of feeling. And it is so here. It was a question of service. "And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them because they are brethren; but let them the rather serve them with subjection, because they are faithful and beloved, who profit by the good and ready service rendered. These things teach and exhort. If any one teach differently, and do not accede to sound words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the teaching which is according to piety, he is puffed up, knowing nothing, but sick about questions and disputes of words, out of which arise envy, strife, injurious words, evil suspicions, constant quarrellings of men corrupted in mind and destitute of the truth, holding gain to be the end of piety. But piety with contentment *is* great gain. For we have brought nothing into the world: it is manifest that neither can we carry anything out. But having sustenance and covering, we will be content with these. But those who desire to be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and many unwise and hurtful lusts, which plunge men into destruction and ruin. For the love of money is the root of every evil; which some having aspired after, have wandered from the faith, and pierced themselves with many sorrows. But *thou*, O man of God, flee these things", @1 Timothy 6: 2 - 11.
The apostle is addressing this young man, "O man of God". What an honour! And yet he is in the midst of danger -- surrounded by dangers which, undoubtedly, are accentuated because he was a young man. One may question one's employer and even get into arguments and disputations, but the secret of it all may be that I would like to be in his position. He is getting along well in the world and we would like to be in his place. That may be the secret of it. And so the apostle pursues the subject to the love of money. Who is there that does not
{391}
love money? Let each question himself. It is a root of all evil! I doubt if there is one of us but would have to testify that at some time we have loved money. And it may be that it has become crystallized in us. The very thought of it coming into the apostle's mind and developing out of this matter of criticism of one's employer leads him to think of this distinguished young brother to whom he was writing. He says, "O man of God, flee these things". The very title is calculated to stir in him the desire to flee them. No doubt it did. There is not a slightest evidence that he really harboured these things. But the *danger* was there. And if it were so with a man like that with such a spiritual history, can any of us say that we are exempt? Think of his distinction -- to be called, "man of God"! And yet there was need of being warned against these things. Why should the apostle have to say to a man like Timothy. "For we have brought nothing into the world, it is manifest that neither can we carry anything out. But having sustenance and covering, we will be content with these ... For the love of money is the root of every evil"? Evidently the Spirit of God gave force to the word as the apostle proceeded. He is now speaking to this one brother about himself. He had been speaking about others generally, but in this particular verse he is speaking to Timothy about himself. We may think that there was no danger with him about these matters. He was a gifted young man, able to teach and preach. Yet there was a danger that he should have love for money. And the apostle is so urgent. He says he is to *flee*! It is the attitude of one's mind. It is not a physical matter, exactly, though we should get out of circumstances that induce wrong thoughts, but you must turn away your mind with an impetus that will never allow you to go back. *Flee*! Flee from these things! In the next
{392}
epistle he enlarges on the thought, saying, "But youthful lusts flee". He had said, earlier, "The things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men, such as shall be competent to instruct others also". The apostle was making Timothy the custodian of the truth, and yet this same man was exposed to youthful lusts, the love of money and the pride of having money, for pride goes with it.
All this, and more, was possible in one of the most spiritual young men of that age. But is any of us immune? I think not. There are those here, perhaps, before whom a path of distinction opens up with wealth and power; but the apostle speaks solemnly to "flee these things, and pursue righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, meekness of spirit". It is a longer list than occurs in the second epistle. There it is, "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace". Here we have righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, meekness of spirit -- six things. The second epistle relates to a believer delivering himself from evil communications, and finding a company with whom he can walk. But here it is a question of the servant being maintained in the service of God, and, as holding to the truth, to flee these things which would damage him. And the apostle says, "O man of God"! What feeling there is in it! "O man of God"! Your dangers are great! Your privileges are great! Go in for the privileges! Cleave to them!
Well now, the second epistle has in mind the furnishing of the man of God for his service, "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work". I would just touch on the importance of the Scriptures and every aid furnished of God for a right use of them;
{393}
and first of all, for one's own soul benefit. I know that most young men who are able to serve, read Scripture in order to get texts for preaching. This is good in its place. But the first thing is to get something for *oneself*, to get light in one's own soul. Let me say, Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable, for teaching *me*, for convicting *me*, for correcting *me*, for instructing *me* in righteousness. And so, the word to us is, How do we read the Scriptures? "How readest thou?" The eunuch was reading Scripture, and Philip, guided by the Holy Spirit, asked him, "Dost thou then know what thou art reading of?". He did not say, I am glad you are reading the Bible. Of course, he was glad of it. It is a testimony when a man reads his Bible. It is a thousand times better than reading a newspaper. A man reading a newspaper in the train is no testimony. But a man reading a Bible is a testimony. Well, here is a man reading the Scriptures and Philip asked him if he understood what he was reading. He said, "How should I then be able unless some one guide me?" He was an honest man. There are thousands who read the Bible, it may be, out of duty, and you are glad they do. But then, is there someone to help? The Holy Spirit is here for that purpose, and the Lord will give the understanding. And so the Lord would put it upon us to read the Scripture, and to read aright. The Lord said to one man, "How readest thou?" One has read Scriptures hundreds of times without having seen anything in them, but presently light dawns, and then they are read differently, "How readest thou?" It is not to be done in a perfunctory sort of way, but as asking the Lord to help, and being free to tell Him when we do not understand a scripture.
Someone has said, 'Never cut a knot in Scripture'. Never take a short cut to understand. You will always find a key nearby, if you are dependent on
{394}
the Lord to show you something. He is ready to give you wisdom every morning as you read the Scriptures. "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable". Even the genealogies of Chronicles and the curses on the mount are profitable. Every scripture is profitable. If one is an honest man he will say, That curse applies to me. That is the idea. It is very testing, but the number of persons is very small who are prepared to say, I deserve to be cursed. But you *do* deserve to be cursed. Those curses are against us as men. It is important that we should know from what we have been saved. It says here that *every* scripture is inspired of God and is profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, instruction in righteousness. It is for *me*, that I may be perfect. Let none think that he has done well, that he can preach well, or that he is getting on. Such a one has hardly begun to understand Levitical principles at all. The less confidence I have the more power I will have. The excellency of the power is of God and not of us.
Well, I will now go on to speak of Elijah and Elisha. The young men need to see the dangers that beset them, so that they should not dishonour the great name by which they are called. It is intended to be a sort of leverage in their souls. I should be ashamed, after I take this in, to run after the filthy lucre of this world. Gehazi is a warning in @2 Kings 5.
Now the Old Testament times would be like *nursery* times. Take a man like Elijah. Great as he was, he could not speak of things such as we are saying tonight. Not that one would draw attention to oneself, but Elijah could not preach the gospel as the youngest preacher here could do it, for he was in an imperfect condition. He was in the nursery, kept as a minor until the time appointed by the Father. I make that remark that our minds might be rightly balanced. He belongs to another
{395}
dispensation. And in our passage he is spoken of as a man of God. He is called this by a person that has been benefited by the prophet. God may have great thoughts about a servant, but the brethren may not have them. What he is may not have become evident in him yet. None of the disciples would have said of Peter what the Lord said of him in @Matthew 16. Yet how true he was to his confession.
Here it is a question of a man being called a man of God by a person that he has benefited, by the woman of Zarephath who had entertained him for a long time. In truth, he had entertained her, for she and her son were going to die and he kept them alive for a year. That was a great matter. The meal in the barrel did not waste and the oil in the cruse did not fail. It was God who did it. It was not Elijah, though it was at Elijah's word. The farmer might say of the grain that grows in the field, I raised a good crop. It was *God* who did it! A man sows his seed and rises up day and night. The crop comes. He does not know how, with all his rising up. It is God. What a great thing that is! If you were to ask Elijah about the raising up of this woman's son to life, he would say, God did it. Look at the way he entreated God. It was *God* that did it. The woman was greatly benefited, and she says, "By this I know that thou art a man of God". That is how we come into the knowledge of a brother's worth. What he really is becomes evident in the proof that comes to me. If I receive positive help from a brother, I will not listen to anything detrimental to him. Yet there are those who receive help from a man of God and turn a ready ear to ridicule. This woman had a complaint against Elijah. He could not keep her boy alive. He kept the meal and the oil from diminishing, but he could not keep her son alive. That was the kind of feeling she had
{396}
about him. And it was a serious exercise for Elijah. For after all, the excellency of the power is of God and not of us. But "he cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again! And Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah". Elijah prayed, and stretched himself upon the child, but God did the work. It was God who did that. One might say, Elijah, that was a great feat of yours. He would say, No; do not say that, I was at extremity about the thing, I could not have done it; but I did it under God. "Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into him again, and he lived". Elijah had prayed; he stretched himself upon the child; he begged God about it; but God brought the soul back into the child. *God* did the work! Elijah brought the child down to his mother, but it was God who brought the child's *soul* back.
But there are great things happening today. A brother may get away from God, and is recovered. That is a great work! In principle, the soul has been brought back. It is a spiritual matter. But who would say that *he* had done it? If God did not do it, it would not be done. But let us look at Elijah. What a peace offering he has! The woman had not been pleased with him. She had discredited the man of God. But now he says, "See, thy son lives". But it was God who had done it. God is still doing things. He does them in answer to the prayer. Think of Elijah stretching himself on the dead child! How he prayed to God! He is the one man who is held out as an example of prayer in the New Testament. It is because of prayer, but the work is God's. Now look at the woman. She says to Elijah, "Now
{397}
by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". You may say, Of course the word of Jehovah is truth. But this was not written for nothing. "The word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4: 12. But it is truth. And the important thing is that it is in this man's mouth. The idea of truth is not stressed alone but that "the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". The woman was adjusted and she was able to name him. "I know that thou art a man of God". So that what was done was a confirmation. "Now by this I know that ... the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". Bringing the child back to life was the great point with the woman. But God is aiming at bringing all the saints into life; not only into fellowship to partake of the emblems, but to be brought into life. Elijah says, "Thy son lives". He is alive!
Well now, we go on to Elisha. He represents grace. It is the great grace side in the New Testament and opens up the dispensation of grace by this passage amplifying it. He is a man of God. The title is applied to him more than to any other in all Scripture. It is as if God would say, I want to attach My name to the great grace system. And so Elisha is met by a woman in debt. The creditor was at the door. And Elisha helps her. He solves her difficulties. It is a matter of grace. She is not only to pay her debts; she is to live on the rest. And he is owned as a man of God. And then we have the woman of Shunem who says, "This is a holy man of God". She is a greater woman than the woman of Zarephath. She says, "This is a holy man of God", even though he has done nothing for her as yet. But he was passing by her door. She had an eye for what
{398}
was of God. How many in Capernaum thought that of the Lord Jesus? More than a holy man of God was there, but few in Capernaum recognized it! Well now, we are told that Elisha passed by and the woman constrained him to eat. And she said, "This is a holy man of God, who passes by us continually". Well now, if her husband had been an alert believer he would have said to his wife, You have more discernment that I have. But they make a small chamber for the prophet with a bed, a table, a seat, and a lampstand. And the woman is rewarded with a child who died. But Elisha restored the child to life. He met every difficulty. And so the present dispensation is the time when things are finished; every difficulty is to be met. But the solution of every difficulty is in relation to the man of God. Think of having such a reputation! Think of the power of it! The little maid that waited on Naaman's wife said, "Oh, would that my lord were before the prophet that is in Samaria! then he would cure him of his leprosy". The solution of the difficulty lay in the man of God.
But I want to speak about "the great pot". What does it represent? It is like a Bible reading, when the brethren come together, and we may speak one by one. But presently someone brings in what is not right -- a wild gourd. The brother may have been thinking of something but has not been subject to the Lord, and says to himself, Now this will give me a little distinction if I bring it in. But when you look into it, it is poison. It is not the truth, and the pot is poisoned by it. They cried out and said, "Man of God, there is death in the pot!" Who can meet this? Only a man of God. It is a question of persons who are characteristically men of God; characteristically of God. "*We* are of God", the apostle John could say. *All* the apostles were men of God. The antichrists would not hear them: "*We* are of God; he that knows God hears us; he who
{399}
is not of God does not hear us", @1 John 4: 6. And so here, the real difficulty must be met by this man of God. Elisha does not complain. He does not rebuke the person that brought in this evil. He said, "Then bring meal". Who has the meal? He assumes that there is meal, somewhere, even with the dearth around. It is not easy to provide meal in famine times; nearly everything edible is scarce then. But he assumed that someone had meal, and, thank God, someone *did* have it. The requisites are always available in times of difficulty. When God is working, all the requisites are available. And so he says, "Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot, and said, Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no harm in the pot". What a change! You may say, There are not many men of God. Quite so. But the point I am making now is in the idea of being of God. Christianity is of God. "Of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus". The saints are of God, characteristically. And that shuts out all else. So that relief comes in. The solution is found. And there is no harm in the pot.
Well, I might say more, for the title is applied to Moses, David, and to several unnamed persons in Scripture. It really alludes to christianity, in the principle of it; christianity is of God. It is characteristically of God. Christ came out from God. And "of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption", @1 Corinthians 1: 30. And so we are to be characteristically of God and relief will come; the adjustment of every difficulty will be found.
{400}
"IN THE BEGINNING GOD ..."
@Genesis 1: 1 - 13; @Revelation 22: 14 - 21
I feel encouraged, beloved brethren, having a sense that it is my privilege and distinction to read and speak from the Scriptures at this time, beginning with the book of Genesis and connecting it with the book of Revelation. I should just like to link up these scriptures as dealing with the whole time-scene, we might say. They link up the whole Bible; and what a privilege it is to have the Bible!
The book of Genesis begins the Scriptures and brings in man, which is a great matter. Indeed, it is one of the most immense matters that could be mentioned, because God and man are brought together. We have come to a time when men are very active, and in which they are ready to say great things, and to advance great things, and to do great things. But *we* are here tonight to do something; and I am thankful to have the opportunity of saying something in regard to the Scriptures. The word that I seek to speak is about the very beginning. We are told, in John's gospel: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". But in Genesis it says, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". I am thinking about God. What a marvellous thing that we have to do with God! We have expressed in creation the majesty of God, the greatness of God, the glory of God and the patience of God. All this enters into the beginning of the book of Genesis. And I might say that it carries right through to the end of the book of Revelation.
And so the word is: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". I am encouraged to begin with the beginning and to say that it is God with whom we have to do, and that it is *such* a God.
{401}
We know God! That is one of the greatest things that anyone can bring forward -- that he knows God, and that God is *his* God.
But the passage goes on to say, "And the earth was waste and empty, and darkness was on the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters". Notice that the blessed Spirit of God is here. The Spirit *is* God, and He was hovering. And then, "God said, Let there be light. And there was light". God has His way; whatever men may say or do or think. God has His way! His way is good; His way is right, "The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul", @Psalm 19: 7. And so I would seek, in humility of mind, to consider the great facts of what God did in the beginning and what He will do in the end. We are at the end of things in this dispensation. If we do not know it we should know it, and our children should be taught so that they may know what God is doing for men. He began with creation. He began with this great matter and He will finish with it in the sense that His glory will be displayed in relation to it.
But we are told that "the earth was waste and empty". Things had happened that were very objectionable and at this point there was no encouragement at all; all was waste and emptiness. But the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters, and God said, "Let there be light. And there was light". The goodness of God comes in immediately. His goodness, His majesty and His power are in mind. And the Spirit of God is seen as free. No one can hinder God, "Thou canst be hindered in no thought of thine". @Job 42: 2. And so God said, Let there be light. And there *was* light. And God saw that it was good.
And then the next thing is that God divided between the light and the darkness. God is doing things to better them for man. And He called the
{402}
light Day, and the darkness He called Night. Day is mentioned first, for God had days in mind; "There was evening, and there was morning -- the first day". That is to say, God was dealing with things in His own way and His own time and with His own latitude and grace and patience. So that there was the evening, when we go to bed; and the morning, when we get up and do things.
And then God said, "Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it be a division between waters and waters". God is doing things His own way, and they are His own things, and He is calling them by the names *He* uses. And so He made the expanse. And He called the expanse Heavens. God was doing the speaking, and it must be done. And so we have the glorious creation of old. And, of course, man was created. We here this afternoon are part of the creation and God is blessing us; I am sure it is so, "And God said, Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together to one place, and let the dry land appear. And it was so". Notice that when God spoke, it says, "It was so". There is no use contending with God, for He is going to have His way! And we thank Him for it! God has rights in what He is doing and all that He is doing is good. And then we have the grass and the herbs and the trees yielding fruit. And God saw that it was good, "And there was evening, and there was morning -- a third day". Now we have come on to the idea of the power of resurrection in the third day. That is a great matter to reach -- resurrection!
Now I will just touch on the passage in @Revelation 22. Verse 14 says, "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city". Now God has a *right* to do that. He is giving men life! And it is that *they* may have right to the
{403}
tree of life. God is asserting that, and it *must* be so. "Without are the dogs, and the sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every one that loves and makes a lie". God is going to deal with all that, and we had better seek to deal with it, too. And then the Lord comes in with this word: "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. *I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come". Now that is the conclusion of what I have to say. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". It is not alone the Holy Spirit, but "the Spirit and the bride say, Come". And then, "Let him that hears say, Come. And let him that is athirst come; he that will, let him take the water of life freely". Everything is there in liberality and freedom. And so we can glorify God together in our place of nearness and in faith as we wait for the Lord to come.
I just present these thoughts to you in the name of the Lord.
