{1}
Pages 1 to 115 from "Notes of Readings in New York and Other Ministry, 1954" (Volume 196).
THE MATERIAL FOR THE NEW STRUCTURE
@Acts 1: 1 - 26
We see in this chapter the nature of the material the Lord had formed, and how suited it was for the new structure -- the assembly. Special notice should be taken of the place given to the Spirit in the Lord's charge, of the fact that He assembled with the apostles and that they as together asked of Him, and that Peter stood up *with* them for his discourse recorded in chapter 2. There is something for us in all this, for according to the mind of God, the end of a dispensation should conform to what was true at its beginning.
The first narrative by Luke finishes with Christ carried up into heaven after blessing the disciples, and their returning to Jerusalem and attending the temple and praising and blessing God there. All is suggestive of the results of Christ's ministry as bringing in the priestly family. Luke's second narrative, the Acts of the Apostles, has in view the new structure, hence the prominent idea is *assembling* together in view of the coming of the Holy Spirit. The Lord's own charge to the apostles is said to be by the Spirit. His service in @Luke 24 is not presented as being by the Holy Spirit, but as what He did Himself. Acts has the assembly as the new system in view. Everything is now provided by the Spirit, and what the disciples did in the ten days between the Lord leaving them and the Holy Spirit coming shows that they had been formed by Christ's ministry. Without being told to return to the city and to go to the upper room they did so, showing that they had light as to the new thing. The fact that we get here the mount of Olives instead of Bethany gives a clue to the heavenly connection. Those in the
{2}
upper room represented the authority of Christ; no reference is made to the temple in verses 3 to 14.
"Assembled" is one of the key-words to the new dispensation, and here "assembled with them" is a most remarkable expression. Here in Acts it is the manner of His presence, and so He assembles with them and commands them not to depart from Jerusalem until they had received the Holy Spirit. It is a pattern -- a primal thought that goes right through the dispensation as a matter of light. It is most suggestive that the Lord takes up a relation like this, and there He commands. We treasure it as light in the soul, and if we are to answer to the beginning this is necessary. In Luke we find that the Lord left here a priestly company. He led them out to Bethany, which speaks of an earthly association, and there He blessed them; it was like Aaron's house being blessed (@Psalm 115.). They continued in the temple praising and blessing God, which was what God sought from Aaron and his family.
Luke's second treatise has the assembly in view and although he refers to the same things, it is in quite another way. The disciples, who belong to the new structure, are here charged, assembled, and commanded not to depart from Jerusalem, but to await the promise of the Father. The mount of Olives in @Acts 1 suggests a heavenly connection. When every man went to his own home, Jesus went there (@John 8: 1), and it would seem to point to heavenly associations with the Father, "When they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives".
When the disciples are together they *ask* the Lord; they recognise the oracle, the place of divine communications. It is at this point that the Lord is taken up and a cloud received Him out of their sight, but the two things we have been looking at remain, the Lord's administration in relation to the assembly, and our privilege of asking. It is a great thing to be in a place where we can ask, and although we may not always
{3}
get *what* we ask, we get regulated. Here the Lord replies to their question in the negative, but a negative is very often light, and we learn that when the Father's time comes, the course of things will be resumed according to the prophecies. The assembly is linked up with an eternal order of things; we are, as it were, let down to earth like the sheet, but only to be drawn up again. The feast of Pentecost was not limited by time like the other feasts, and so we have access to what is eternal.
The Lord is taken away, and they are seen gazing up, but they are corrected at this point. The cloud would indicate that they were not to look up. Stephen was right in looking up into heaven, for then there was no cloud; but at this point God had not given up Israel, so there was not the "clear shining" yet. The disciples go to the upper room, not to the temple. It was probably the guest-chamber where the Lord had been (@Mark 14: 14, 15), and where He had instituted the Supper. They show that they are in keeping with the new thoughts.
Peter standing up is another evidence of the fruit of the Lord's work. He stands up in the *midst* of the brethren, the assembly properly, and proves that he had profited by what had gone before. In chapter 2 he shows that he understands further the ground on which preaching stands. In the first instance they are together to receive communications, and he stands up "in the midst of the brethren", but in the second he stands "with the eleven"; that is, they are on the same footing as he; they were all commissioned to preach, and it is only sent ones who can preach or teach. Evangelisation stands on the ground of commission, and it is for the brethren to determine whether there is a commission; they are to judge.
In verse 21 we see that they deemed it an indispensable qualification that the one to be chosen in
{4}
the place of Judas should be "of the men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us". Only such could be an adequate witness. It is remarkable that the Spirit tells us the number of names in the whole company residing in the upper room, which indicates His cognisance of what belongs to Christ.
Peter stands up in chapter 2 more as an oracle than as a servant. "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God"; as there is speaking for God things are clarified. A word from the Lord comes from one standing up "in the midst of the brethren". In the assembly the Lord is supreme, and the speaking is an oracle. The gospel preaching is supported by the sympathies of the house of God, and you may get a manifestation at the Lord's supper, which will colour not only the preaching, but will go through the week with you.
It is instructive to see that the disciples appeal to the Scriptures, and that they pray. The Lord knew when He left them that He could safely trust them, and so He did not tell them, as He could have done, whom they should appoint in Judas's place. They had not the Spirit as yet, but they knew what to do in those unique circumstances. They were menders of nets, and what they did in @Acts 1 was on the principle of repairing a rent. It is also a point to be noticed that they knew the brethren, those who had been in the habit of assembling with them all the time Jesus went in and out among them, and the Lord knew their hearts. They go through all the exercises needed in making the selections, but God decides the choice. It is a great thing to know the brethren, and then you know how to act under any circumstances.
{5}
ADJUSTMENT TO GOD'S THOUGHTS
@2 Samuel 7: 1 - 29
J.T. In this chapter we see the need for adjustment even in the most spiritual. It is easy to apply it to those who are not spiritual, but that it should be needed in the most spiritual is perhaps what we would not expect. There is no evidence of any naughtiness of heart in David in this connection. In the end of the previous chapter, referring to his dancing before the ark, he says to Michal, "It was before Jehovah, who chose me"; he evidently was subdued and humble in his spirit, but not withstanding all the honour put upon him and the prosperity that marked him in bringing up the ark, he needed adjustment.
Ques. Nathan needed it also, did he not?
J.T. Yes; so that we see the most spiritual among the people of God need it, especially in connection with His house. God would remind us that all in the house must be of Himself. That David should consider the fact that he dwelt in a house of cedars and that the ark of God was under curtains was a very right motive and exercise. Nathan says to him, "Go, do all that is in thy heart; for Jehovah is with thee". It was right that it should be in his heart, but then whatever may be in my heart, I must think of what is in *God's* heart.
Ques. Would God's word to Abraham earlier, "Walk before my face, and be perfect", show that in God's wisdom He anticipates that in the most spiritual there would be times of imperfection?
J.T. Just so; in the most spiritual. Even Joseph, wonderful man though he was, does not pass without a slip that needed adjustment; he would have the elder blessed, in that way denying the sovereign choice of God.
{6}
Ques. Adjustment is needed in so many ways, but is it your thought that we need adjustment in relation to the thoughts of God, that He must act first?
J.T. It is to bring out the importance of the house, that God's mind must pervade it and that He must have the initiative as to all things concerning it.
Rem. The children of Israel took the initiative in desiring a king, but it was not according to God.
J.T. There is no doubt that the motive on the part of David was a worthy one; he had in his mind to find a habitation for God. It was a governing principle in his life, but this chapter is to bring out that notwithstanding all that, worthy as it was, David was short of the spirit that enters into the house of God; that he lost sight of the fact that it was a question of God's sovereignty and choice and that the thought of relationship entered into it. A military man was never in divine purpose, it was a son; what answers to the heart of God is sonship. It is the son who is to build.
Ques. Should Nathan have known that, instead of confirming David in what he purposed to do?
J.T. We must not be too quick. Deliberation is a great thing in the things of God. Of course, the Lord answered quickly in His dealings with others, but deliberation is a great principle. It was a great and weighty matter that David suggested to Nathan and required due consideration. You would have thought that Nathan would have said, Well, what about the word, "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared", @Exodus 15: 17.
Rem. So what is in our hearts should originate from God's heart.
J.T. If David had built the house, "Wisdom hath built her house" could not have been said. Wisdom
{7}
borrows nothing; she is indebted to no one. Wisdom originated with God, but it is the Son that builds, so that while wisdom builds, it is the affections and sentiments of the Son that enter into the building.
Ques. Is that why it is said regarding Solomon, "I will be his father, and he shall be my son", @1 Chronicles 17: 13?
J.T. It is not simply David's son that builds the house. In both Proverbs and Ecclesiastes it is David's son -- Solomon, "son of David". But that is not enough for God, the point that God emphasizes is, "He shall be my son"; that is to say, he is detached wholly from David. So that from the very outset of Solomon's being, God, as it were, intervened. He sent by the hand of Nathan and called his name Jedidiah, meaning that Jehovah loved the child. To David he was Solomon, but to Jehovah he was Jedidiah, and this showed what he was in the mind of God. God adopted him because He loved him. Thus Solomon is not simply David's son. As building the house, he is God's son, and the application of that to Christ in the first chapter of Hebrews makes it all the more emphatic: "*I* will be to him for father, and *he* shall be to me for son".
C.H.H. I suppose David reached that in his soul in @Psalm 72 where he blessed "Jehovah Elohim, the God of Israel, who alone doeth wondrous things".
J.T. Quite; and we see the end of David's desires, for the psalm ceases with, "The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended". He sees now in the son one who would take up the will of God; there is nothing more to desire.
J.D. What place would David's matchless preparation for the house have when he himself was debarred from building it?
J.T. Well, in David's heart there was affection for the house, so that although one might be debarred from much activity, his affection for the house would
{8}
lead him to expend all he has for the saints; he has a regard for what the saints are as the dwelling of God. @Exodus 15 contemplates a place which Jehovah has prepared for Himself to dwell in. Moses could not bring the people in, nor did Joshua bring the people into the fulness of @Exodus 15; Joshua did not get beyond Shiloh. The tabernacle was set up there. But in Solomon, the counterpart of David, you have the full thought of God reached as indicated in Exodus. What David is occupied with in this chapter (verses 22 - 29) is the establishing of the thing, not only that they had been redeemed for Jehovah, but that he wanted to see them established to be His people for ever. And that, I think, agrees with the number twenty-four -- a number that characterises David's ministry, meaning another ministry besides that of Moses.
Ques. What is suggested in that it says that the word of Jehovah came to Nathan that night?
J.T. It was an urgent matter; God would not allow the thought to crystallise in David's mind. He would adjust David at once. But it is interesting to see that He refers to David as "my servant". He is serving God and God would have him proceed to the end. He was chosen to be king and he was to proceed on *that* line; God took the matter up at once so that there should be adjustment. There was a certain distance -- the prophet involves distance, and David was to accept the fact that the message was mediatorial. David had been chosen to be a prince over His people; that was his ministry or office, and his last words indicate that he had learnt the mind of God as to his ministry. He accepted the message that Nathan brought, and he went in and sat before the Lord. It is a question now of being detained *there*.
C.H.H. May we not learn from that a principle, that if ministry puts us in touch with God, in accepting it we can go in to God?
{9}
J.T. That is the thought. Had David done this before the prophetic word it would not have been necessary. The thought of building a house was an important matter and it required the greatest care and *inquiry from God*.
J.D. Are you indicating that every one of the people of God should be able to get His mind for himself?
J.T. Yes; prophetic ministry is intended to bring us down, but it is for our blessing. You feel reduced and humbled as the prophetic word comes into your soul. Now David would speak to God, but before he speaks, he goes in and sits down before Jehovah. A sitting posture shows that you are there for a while. What he says to Jehovah indicates how much he profited by the word of Nathan; he had bowed unreservedly to the prophetic message.
C.H.H. Communications to Paul were direct.
J.T. They were, but there is one important point about him, before he got his direct communications for his ministry, he fully owned the brethren, and found adjustment among them; one cannot be a special minister to the saints or to the Lord unless he finds his place among the brethren first.
C.H.H. So that they gave him the right hand of fellowship, but in the first place he owed his position to Ananias.
Rem. It is noticeable that while Nathan failed in the mind of God at first, yet he was entrusted with the message, and he delivered it.
J.T. God spoke to him that night. But when Paul asked, "What shall I do. Lord?", the Lord answered, "Rise up, and go to Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which it is appointed thee to do", @Acts 22: 10. That was the reply to Saul without designating anyone; but so that there should be no discrepancy between what Saul saw in Christ and what he should find in Damascus. He went before him and prepared Ananias to receive him. The kind
{10}
of people Saul met in Jerusalem when he went to houses and dragged out men and women and delivered them to be punished, was the same as he was to find at Damascus. He was dealing with Christ when he did that at Jerusalem, so the word was, "Why persecutest thou me?". Now he was to find the same people in Damascus. Ananias says, "Brother Saul". He is at once disarmed and made to realise that the voice he had heard from heaven was the same in character as when Ananias spoke to him, so that from the very outset of his spiritual being. Saul would know that he got adjustment through the brethren. He recognises this principle later when he refers to one who was in Christ *before* him. Ananias said to him, "Receive thy sight". He looked upon Ananias; he would be impressed with what he saw in a brother after he received his sight. But then Ananias went on to say wonderful things to him, that he was chosen to "see the just one, and to hear a voice out of his mouth". It was a personal touch. Saul was listening to all this, but it was his turn now to do something; that is to say, when the light comes to you conveying the mind of God, you are to move according to it. Saul apparently was *not* doing anything, so Ananias says, "Why lingerest thou?". He was listening to the mind of God but that was not enough, the time had come to make a move: "Arise and get baptised". That was his part; he had to come to that. So you see he had to learn the principle of adjustment through the brethren. Great vessel though he was, he was at first slow to act according to the light vouchsafed.
B.T.F. Do you think the Acts take character from the principles laid down here?
J.T. Quite, the principle of selection. Whilst God selects there must be the corresponding result in those He selects. It is very beautiful that after the message reaches David, he goes in and sits before Jehovah. He would get impressions of the divine dwelling as he sat
{11}
before Jehovah. In John's gospel the first persons that move towards Christ say to Him, "Where abidest thou?"
F.R. Does sitting before Jehovah indicate that David no longer takes the initiative?
J.T. If we are to get the mind of the Lord, the thing is to sit before Him. The prophetic message is gracious but it implies distance. It was right, surely, to take account of the ark as dwelling under curtains, but to get an idea of what is requisite for God you must go in and sit before Him; you get right impressions there.
C.H.H. What answers to that today?
J.T. Of course we know what the house is: "Whose house are we". We know from Ephesians that the house is built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets. Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone. It is a spiritual structure in which God dwells and in which He is approached. But then, in approaching God now, you never lose sight of the fact that He is in heaven. He is dwelling here Spirit-wise; that is, all divine feelings and sympathies are directly in the Spirit. If we distinguish between the divine Persons, the Father and the Son are in heaven; the Spirit is here; so that God is here in that way.
B.T.F. What about the "living stone" and the "living stones" in connection with the building?
J.T. It is a spiritual house. "Yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house", @1 Peter 2: 5. We never lose sight of the fact that the Father and the Son are in heaven, and that the Spirit is here -- the Comforter; so that there is a medium through which the Father and the Son can dwell.
Ques. What does the ark dwelling under curtains signify?
J.T. David refers to the curtains as unsuitable; it
{12}
was a provisional place for the ark pending the building of the house.
Ques. God bears a good deal from us until we have light?
J.T. That is what comes out in Numbers, when the ark went before. The love of God is such that He is content to accept the circumstances without complaining. But sitting before the Lord you can understand that certain things will enter the soul. You are subdued and you get impressions that you might not get anywhere else.
Rem. I suppose Mary of Bethany was a typical example of this; she sat at Jesus¬ feet and heard His word with the result that she knew how to anoint Him.
C.H.H. Does this passage correspond with the holiest?
J.T. In a way. Entering the holiest in @Hebrews 10 does not contemplate us as together. You are to do that. It involves ability to abstract yourself from what is outward so that you acquire an apprehension of Christ as He is before God. In this passage it is where the ark was and what that alluded to -- where God was dwelling between the cherubim. Of course, David, not being a priest, could not go inside. It refers to God's house. In the Psalms you get it alluded to, "One thing have I asked of Jehovah, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire of him in his temple", @Psalm 27: 4.
C.H.H. That is the value of a meeting like this.
J.T. Especially when the saints are together in assembly, where the Lord is supreme and where He is recognised. You get impressions there that you get nowhere else.
Ques. David having now found his place in Jehovah's thoughts, would really point to Christ, would it not?
{13}
J.T. That is the point God has in His mind.
Rem. Peter had to learn that lesson also. His idea was to make three tabernacles; he had to learn that Christ is supreme.
J.T. Exactly; the voice said, "*This* is my beloved Son, hear him". Mark puts it that they saw no one but Jesus alone with themselves. So that David really comes to Christ and that is the substance of his remarks in this passage. David is coming into the divine 'manner'. In the house of cedars he would be impressed with the manner of man -- what man can do -- but it is the manner of God, the *divine* manner you get in the divine Presence. And so David says, "Is this the manner of man?". He is laying hold of how things are there; he is apprehending what was in God's heart.
Rem. He speaks on very intimate terms with God.
J.T. I think it is the effect of perfect love that casts out fear. He is able to speak to God and he says, "... according to thine own heart". Certainly it is much better to have things according to His heart than according to my heart. The manner of man in the house of cedars can never rise to the manner of God in His house.
W.D.R. You are coming nearer to the thought of ascension, are you not?
J.T. It is elevation. Hence you see the Lord in the finishing touches in the gospels; He directs the disciples upward. Here David gradually arrives at the greatness of God; he is impressed with it.
B.T.F. Why does David use the titles "Lord Jehovah" and "Jehovah Elohim"?
J.T. I suppose it refers to the increasing spiritual power of David as he apprehends God.
C.H.H. Would it refer to our ability to express the greatness of God in the assembly in every character in which we know Him as revealed in Christ, so that there is a variety of worship?
{14}
J.T. I am thinking of the difference between Romans and Ephesians. In @Romans 8 we cry, "Abba Father", by the "spirit of adoption". That is not the Holy Spirit, *formally*, it is "a spirit of adoption". That is related to the beginning of our relations with God, consciously. Ephesians is the culmination of that, so that you get reference to "the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ", and then you get "the Father of glory", and then, in chapter 4, "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". There is expansion in Ephesians. David's use of divine titles here shows spiritual progress.
H.E.E. Is it because of David's apprehension of the greatness of God that he takes account of the greatness of God's people in verse 23?
J.T. That is the next thing that comes out, as it says in Ephesians: "the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints".
Rem. So that our valuation of the people of God is related, to the measure in which we apprehend God.
J.T. You are impressed with the fact that David has come to recognise that all that he was, spiritually, was from God; all that his house was ever to be was from God; all that God's house itself was to be was from God; so that he is completely adjusted in that he saw that God was all and in all; he reached, we may say, "the fulness of God".
{15}
FRUITFULNESS
@Luke 8: 15; @Luke 13: 6, 9; @1 Thessalonians 1: 1 - 8
These scriptures, as you will observe, speak of the simple thought of fruitfulness. God had this in His mind from the outset of His operations. On the third day, spoken of in the book of Genesis, we have the first reference to it. It is presented there as a result of certain latent qualities in the earth. That is, the earth had long lain in water and by the word of God emerged from the water; the allusion, doubtless, is to the judgment of God which precedes and enters into fruitfulness. As applied spiritually it signifies that the believer is planted in the likeness of Christ's death, planted in baptism. God indicating in this that there can be nothing in us for Him aside from the definite acceptance of His judgment on ourselves, but borne vicariously by the Lord Jesus. So that the apostle says, "We, as many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death", @Romans 6: 3. We are become identified with Him in the likeness of His death, or planted, we are told, so that there should be a crop according to the mind of God, the believer taking root downwards. There is no suggestion of a limit to the depth of the roots. The deeper the roots go, the more fruitful and valuable and extensive will be the crop. There are grades in the roots. Baptism is the nominal acceptance of the death of Christ as being the penalty due to us, and involves that one is planted. The use of baptism abroad today, therefore, by millions of people on the earth who have no thoughts whatever of the reality of it, is a most solemn consideration, and every believer having been baptised, is under serious obligation as to what it means, and whether the acceptance of what it means marks him. True there is the planting, but then the planting is one
{16}
thing, and the taking root downwards is another thing. The Lord, in these parables about the sower, speaks of persons having no root in themselves. The figure in Isaiah is taking root downward, and bearing fruit upward (@Isaiah 37: 31). The planting is one thing, but the taking root in the energy of life is another thing, and then the depth to which the root goes is still another thing. There are grades. The Lord Jesus is said to have gone down to the lower parts of the earth. Who can fathom that? Certainly no geologist can fathom that. Though they do not go down very far they have a great deal to say of what they have found, but you find no reference to the great descent of Christ into the lower parts of the earth. The depth is beyond us, really, and the deeper we go the richer and more extensive should be the fruit. For instance, a man who accepts baptism generally as planted in the likeness of Christ's death is sure to take root. Aside from taking root there could be no crop. But then, the root may be little and short, so there is in that same scripture in @Romans 6 the idea of our old man being crucified with Christ. That is a further thought which requires a deepening of the roots. Crucifixion is a man's death. It involves that I have judged the old man in which I had part. There is only one old man; it is the thought that involves us all -- each of us comes to a judgment of what it is -- but it involves us all; "our old man", it is said. That is a further extension of the root downwards; and then finally we have one who says, "I am crucified with Christ". When one says, "I am crucified with Christ", he is dealing with himself -- he is not dealing with others. His thoughts are occupied with himself, and he means to convey that he has reviewed his whole history and discovered how mean he has been, unrighteous of course, and sinful -- but also the meanness of the things he has been guilty of, the utter despicableness
{17}
of his thoughts and attitude towards others. Many of us have reviewed our history in that way and have come to the necessity of crucifixion. The history of oneself has been viewed as so utterly bad, so mean, that nothing less than crucifixion will meet the case, and he sees that the Lord Jesus knew all that, and accepted all that, in hanging on the cross. His heart is drawn after Christ; it becomes entwined around Him as he thinks of the depth of suffering that He endured, that He became a curse, that He was "made sin" on the cross. He was made a curse -- a remarkable statement -- made sin and made a curse for us. One thus judged, beloved brethren, is taking root downward, and correspondingly he bears fruit upward, that is, God-ward. So that @Romans 7 is really a sort of answer, that we have become "dead to the law by the body of Christ, to be to another". And all that we are is acceptable. We are not going to link on with Him the meanness, the earthliness, the despicableness of our conduct. We are holding ourselves according to Him. The believer, as his root goes down, corresponds with Christ, and he would abhor the idea of linking on with Christ anything of that which took Him so low, which cost Him so much sorrow and suffering.
Well, now, having said all that, you can see the force of this scripture in @Luke 13. I want to speak of it first. It alludes to Israel, but it illustrates what is current around us. The fig tree alludes to that which God set up on earth through the gospel, as Israel had been set up. The Old Testament speaks much of the plant of Israel, the care expended on it, and this parable is intended to teach us that after all that, there is nothing. The vineyard owner came seeking fruit. That He does so is sure. If we take up the profession in relation to God, He comes seeking results, as you will observe here, "These three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree". That is,
{18}
you may expect a divine visitation, as you take up a place in this world in relation to God, as a baptised person. It may be that you have not thought of this. It may be that you have never felt or realised those comings of the Possessor of the vineyard -- for He holds rights over you. He says, "These three years", meaning that He has given full time; if not the first year, then the second year, and if not the second year, then the third year. Now this is a very serious matter, and each believer, or nominal believer, has to consider whether there has been this visitation, or these visitations year after year, since you have accepted and taken up this attitude God-ward, and whether there has been any fruit available to God. He is looking for it. The Lord, in @John 15, speaks of His Father as being the Husbandman, and shows that even if one bears fruit, He will purge the branch that it might bring forth more. God never intimates that He is satisfied; He is always seeking more. Each year should yield more because of His gracious, careful husbandry. So here He says, I have come these three years seeking fruit, and found none. And the vinedresser says, Lord, let it remain for another year. The Planter of the vineyard had no thought that His comings should terminate. It is a very solemn consideration, that we do not know when God may come in and terminate the time of fruit bearing, when there will be no more hope of answering to His mind. The vinedresser here alludes to the Lord's own position as come into manhood, as come in to Israel. One could say much as to the wonderful feelings of affection and sympathy that marked Christ as moving about in Israel. We know much of what His thoughts and affections were with regard to His earthly people. You know, on the Lord's visit to Jerusalem, how moved He was. One loves to stand with Him there as He approached from Jericho, "already at the descent of the mount
{19}
of Olives" to the east. He looked on the city, and it says, "He wept over it". The Lord would lay it upon us that we should think a little with Him as to this. "He came to his own, and his own received him not". What did He feel about that? He would fain continue on with them, for the Scriptures bring out the perfect humanity of Christ. The Spirit of God loves to dwell upon it, always maintaining the balance as to His deity in a full way. The Spirit of God loves to dwell on the perfect, real, and genuine humanity of our Lord Jesus, that He was capable of such feelings, that He loved Jerusalem, and would do anything for it; indeed, He has done all for it! He died for that nation. He was about to die for it and the feelings proper to Him in view of such a sacrifice were all there. "He came to his own, and his own received him not". He felt the coldness, the indifference that marked them. "How often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen her brood under her wings, and ye would not". Has this not an echo amongst us? The Lord's tender solicitations for us -- "And ye would not". So here, the Possessor of the vineyard would remove the fig-tree after three years of testing. The vinedresser had another thought -- yet not another mind -- it was delightful to see the sacrifice of Christ, the true Messiah of Israel, continuing on with them, to do His utmost for them for another year. He was reasonable in his request, but it speaks of the sacrifice of Christ, the intercession of Christ, and shows what Israel was to Him, and how He was loath to let the judgment of God take effect. The figure means that God had respect to His intercessions, and the fig-tree is allowed for another year. Think of the gracious ministry of Christ as He continues on! I suppose we may include the early chapters of the Acts in this. It says, in Luke, that He led His own out "as far as Bethany", not beyond that; meaning
{20}
that He was still lingering over the city. He was blessing them within easy reach of the city, so that they might be a testimony in it, as they were. He digged about the fig-tree, He did everything a vinedresser could do in digging about the fig-tree and in dunging it. The figure is well known to those who have to do with farming, the adding of the fertiliser after the digging. Think of the Lord Jesus being so concerned for His own that He comes digging about the fig-tree, and then applying the fertiliser! The vinedresser only asked for another year, and we know from other scriptures how Israel was set aside, and with what terribleness; for the Lord Himself says, "Thine enemies shall make a palisaded mound about thee ... and shall lay thee even with the ground". Jerusalem was razed to the ground; Zion was, it is said, as a ploughed field, for such was the judgment of God. I speak thus, on these verses, as a very solemn reminder of the judgment of God where no fruit is found. Everyone has to take it to heart, for certainly the same thing will happen to christendom.
Now I want to show you in the parable in @Luke 8, how Luke speaks of this subject which is spoken of by all three synoptical evangelists. Luke quotes the Lord, in verse 15, as saying, "But that in the good ground, these are they who in an honest and good heart, having heard the word keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience". Instead of saying, "bore fruit a hundredfold", as He does in verse 8, or "one a hundred, one sixty, and one thirty", as in @Matthew 13: 8, He says, "bring forth fruit with patience". Now this is the important side to the subject, because we are apt to be impatient. First, it may be with the Lord, or with the brethren, and sometimes with ourselves. If one is impatient with himself it means that he has not learnt himself, that he has been expecting something from himself; and I well know
{21}
from my own experience that many suffer from impatience with themselves. The first thing is to have done with yourself; there is nothing to be expected from yourself. Impatience is a serious state, for the enemy acts on it, and the most spiritual among us is apt to come under the enemy's influence by impatience. In @Numbers 11, you will remember, as Israel began to move out into the wilderness, they immediately complained, they murmured, and it says that "the fire of Jehovah burned among them, and consumed some in the extremity of the camp", showing that those of us who hold ourselves at a distance from the divine centre -- from the tabernacle -- who are infrequent in our attendance at the opportunities of privilege, who are neglectful, who are world-borderers, in other words, those who are on the outskirts of the camp, are sure to be complainers. Unless we frequently attend the meetings, and have part in that which satisfies -- for there is in the assembly that which satisfies, for God is there -- it is as sure as possible that we shall become murmurers; we shall complain against the brethren; we shall complain, it may be, against Christ and against the Spirit, and perhaps against God. Let us never forget that it is the dwelling-place of God; Christ is there, the Spirit of God is there, and, not to be neglected, the saints are there; indeed all the elements of heaven are there. Many do complain. They question why God should have allowed this and that. It is a sure evidence as to one's living associations, and that one is far away from this centre, which answers to the tabernacle of witness, which was beautifully set up in the centre as Israel was encamped. The cloud was over them by day, and the pillar of fire by night, the evidence of the divine Presence. Those who stayed in the utmost limits of the camp enjoyed but the utmost limits, and they complained, and the fire of Jehovah burned among them.
{22}
But then, the chapter tells us that Israel also wept, and the mixed multitude joined in, and they complained about the manna; and then, alas! one hesitates to speak about it, even Moses complained, showing that the most spiritual among us is exposed to this dangerous feature of complaint. Hence the Lord's word here, "bring forth fruit with patience". There will be much, may be, to hinder the crop. There is the chilling north wind of times, and other things which tend to hinder the growth, and we must be patient. But let us see to it that the fruit is there, that the growth has not stopped entirely, that there is genuine growth of something for God; that we are patient in it, day in and day out, week in and week out; that there is a patient steady evidence of good works, in the attendance at the meetings, in attention to the things of God and in the participation in the manna; that nothing that would tend to promote growth is excluded, so that there is something for God. He comes regularly; He comes looking for fruit. How often He has to turn away! But if *we* are to be patient, *He* is patient. Nothing affects one more than the patience of God. How long He has continued waiting on christendom, for instance, notwithstanding the conditions that are so revolting. God is patiently continuing, He has His eye on the few that love Him and keep His commandments, and He comes looking for fruit. How dreadful we should feel if we knew how often He comes and finds nothing! So that the Lord has in mind here, according to Luke, that there should be patience -- bearing fruit with patience -- not giving up, but continuing. As is said elsewhere, "In due time, if we do not faint, we, shall reap", @Galatians 6: 9. And I may add, that it is not only that God has His fruit, but we have ours. We have our "fruit unto holiness, and the end eternal life", @Romans 6: 22. Hence the need of patience. We are to be patient in well-doing for in
{23}
due season we shall reap, if we faint not. There is much tendency to give up, but the word here is "with patience".
In speaking of patience in regard of fruit-bearing, it is perhaps worth while to remark that we also have in the Scriptures the suggestion of *quick* results. The farmer knows what I mean. Certain seed is sown with a view to an early crop, other for a later, but certain things are needed early and are forced. Every attention is given so that there should be a quick result. Now this is not at all out of keeping with what I have been saying as to patience. To illustrate the quickness of divine results, take the rod of Aaron laid up before the Testimony. It budded over night and blossomed and yielded ripened almonds! There is nothing like that in nature -- but that gives the idea of quick results. The staff of Aaron was laid up just for a night, with the eleven other staves of the tribes of Israel, and it yielded ripened almonds, in perfect order. There was the bud, and the blossom and the fully ripened fruit. You may say, Can you illustrate that in a spiritual way? Yes; Scripture abounds with quick results. Take the man in @John 9. He developed from a blind man, in a very brief time, into a fully developed worshipper. Just look at the passage and you will see him growing! I am speaking practically -- and so we get the Thessalonians. The apostle having been shamefully treated at Philippi, went to Thessalonica, and went in among the Jews and for three sabbaths he reasoned with them out of the Scriptures opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from the dead. How one loves to think of the apostle in those three sabbaths! What a time they must have had! He was amongst them as one of them. He went in among them. He alludes here to his being a model and they valued him as such. That is, he stresses that the idea in the
{24}
gospel was not only presented in words, but presented in himself, and that is where so many of our dear brethren suffer. They have not had the model. As the gospel has been preached and the truth presented, the model has not been there; that is, the end to be reached has not been presented in their teachers. But it was otherwise in Thessalonica. The apostle was there. He went in among them as it says, "opening and laying down that the Christ must have suffered and risen up from among the dead", @Acts 17: 3. And a great number were converted in that town. He had to leave them immediately, and he wrote his letter very shortly after, for he was concerned about them. It is only a question of reading this chapter to be convinced of quick results in a meeting. He speaks of them as "the assembly of Thessalonians". Not the assembly at Thessalonica, but persons who belong to the town, who were characteristically persons of that town; that is, they had not come from the east, nor had they been christians for years before. They were verily Thessalonians. They had just heard the word and had received it, and this quick result is there. That is why I read this chapter, dear brethren, and the Lord would perhaps use it in our little gatherings; for one has great sympathy with gatherings who are perhaps minus what others in large cities have, such as much ministry and much teaching and much practical fellowship as compared with brethren who reside in smaller towns and country places. The Lord has great sympathy for us in these circumstances, and He would encourage us in this way. The Thessalonians had nothing, as far as the Scripture says, save what they got from the apostle in that three weeks¬ visit; but the soil was there, the young bud was there too, so that he says, "Remembering unceasingly your work of faith, and labour of love, and enduring constancy of hope, of our Lord Jesus Christ, before
{25}
our God and Father; knowing, brethren beloved by God, your election. For our glad tidings were not with you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in much assurance; even as ye know what we were among you for your sakes, and ye became our imitators, and of the Lord, having accepted the word in much tribulation with joy of the Holy Spirit". Now this last verse is most important as to what I am saying, "Having accepted the word in much tribulation". Normally, affliction will come with the sowing. It is a sort of digging around at the roots. Affliction makes us real, so that the fruit is forthcoming. So they were ensamples "to all that believe in Macedonia and in Achaia: for the word of the Lord sounded out from you, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your faith which is towards God has gone abroad, so that we have no need to say anything". I read these verses twice because they are so simple and direct as to the subject I am presenting to you -- how quick results will come, results marked by patience too, as the soil is right. They received the word in much tribulation with joy of the Holy Spirit. So that the Spirit of God was there as the apostle ministered, and the soil was developed, and the seed sown sprang up in the ordering of God and matured in a few weeks. There was a 'sound' as he says: "The word of the Lord sounded out from you, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your faith which is towards God has gone abroad". One would question as to the 'sounding' -- as to what kind of sound is heard in our town, where we are -- in *this* town. The christian's position is here. Christ went into heaven as the high priest of old went in to the holiest. On the skirts of his garments there was a bell and a pomegranate, and bell and a pomegranate, all round. As he went in, the sound was heard without. That is the presence of Christ in heaven now is to have
{26}
a corresponding sound here in the saints; in the towns and villages and cities in which we are, there is to be a sound. And so, when the Holy Spirit came, there was a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind. True christianity is marked by a definite sound reflecting what is of God, and it is to be heard wherever the saints of God are gathered; wherever they are set, there is to be a sound, not only in their own towns, but in the district or country, and indeed, as the apostle says, "in every place". How pleasing it is for those who have to do with the things of God, in visiting the brethren, to be able to speak of them in this way; that there is a sound of testimony -- the word of God sounding in the brethren -- "The word of the Lord sounded out from you".
One hopes that this matter may be taken to heart, because after all, lifeless meetings are not what God intends; not that I am saying these exist, but we are in danger of it. I am not imputing anything to any gathering or any person more than to myself -- but God is looking for fruit and He comes, and searches for it, and if it is not there something happens, for God is God. So that we should serve Him with reverence and godly fear.
{27}
INDUCING WORSHIP
@John 4: 23, 24; @Exodus 12: 21 - 27; @2 Samuel 7: 12, 14, 18 - 22; @1 Chronicles 29: 20, 22
My remarks will deal with what induces worship to God. In @John 4 the Lord, in conversing with the woman at the well, introduced the Father, saying, "The Father seeks such as his worshippers"; referring to those who worship Him "in spirit and truth". She had introduced the subject of worship and the Lord had seized the opportunity to say wonderful things which, ordinarily, we would hardly expect Him to say to such a one. But God was working in this woman and the Lord paid attention to her remarks and said things to her that we do not find Him saying to anyone else, remarks that we refer to constantly, and rightly so. These remarks are found in John's gospel which unfolds to us the declaration of God, that He has needs, speaking reverently, and hence the Father *seeks* worshippers. The quality of those who worship is in mind, for He goes on to say, "God is a spirit, and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth". There is no deviation from these remarks; they convey the divine standard as to worship.
I want to show, first of all, that ministry induces worship. God approaches men in a minister; that is, in Christ, and then in ministers. There are two words used, one implying servile or slavish ministry -- the other official or dignified ministry. Normally, both are combined in every minister. Moses and Aaron represent the ministry in the Old Testament. God expended great care upon them to this end. Primarily, Moses possessed the light and thoughts of God, and Aaron was the speaker. In their first service they occasioned worship, as it says in @Exodus 4: 31, "When they heard ... they bowed their heads and worshipped". Thus the people met God.
{28}
So that, normally, God comes into contact with us through ministry. The verses in chapter 12 show the power of ministry as normally exercised. They are the words of Moses. Earlier in the chapter Jehovah speaks in a great general communication of His mind in regard to the passover, the great institution that was to exercise such an influence in Israel, and in which the Lord Himself took part, as we all know. But the verses I have read, beloved brethren, are Moses¬ presentation of what Jehovah had spoken to him. And you will observe that there is a great abridgment of what Jehovah had spoken, and there were certain additions. But what I am endeavouring to say is that ministry is not only intended to refresh us, and instruct us, and edify us, but to induce worship. And so Moses epitomizes what Jehovah communicated to him, on the principle of brevity, for ordinarily we take in but little at a time. Brevity and pungency with affection behind what is said are important. And so you will find that the great minister Paul, we might say, constantly introduces the spirit of worship into his ministry. He is not so unduly occupied with the service in hand as to shut out the additional thoughts that would enter into it. The minister always keeps his mind free so that in his service there is the introduction of God, some recognition of God -- how great God is. Thus the feelings of the minister are calculated to convey the greatness of God to those ministered to: "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!". How persons would be affected were they to hear the apostle Paul preach "the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus)". And so, in various instances, we find his feelings coming out spontaneously as he dealt with the great features of the truth. You can understand that those to whom he ministered would become worshippers.
{29}
And that was the intent, for if a convert has not become a worshipper, of what moral value is he to God? The Thessalonians "turned to God from idols to serve a living and true God". So that, characteristically, evangelisation has in mind to secure worshippers.
And so Moses, in a few words, conveys to the elders of Israel what Jehovah had said about the passover. And in doing so he introduced the use of the hyssop. You may ask Moses, Why did you bring in that idea? Well, it was his skill as a minister. Hyssop implies that if I am to be a worshipper I must be small. It grows out of the wall, "From the cedar tree that is on Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall" was a moral conception in the mind of Solomon. And Moses also introduced the thought of the bason. Why did he use that word? It is not in the general instruction he received. The bason was for the blood. It is referred to again in chapter 24 in relation to the service of God. Think of the precious blood of Christ, beloved brethren! If the blood is to be preserved in a bason, a vessel, it is to be kept in all its preciousness! It is that we may have a true estimate of it and of the "cup of blessing which we bless". The idea, thus, is carried forward into the Lord's supper; there is a vessel; there is that in which it is conserved and presented to us, out of which we drink. We speak of the blood much, but what about the preciousness of it? "Ye have been redeemed, not by corruptible things, as silver or gold ... but by precious blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, the blood of Christ", @1 Peter 1: 18. Think of what that life was to God! Was it mere human addition that Moses introduced? No, beloved brethren, it was a spiritual addition, a spiritual touch in ministry that the Holy Spirit promoted in the minister so as to affect the hearts of the hearers. And so, if I am small the blood is great. Well now, as I said, Moses spread out
{30}
briefly the gist of what Jehovah said to him, and though in brevity, not one iota of Jehovah's thoughts is to be omitted. One marvels, as the Holy Spirit opens up the Scriptures, that not one iota of the whole Bible is to be omitted. Scripture is divinely inspired, and the Holy Spirit helps the ministers to bring in touches from the Scriptures to affect the hearers that they may worship. And so here, the great minister presented the death of Jesus and the wonderful way that Jehovah's care had provided for His people that their houses should be kept intact. Who is there who is a parent who is not concerned about the intactness of his house? God cares for the households of His people, not only that the firstborn is saved, but that the *household* is to be preserved. That precious blood, as it were, is put upon the lintel and door-posts with the hyssop by parents that fear God. And the presentation of it induces worship: the people "bowed their heads and worshipped".
Next I would speak of sonship. God addresses Himself to men in a Man. The reflection of God's love in the minister affects men. Hence Luke presents to us the kind of Man Jesus was. Think of how He ministered in @Luke 4! His demeanour as minister affected His hearers; they wondered at His words. But my thought is sonship; that is, it is not now Christ as a minister, but Christ as Son. And so David had in his mind to build a house for Jehovah and he spoke of it to Nathan. At first Nathan encouraged him to proceed but Jehovah spoke to him that night telling him to say certain things to David, which brought in the great fact of sonship. Solomon was not yet born, but light as to the great fact of sonship is introduced and what developed is that David went in and sat before Jehovah. Why did he do that? Well, he was affected by what Jehovah had said through Nathan. Would that some here would be affected tonight by the thought
{31}
of the house, and that it belongs to the sons! The Lord Jesus said, "The bondman abides not in the house forever, the son abides for ever. If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free". We are to be free to come in, certainly, and free to *stay* in. David went in, we are told, after hearing the words of Nathan. You may be sure they were said in ministerial power! Nathan was a real minister! He stimulated David to move towards God -- and he went in and sat before Jehovah, and he tarried there. Read it at your leisure. You will be impressed by the appellations by which he addresses the Deity. The nearer we get to God, dear brethren, the greater He becomes to us, and the more worship is induced in our hearts, so that we have liberty to address Him with titles that are proper to Him.
And now I want to show how headship in Christ induces worship. That is what David represents in the closing section of 1 Chronicles. Solomon sat on the throne before David died, but immediately before that, according to the narrative in 1 Kings, David was advanced in years and obtained no warmth. But in 1 Chronicles he is seen as before God, as it were, in supernatural power. And it is only in that power that we can be before God -- out of weakness we are made strong. But from Chapter 23 to the end of 1 Chronicles we are told of David's disposition of what there was in his day; and that is going on at the present time, beloved brethren. The Lord Jesus is making disposition of what He has. All are not available, but those who are available He makes disposition of, and that is headship. As I understand headship, as presented in David here, it is to get the most out of what there is. It is the very converse of one-man ministry. One-man ministry dominates christendom, whereas headship is to dispose of what there is so as to get the very most out of it. Hence, the Levites are mentioned first in chapter 23. There
{32}
are some thirty-eight thousand of them, and David divided them into twenty-four courses. There were the Levites, the priests, the singers, the doorkeepers, and then the military. However they are viewed, as you look at these chapters, you find that David disposes of them so as to get the very best results. And then, in the verse I read, he said to all the congregation, "Bless now Jehovah your God. And all the congregation blessed Jehovah the God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and did homage to Jehovah and the king".
Is it possible that some here have had no thought about taking part in the service of God? It is the first thing that you should think of, that you *should* take part. You may be a sister, but that does not mean that you should not take part, for the body requires that *all* should be in the matter, "All the congregation blessed Jehovah". All should worship. Headship is to the end that everyone should take part, that everyone should function, that everyone should add to what is there.
In chapter 23 David reduced the age of the Levites by his last words to "from twenty years old and upward", as if to say, This is my dying word to you -- reduce the age of the Levites. What does he mean? It is to increase the number! The Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward in @Numbers 4, and in @Numbers 8 the age is brought down to twenty-five, but the last words of David, in @1 Chronicles 23, bring the age down to twenty. It means that they were so perfectly delightful to God that He says, I wish to increase their number. Is there a young person here in doubt? The Lord has need of you. He wants to make the most of you; that is the principle of headship. He knows you well; He knows your antecedents; He knows you thoroughly; He says, I want you!
{33}
There is also the thought of refinement -- two hundred and eighty-eight refined and cultured persons who are singers, family singers. There is the number; divide it by twenty-four! There is the teacher with the scholar, the small as well as the great. Let there be no discrimination! Bring all in! There are twelve in each course; no guess-work. The Lord knows them that are His! *All* are known, but how much more those who are available! He knows them, as Jehovah said about Aaron the Levite: "I know that he can speak well". So that headship, I believe, is the last great feature. The Lord is, working to get the greatest results from what is available. He is bringing in the young. "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou established praise". And so David says to all the congregation, "Bless now Jehovah your God". The Lord would speak to you on the principle of headship; He would put in His claim, "And all the congregation blessed Jehovah the God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and did homage".
And then it says, in verse 21, "And they sacrificed sacrifices to Jehovah, and offered up burnt-offerings to Jehovah, on the morrow after that day". That is, not only was that day under the influence of David and his headship, but the morrow. That is, the principle of continuance is brought in. The people rejoiced together and they made Solomon king the second time. Christ, as Son increases in our estimation and appreciation under such circumstances.
Well, that is what I had in mind -- that worship is induced by ministry, first of all; and then our apprehension of God's thoughts as to sonship lead us to worship; and, finally, as under the headship of Christ, the whole system is disposed in order that there may be the greatest possible response in worship to God. May the Lord bless the word!
{34}
WORSHIP
@Exodus 4: 29 - 31; @Exodus 12: 25 - 27; @Exodus 34: 5 - 8; @Exodus 33: 10
I have in mind to speak about worship, and I have selected my scriptures from this book so that it may become clear that worship is intended by God to mark His people from the outset, that is, from the time of one's conversion, and that each may understand that it is not merely for those who have advanced in the truth but for all. Hence we find that, in the gospel of John, it enters into a conversation between the Lord and a woman, who had in herself no moral right to speak about such a holy subject, but she did speak of it; she introduced it into the conversation, evidently because her soul had been reached, the Lord, having spoken to her in a prophetic way, had brought her sins to her mind, and, as the sequel shows, she had begun to judge them, she had begun to repent. It is to this very thing she alluded in speaking of Christ afterwards, that He had told her all things she had ever done. It was therefore in no perfunctory way that she introduced the subject of worship, nor did the Lord, who knew it well and who continued the subject in a most exalted way, deter her at all. In no way did He indicate to her that it was not for her to speak of such a holy subject so early in her contact with Him; it was quite apropos. No doubt if she came into fellowship and into service later, as doubtless she did, she would shine in it. She would not be behind in her part in that service for she was one of those as to whom it is said that their conscience is purged from dead works to serve the living God. That is the end in mind. So also with another notable case contemplated by the apostle Paul in his letter to the Corinthians -- an unconverted man or an ignorant man coming into the christian assembly and coming under the power of the prophetic word. He would
{35}
be convicted, the secrets of his heart would be made manifest, and he would fall down, the apostle says, and worship God. It is as if it would be the first thing after he was convicted of sin and judged himself. In truth the gospel is the light of God; it brings God into a man's soul, with the result that normally there is an immediate response to God. If there is not, the fault is with the person who professes to believe; something is holding him; there is some reserve. Alas! it has to be owned that it is so with most of us. How slow we are, after we profess to receive the light of the gospel, to respond in the fellowship of God's Son, and of His death and of the Spirit, in the worship of God. Many put if off for weeks, months, or even years -- whereas God is looking for an immediate return.
We see another case in the tenth cleansed leper, who was a Samaritan. There was an immediate return on his part, but not with the nine. They failed to return to give glory to God. But one returned; he fell down and gave glory to God. It was an immediate reaction from the light of the gospel, the light of God entering his soul.
All these instances illustrate what is in mind, and why I have turned to Exodus. It is the initial ministerial book, typical of our exodus from the world and it covers the exercises as we are leaving, in fact, before we formally leave. This book contemplates that there should be response to God as His light comes to us. There may be young ones here who have never thought of worshipping God, though they may say they confessed the Lord some time back. The word would be for all such, particularly that they may delay no longer, that they may see that God is looking for immediate reaction, not a matter of weeks, months, and years, but an immediate reaction from the word of the gospel received in the soul.
{36}
The gospel narratives furnish many more instances than I have mentioned, and Exodus would elucidate the point, as I hope to show, not only as to young believers, but in Moses himself, the great mediator and deliverer, under God, of His people; he worshipped, too. The passage read in chapter 4 contemplates the reception of the ministry of God. Moses and Aaron appear as the ministers of God acting together, for it is an important thing in service that the servants who minister are of one mind, able to act together. Two are always better than one, even in service; and so, if there is to be this unity in service on the part of those who are qualified to serve in a special way, the history of Moses and Aaron must be looked into. We see God's great concern about them, particularly Moses. What a history his is! It is a history from his infancy. Not so with Aaron. We hear nothing of him until he is about eighty-three years of age. Not that he did not have a history with God, but the Spirit of God passes over it until he is about to enter the divine service, and then God tells Moses about his brother. He knew more about Aaron than Moses did, I am sure, and it is well for all those who serve to understand that God knows all about us, that He would put us together and help us to serve together. He would tell one about another -- some good thoughts about him. The Lord does that if we wait upon Him about fellow-servants. He would give us to understand just what each one is and how he is to be regarded; it is important that we should understand each other and have an exercise to come to a right judgment of each other; God would give it to us for He intends His servants to work together. So He says to Moses, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?". He is called a Levite before Moses, not simply because he was of the tribe of Levi, but he evidently had the characteristics of a Levite, known to God. No one
{37}
can serve God unless he has those characteristics, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also behold, he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart". That is a fine commendation for God Himself to give of one servant to another, and we need these commendations, and shall get them if we ask God about them; but even if we do not ask we will get them as we are open for them.
The meeting takes place on the mountain of God, which is another important point to be observed, because the mountain of God refers to the place of divine reserves, and servants have all to go there. We all get our supplies from the same source. And there was an expression of affection between them. Aaron was three years older than Moses and would thus be at a peculiar disadvantage, indeed Moses would be too, because age enters into the calculations of servants. The older we are the more apt we are to make much of our age; it is a part of our capital and we do well to discount that capital; it becomes a test to servants when such disparity exists between them. But the affection is here between Moses and Aaron, and expressed too. Moses had the lead; God never overlooked that. There was no one like him in God's mind at that time, "My servant Moses", He says. When Aaron and Miriam questioned him later there was no one like him, one to whom God spoke face to face as a man speaks to his friend. But they were of one mind here, and according to what God said, and Aaron spoke to the people. God had said, "I know that he can speak well". And so in our verse it says, "And Aaron spoke all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses". Moses received the communications; they passed through him, for there is only one mediator. He was the apostle, the one through whom the messages came, and how many there were! It would be
{38}
an interesting matter to count up the number of messages that Moses received from Jehovah, I suppose every message added to him in a moral way. He would not grow weary of receiving them. They came from between the cherubim on the mercy-seat. Moses tells us that he heard a voice speaking to him from there. He always had access there, I do not say that all the messages came to him just there, but still, that was the principle. And Aaron was his spokesman; at least, at the beginning. God says, "I know that he can speak well". So that good speaking is important in the service of God; not eloquence, of course, the mere putting together of words, nor gesticulations, but such speech as is suitable for divine communications. Hence we find that Paul, as compared with Barnabas, was the chief speaker, although some rivals of his at Corinth said his speech was contemptible. Still, according to certain records, he and Barnabas "so spoke that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed". Stress is on the speaking. So here. Moses and Aaron gather the elders together. They move rightly, and we are told that "Aaron spoke all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and did the signs before the eyes of the people". And then it says, "And the people believed. And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped". How pleasing that would be in a gospel meeting! We hear of a hundred being converted, or fifty, or twenty-five, but countings are not very certain. How delightful it would be, and what an evidence of the genuineness of the confessions, if each one bowed his head and worshipped! What a sight it would be! And why should this not be so? Is not the message today greater than what we read here? Think of the full declaration of God in Christ set out in the gospel, testifying to His love and to His
{39}
righteousness. His righteousness toward the believer and *upon* the believer. Think of the righteousness of God coming upon a wicked person like the woman of Samaria as believing the testimony; and think of His power known in the soul -- for in truth that is the order in Romans; it is the righteousness of God, the power of God, and the love of God. The righteousness is in chapter 3, the power in chapter 4 and the love in chapter 5. Is that not enough, as genuinely received into the soul, to move the soul to worship? I think so. And each of us may well question himself as to whether it has been his history. Is it true of me that I worship God? It may have been observed as I read these passages that it is not said that they worshipped God; the point is they *worshipped*. The thing is so manifest; there is no need to say that they worshipped God. It would be well for us to look back on our histories, and compare our present state of soul as to whether we really do worship. These people *worshipped*; they bowed their heads and worshipped. The light had come to them through these servants. First it says that they believed, and then, "when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped". I am not attempting to preach the gospel, but I do wish to impress upon everyone and myself too, the immediate intended effect and reaction of the gospel in the soul of the believer -- that I might be characteristically a worshipper, purged and sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
Well now, the twelfth chapter is an advance on this. It is a question of redemption and the passover. The Levitical thought comes in again. The account of the passover, as given by Jehovah to Moses, takes up twenty verses in this chapter. Moses, in giving it to the people, reduces it to something like seven or
{40}
eight verses. He does not leave out anything that should be mentioned, but he introduces things that Jehovah did not mention at all. He is a true Levite in this service, and if there is one thing that should affect us, it is the desirability of brevity -- to be brief without omitting anything that should be said, just saying what is needed. So he speaks of using hyssop and a bason, which Jehovah did not mention, according to the record; and then he speaks about what their answer to their inquiring children would be; "It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses". He makes a point of that -- delivered our *houses*. And you can see how suitable that is because it is the children that are in mind. This is not a Sunday-school matter; it is the great servant Moses who was faithful in all God's house, who is speaking here. He is speaking about children. He is anticipating that children will enquire about the passover. It is lovely to think of it in a spiritual sense, how, in Israel's history, children would enquire about the passover lamb and the ritual of the passover. What did it mean? One can understand a child of four or five asking his parents, 'Why was it necessary to kill the lamb?'. What an opportunity for the parents to bring home to such a child, in the youthful period of life, what the meaning of that passover lamb is -- "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed for us", we are told. What a lesson that is to teach children -- "our passover". The children are included, for everyone in the house is included. The children are holy, we are told in @1 Corinthians 7. The children of believers are in a sphere where they hear of the most holy things. It enters into the make-up of the household that the parents include the children in these things -- "our passover, Christ" -- children and all. The children were included in the provision
{41}
of the manna, too. There was to be an omer for each one in the house. If the parents had eight children, then there would be ten omers. You can understand a child saying, Why should I have the same amount of manna as my father and my mother? Well, what an opportunity of bringing the children into the thing, of leading them on in a most spiritual way; for it is a question of their affections and interests. They can be led on to the most exalted things in a holy way. In the book of Joshua it was anticipated that they would ask about the twelve stones that were set up at Gilgal. Here Moses says, '*our* houses'. One can understand how two children -- neighbours, for the idea of the *nearest* neighbour is contemplated in this chapter -- speaking to each other about what had happened in the celebration of the passover. How lovely it would be to listen to such a conversation! What happened in your house? one might ask. And what happened in your house? the other would ask. Well, one may say, Jehovah passed over our houses, both yours and mine. We are sharers alike in this wonderful deliverance so that we are no longer bond-slaves in Egypt. They were not likely to forget their bitter experience in Egypt, their hard toil at the brick kilns. What rigour! what utter want of consideration in the Egyptians towards them! But now they are about to be delivered out of it, for that is all included in what the passover signifies. They are to tell of the way Jehovah "delivered our houses"! And so we are told that when they heard this they bowed their heads and worshipped. They did that. They had not heard this message before; it was the first time they had heard it, and it effected a wonderful state in their souls. That is the point I would endeavour to show, that this matter is not for the more advanced brothers and sisters; it is initial; it is the immediate reaction to the gospel in the believer's
{42}
soul. If it be not so, then his conversion is questionable.
Now in chapter 34 they heard the mediator himself. This is a wonderful scene. Moses is alone in it; not even Joshua is with him at this second ascent of the mountain. It is a scene that is set down by the Spirit of God to affect all readers; to inspire us with the desire to have first-hand relations with God. Paul said, for instance, "... whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God". This is not a matter for children, exactly. They can hear about it and enquire about it, but it is a matter for spiritual persons. Moses represents an advanced believer, one in the service of God in a very distinctive way. He had just vindicated God in the presence of all Israel, encouraging the people to be for God, and he brought about conditions of worship as I hope to show; but I am not speaking of that at the moment. I am speaking now of Moses -- a man who had effected so much for the people and for God. He is fully owned of God. He had desired to see Jehovah's glory. How delightful that was to God! "Show me thy glory", he had said. God would gladly have done so, but the times did not permit of it; it was not opportune. I suppose God kept this in mind as to Moses until on the mount of transfiguration. God would never let it out of His mind that here was a man intent upon seeing His glory. God buried that man! What He must have thought of him! Satan wanted his body, but Michael contended for it. Moses¬ body was protected, as every believer's body is. But God signalised His servant in that oft spoken of incident in the New Testament -- the mount of transfiguration. Moses was there! You say, Was he there in his body? I am not saying that. You say, Is it possible that all the departed saints are being used of God? I am not saying that. I would contradict anyone who would say that. But Moses was used of
{43}
God. Elias was used of God after he died. He was on the mount also. Others, who had been asleep, are said to have come out of their tombs and entered into the holy city and appeared unto many after Christ's resurrection. You say, Where are they? I do not know. I am confident that God is looking after that, whether in the body or out of the body. God allows us certain glances into the unseen, but we must not attempt to go further and force things. God would say, Leave all that with Me. As regards Deity, God has come out in manifestation, but let us not intrude into the things which are beyond us; we have not seen everything. Even as to angels, we know but little. There is more revealed than we can understand. Let us give ourselves to what is revealed, for it belongs to us and to our children. And so God brought Moses into that glory scene on the "holy mount". Whether it was in the body or out of the body, we do not know, but God brought him there. It was a simple thing for God to do. Moses sought to see God's glory, and so we see how he was given to appear in glory himself, fully equal to the position. He and Elias were speaking to Jesus "of his departure which he was about to accomplish in Jerusalem". What an honour it was!
Well, Jehovah said to Moses, "I will make all my goodness pass before thee ... and I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts, but my face shall not be seen". We see God in Christ. The glory of God is in the face of Jesus Christ. But do we bow down every time we see that? And do we worship? One often thinks of the writer of @Psalm 119, how he got up through the night: "At midnight I rise up to give thanks unto thee" (verse 62). He was not simply doing it lying down on the bed, which would also be accepted, if done reverently, but he got up through the night. I think God is looking for that in us, that there should be this kind of movement with
{44}
us, that He should be thus in our hearts. So that if it be a meeting of this kind, or whatsoever it may be, when God speaks and shows Himself in any way, there should be immediate reaction in the sense of praise and worship, for He deserves it.
Well now, Jehovah came down and stood by Moses: "And Jehovah came down in the cloud, and stood beside him there". How beautiful that is, yet it is not at all beyond us. If we understand the assembly at all, we will see that it is not beyond us. The great thought of the house of God was disclosed to Jacob. In the first vision which he had, Jehovah appeared above the ladder, but in the second vision in Bethel, Jehovah came down and stood beside Jacob. That is the great principle that runs through; God draws near. He loves the idea of nearness. He comes near to us, but then, He would have us to get nearer to Him. And so in Hebrews, we have, "Let us approach". Why not? We have access into the holiest "by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, and having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience, and washed as to our body with pure water". @Hebrews 10: 19 - 22. Why should we not draw near? Everything is provided to make us suitable to draw near. Jehovah came down to Moses. He would be near. He descended in the cloud and stood with Moses there, and He passed by and proclaimed, "Jehovah, Jehovah God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy unto thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but by no means clearing the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, upon the third and upon the fourth generation". This is what God proclaimed. It does not go as far as the gospel
{45}
does in our day. Nor does it at all touch the mystery, which was hidden in God even then. But it says that "Moses made haste, and bowed his head to the earth and worshipped". Think of what is available to us week after week, through one and another, by God's Spirit sent down from heaven. What unfoldings there are! But what is our reaction? What are our services? It is a matter of God showing Himself. In chapter 24 God called Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders to go up and worship, but here God came down in the cloud and stood beside Moses. For us this would be moral elevation; God comes near and shows Himself. And then the reaction -- Moses worshipped! Anything less than this in assembly service is wanting; anything short of reaching God is wanting. He is to be worshipped. Not that Jesus is not to be worshipped; He is to be worshipped, of course, for He is God. He is to be worshipped even in a mediatorial sense. But then God is the great objective in service. Any service that does not reach God is wanting, and God wants completion in our service. Moses *made haste*, and bowed his head to the earth and worshipped. Think of a person coming into the service of God, pretending to serve God and yet leaving without worshipping Him! God is the great Objective in His house. The Lord Jesus makes that plain in all His ministry, and especially in the epistle to the Hebrews. And I may say here that, in order to understand the gospels, we must understand the epistles. We must learn from the epistles; the truth for us is in the epistles. The ministry of Christ is universal, not only relating to the assembly but to Israel, for He is to rule over the nations, and they are all to be gathered together before Him, according to the gospels. The epistles are narrower. We approach the gospels through the epistles to see what applies to us, and as I was saying, the Lord makes it plain in the
{46}
epistles that God is to be worshipped. Paul says, "To us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things". There are things said about Jesus, in the mediatorial sense, that are also attributable to God. For instance, Jesus made everything -- "by whom are all things" -- but then in other similar passages it says of God, "of whom are all things" -- all bringing out in wonderful perfection and variety the deity of Christ. But when we come to distinction of Persons, the Father is the supreme Object of worship, and the Mediator will never be satisfied until He brings the people to God. Moses led the people out to God. And here he "made haste, and bowed his head to the earth and worshipped". It was an intelligent action, and he made haste to do it.
In chapter 33 we see how conditions for worship had been established in the presence of idolatry. The tabernacle had been taken and pitched outside the camp. Joshua remained inside the tent, a spiritual element, as it were, maintaining the position. And then it says, "And it came to pass, when Moses went out to the tent, all the people rose up, and stood every man at the entrance of his tent, and they looked after Moses until he entered into the tent. And it came to pass when Moses entered into the tent ... Jehovah talked with Moses. And all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the tent; and all the people rose and worshipped, every man at the entrance of his tent". Now the tent door is not properly the place of worship; not that it is despised, for it does not seem so here. The place of worship was established *outside the camp* -- pitched outside, and it was *there* that God came down to speak to Moses. What a scene it was! Think of a person remaining in his own tent when such a glorious scene was opened up to him! We are told, in verse 7, that "every one which sought
{47}
the Lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp". If there is any one here who is still in the camp, he is missing this. I am not denying that there may be worship in your heart, though in very cloudy circumstances, but your place is outside the camp if you are a christian. Do not stay where you are a moment longer. God has established a place where He is to be worshipped. It is outside the camp, and if there is one here who is in a human organisation, a man-made religious system, the word to you is in verse 7. "Every one which sought the Lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp". That is where to worship properly; that is where God came down and spoke to Moses; that is where Joshua remained. He did not depart from the tabernacle.
May God bless these thoughts to us!
{48}
THE BRIDEGROOM'S PRIESTLY TURBAN AND THE BRIDE'S JEWELS
@Isaiah 61: 10
I have in mind to speak of the bridegroom decking himself, as a priest, with the priestly turban. This fits in with the idea of the believer's household, affording a place for the ark. The ark requires to be handled in a priestly way. In @1 Samuel 7 it says, "And the men of Kirjath-jearim came, and fetched up the ark of Jehovah, and brought it into the house of Abinadab on the hill, and hallowed Eleazar his son to keep the ark of Jehovah" (verse 1). And then the ark was taken out of Abinadab's house in @2 Samuel 6, where they "set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab, which was upon the hill; and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drove the new cart" (verse 3). But then it says later, "Uzzah reached after the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen had stumbled. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God". I refer to these scriptures to bring out the necessity for this priestly turban being donned by each bridegroom; that is, it should be donned in view of household functions.
The turban, or the high-priestly head covering, in Exodus, is a very distinctive part of the priest's habiliments and had a golden plate on which was inscribed, Holiness to Jehovah. High-priestly service, of course, lay in the sanctuary. Hence the requirement that his head covering should be dedicated in holiness. It alludes to headship in Christ, of course, which is perfect. But the sons of Aaron also had head-caps; high caps they were called. Theirs did not have a golden plate with an inscription on it, but still, they would correspond with the
{49}
head-dress of the high priests, the allusion being that the intelligence, the use of the head, should be in holiness. In nothing, I believe, are we more likely to transgress than in our minds, and particularly if we have good minds. The apostle Paul says to the Corinthians, "We all have knowledge, knowledge puffs up, but love edifies", @1 Corinthians 8: 1. Indeed, Paul's writings in his two letters to the Corinthians are marked by the use of the priestly turban. He was not a bridegroom, of course; but he presented Christ as the Bridegroom. Indeed he says to the Corinthians, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ", @2 Corinthians 11: 2. He was, on Christ's behalf, securing the bride in Corinth, and in doing so the priestly turban was in evidence. He used it, in principle, in the careful discrimination with which he ministered to these saints. He did not tell them everything he knew. In speaking to the Ephesians he enlarges on what he knew, saying he desired that they should know his knowledge of the mystery. There was one man who knew the mystery! The knowledge he had was not that which puffs up; indeed he speaks of being less than the least of all the saints. And in many ways this would appear, but particularly in his measurement and discrimination in the use of Scripture, in the use of knowledge, "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified", @1 Corinthians 2: 2. Think of a brother like that, not judging it well "to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". He would have in mind their tendencies and would save them from what they were prone to; vying with one another and puffed up because of their knowledge. So that the apostle determined to restrict himself so that they should not be damaged by imitating Paul. Otherwise, they may have said, Paul spread out everything! But in serving, it is not a question of
{50}
telling people what you know; it is telling people what they need, after carefully determining what they do need, and presenting it to them insofar as you may, as the Lord gives grace for it. We are so likely to catch on to any display of a special intelligence. There should be no such thing as a parrot found in the assembly of God. That should have no place anywhere! The apostle says, "Knowledge puffs up, but love edifies". Edification is needed in all these things.
Well now, the bridegroom here, we are told, is clothed by Jehovah. It says, "I will greatly rejoice in Jehovah, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with the priestly turban", @Isaiah 61: 10. The turban is what *he* puts on; "as a bridegroom decketh himself". He is head, but his headship is priestly. It is not the mere exercise of mentality -- knowing much -- but priestliness enters into it. Otherwise there would be no room for the ark in the household. If the ark is to have a place in the christian household, there must be the priestly turban on the head of the bridegroom, that is, the husband. It is a question of headship. And how can I have a house according to God without headship? We cannot, dear brethren.
The Lord, in entering into one house, took the housefather's place. There were two persons on the way to recovery; they had been on the wrong road, but He walked with them, and now they are getting into the right way, and the Lord took the housefather's place. It is wonderful to ponder that scene at Emmaus! They constrained Him to come in, and He went in. How long it took to walk there I do not know, but the Lord was there with them and as the meal was placed on the table He gave thanks for it. We see the priestly turban in use
{51}
there! And when they returned to Jerusalem, in the assembly, we might say, He stood in their midst. You see the priestly turban in use there, too. It was not much in evidence with the disciples, but He opened their understanding that they might understand the Scriptures. He had expounded the Scriptures in the way, but now He refers to the law and the prophets and the psalms -- in the assembly. That is to say, He would open up their understanding in a priestly way; the turban would be in evidence, and the intention was that *they* should use it. So that we are to consider this matter as to our intelligence in our houses, as to whether it is used in a priestly way; that this knowledge is to function in a priestly way before our wives, and before our children, and before whoever may be in the house.
And then we are told, "and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels". With *her* jewels! Now we get in Revelation the supreme thought of the bride -- the bride of Christ. She comes down from God out of heaven as a bride adorned for her husband. We are not told what the adornment is, but the point is that she is adorned "as a bride ... for her husband". She has her Husband in mind. What adornment will the Husband value in that day? But here, the bride is said to adorn herself with her jewels. They are *hers*; they are not borrowed; they are *hers*! If we transfer the thought to spiritual adornment, that is not borrowed. Jewels are often borrowed and imitation is often used, but these are *real* jewels and they belong to the person. And if they are her own, spiritually, they will remain. One of them will be subjection, making full room for the influence of the priestly turban -- the intelligence that is regulated by priestliness. It requires subjection. The church is subjected to Christ. Knowledge, developed in a priestly way, requires subjection in those who receive the instruction. So that clearly
{52}
the jewels here would be what the bride has; certain qualities that are not merely natural; they are the fruit of the Spirit; they are her own! They are "her jewels".
Well, I trust that these few words will be taken on by each of us who are householders; that our knowledge is not to be simply what we know, but that what we give out at any time should be in priestly power and grace. On the other hand, the wife is to be in subjection, and we shall have the display of the priestly intelligence, the priestly turban. And then there will be room for the ark in the house.
It would appear that there were priestly conditions in the house of Obed-Edom. There had been different conditions in the house of Abinadab on the hill. It was not that he sought the ark; it was put there by agreement among the men of Kirjath-jearim. It had been put in his house and his son Eleazar had been consecrated to keep the ark, but it is a question if the priestly turban was there at all. And I think that God passed judgment on the whole position in what happened to Uzzah. There was a want of priestly intelligence in regard to the ark, and hence the sorrowful judgment that came upon that house.
So that, dear brethren, it is important that we have the priestly head-dress; that there is the unfolding of the knowledge of God in a subjective way and that it is effective in the house. And then Christ has a place in the house, as in the house of Zacchaeus. He received the Lord into his house with joy. And the Lord recognised that Zacchaeus was a son of Abraham; that is to say, he was of that morally dignified line and recognised as such by the Lord Jesus Christ.
May the Lord bless His word!
{53}
GOD'S CARE FOR YOUNG BELIEVERS
@Genesis 2: 8, 9, 15 - 20
I wish to use these verses as setting out how God in His wisdom and love cares for believers, especially young ones. The divine record only proceeds a little way before we get this thought inserted. In chapter 1, Man is said to be created. There is nothing said about his need for a companion in that chapter. The word "Man" includes both man and woman: "male and female created he them". But chapter 2 brings things in from the standpoint of God's own affections and pleasure in what He had created, so that we have the word "formed" there instead of "created". The word "formed" denotes skill of handiwork after a pattern, so that men are not simply the product of the ground. Eve comes under the divine hand in the sense of formation. Formation involves features of life which would be pleasing to the person who formed the things. So that every creature of the field would have some attractiveness for the Creator, but particularly Man. So we have the word "formed" used in regard to him at first. The same word is used for the lower creatures, but Man is distinguished in that he is breathed into by the Creator; he lived by the breath of God; not by the formation of God, but by the *breath* of God he became a living soul.
Formation refers to ornamentation, appearance, the framework. As a result of it God saw His own image in Man, and then He began to think for him. So that Adam comes in immediately as an object of divine interest. We cannot say that of the lower animals, although they had their existence by God and were formed too; there is nothing said about their environment, nor is it indicated that they had a place in the garden, but Jehovah Elohim planted
{54}
the garden eastward in Eden for a purpose. It was by His own hands, we might say. You may be sure that no landscape garden has ever exceeded its beauty. Similarly you may be sure that no houses equalled the midwives¬ houses in Egypt in architecture. But here He planted a garden: "Jehovah Elohim planted a garden in Eden eastward, and there put Man whom he had formed". He was occupied with this great creature whom He had formed and into whom He had breathed. God was intensely interested in Man. He would not be the sole object of interest in the universe, of course, because angels were made before him. We are not told how they were made; there is no evidence that they live by breath, but they were made before Adam, and before this earth, too, on which Adam was set. For as the earth's foundations were laid, the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God, referring to angels, no doubt, shouted for joy. So that God had objects of interest there in the angels, but none of them is a type of Christ, none of them is the image of God. God intended Man for that great honour. He said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness"; that is the divine thought; and now He is occupied with Adam and He plants the garden and places him in the garden.
Then it is said that "out of the ground Jehovah Elohim made every tree grow that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food". That is a question of providing for Adam; the "sight" would be Adam's sight, and the eater of the food would be Adam. Jehovah Elohim (the compound name is used indicating that He is entering into close contact with Adam) is going to provide for him and care for him, and if any need arises in Adam's history, Jehovah Elohim will see to it that it is met. Sin had not yet come in; so there is no need to use the word 'legitimate', because everything, so far, was perfect.
{55}
Now, applying this to the christian, it is that he is taken up potentially, and the work is to proceed in his formation and development, so that he may meet the divine needs, for God has needs in His affections. And so the believer is taken up by God for His pleasure. The first epistle to the Corinthians regards the saints as "called" -- called saints. That does not means that 'saints' is their title; it means that God has called them, so that they are available to Him. That epistle develops this great thought of divine care for believers, and how we have been called into the fellowship of God's Son. God has thought of you long ago, long before you had any existence at all: "Whom he has predestinated, these also he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified". But I am speaking of the calling, and that He foreknew you before He called you. That means that God in His long outlook, back in the countless millenniums of time, or even before time, saw you as you are, born of Him. He has wrought in you now by the Spirit and you have moved on spiritual lines, however little, however feeble, however vague it may be. God sees the whole matter of your history until you are to be established in an unchangeable blessing in eternity. He foreknew you; He foreknew me. Paul says of the Lord that He "loved me and gave himself for me". That would mean that the Lord had seen Paul in His divine outlook, not as he was, an insolent, overbearing man, and a murderer. In that state there was no attraction in him for the Lord to give Himself for him. It was as wrought upon by God that Paul became lovable to Christ. But he says, He *loved* me. There was something to love; something which the Lord foreknew; and so great was the love begotten in the heart of Christ for Paul that He gave Himself for him.
{56}
Now it should touch our hearts to know that the Lord gave Himself for us because He knew us, not in naughtiness, not in self-will, not in stiffneckedness, but in lovableness; and the point now is to reach that in some concrete way. We are told that "the wind blows where it will, and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes, thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". It is a sovereign matter and has in mind the securing of the believer already known in the divine way. All that is of divine purpose is according to what is lovable. God is going to surround Himself with lovable persons, and their lovableness involves formation. It involves breath, too; that is, the Spirit in us. God has taken us on, knowing us from the beginning, so that He might reach the end He had in mind for us.
Now it is the man whom Jehovah Elohim had *formed* that He placed in the garden, according to @Genesis 2: 8. Our first blessing does not involve responsibility on our part, in the sense that it is based upon the work of Christ -- not our works. A young believer is not blessed on the side of responsibility, exactly, but he is given to understand there *is* such a thing as that. So the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is just said to be there, but the stress is laid on the tree that is pleasing to the eye and good for food. That is what you need -- what is pleasurable to the eye and what is good for food; and God puts us where that is available. He has put the tree of the knowledge of good and evil there, but He does not say anything about the responsibility not to eat of it as yet, or the penalty attached to eating it. It is rather that the environment provides a great source of wealth that is enough to overwhelm you; if you have been brought into any need, this is to meet it. The potential richness and the
{57}
actual riches are overwhelming if we are ready to go in for them. From God's side they are overwhelming.
And so the river is said to water the garden; and then it flows out from the garden, where Man was. And that is where you and I are. It does not say the river is for Man, but it indicates that it is an immense idea as to what is good and refreshing and enriching. So that you are to be kept in the new sphere into which you have been introduced through the gospel, because it is not only the gospel of salvation; it is the gospel of *blessing*. We are brought into the blessing that God has prepared for us. But when the river is mentioned as becoming four main streams or heads -- for that is the word used -- then Adam is placed under responsibility; that is, God would have us first to understand that He has brought us into blessing of extreme delightfulness where nothing at all is omitted that we need. There is a source of refreshment; an unending source of riches, for the gold of that land is good; there is bdellium and the onyx stone; there are great potentialities of wealth, and it is all infinite in this realm.
Now in verse 15 we are told that Jehovah Elohim took Man, and put him into the garden of Eden to till and to guard it. That is the next thing; that it is not *all* pleasure, it is not all gratification and enjoyment. God would say, now, There is work to be done; there is the tilling of the garden and there is the guarding of the garden. There is no mention here of the sweat of the face. That is said later, when sin came in, but not here. It is, so to say, a gentleman's life. You will understand what I mean. God is setting up man with plenty; with everything that is pleasant to the eye and good for food; beautiful landscape; nothing wanting to please him so far as his needs go. We are not yet told that he needs a companion; we will hear of that later. The young people *do* need companions, and they need *holy*
{58}
companions, because you will surely become like your companions, and God is going to say, right here in this chapter, that He has the idea of companionship in mind for you. But in the meantime it is a question of what your life is in the new order of things.
So that God has called us into the fellowship of His Son. That is what we are told in @1 Corinthians 1: 9. It is a question of calling; not yet to heaven -- that is more Colossians, Ephesians and Philippians. But in Corinthians we are called into the fellowship of God's Son. And every young person here should begin to look around and see what he has been brought into, and begin to enjoy and partake of the trees. And God would now press upon him that there is the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and He commands in regard of that. This is the first time we have a commandment in Scripture. So that if you have begun to look around, with spiritual vision to see what beautiful trees there are, and what food there is, and what a river there is, and what potential wealth there is, you are now to take on responsibility. What I observe with young people is a great lack of acceptance of responsibility to till and to guard the garden that they have been brought into. It is not only that they should not bring anything damaging into the garden -- or the local assembly, for that is what is in mind -- but they should see that others do not do it. If you are loyal to the fellowship you will not fail to tell of any secret damaging root of evil that is being allowed. That is the *guarding*. There is the tilling and the guarding. You begin to see that you are wonderfully provided for, and you put your hand out to do something, and that something is to till and to guard the garden. Tilling is not arduous labour; there is no sweat, as I said before. God comes into the garden in the cool of the day, meaning that Adam
{59}
would be free at that time of the day for a divine visitation. These are beautiful thoughts, because the God that we have to do with is the God that did all these things for Adam. And He is doing them for us; He had us in mind. He would as much as say, You young people will understand that I am not only enlightening you, but I have made a wonderful environment for you, and I am now just seeking to get you to take on a little responsibility. And that is to be in the way of tilling the garden; doing what you can to help the brethren so that there should be fruit to God. And also, you are to guard the position that there should be no evil root in your own heart, practised in secret or cherished in the mind, which will defile, and that you will not condone it in any other person either. You are guarding the position, because Satan will come in if you do not. The record of how the serpent came in is in the next chapter.
In the first epistle to the Corinthians we have all this that I have been speaking about. There is the calling into the fellowship of God's Son. Think of the magnitude of that! "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord". But then there is a commandment. The whole first epistle to the Corinthians is a commandment, and so you get the word "commanded" in this second allusion to Adam's position in the garden. He is under commandment; later, Jehovah's commandment is called a covenant, and the thought of the covenant attaches to every believer who has part in the fellowship in the assembly. Now, as it were, God said to Adam, 'All this I have done for you; I have set you up in My own image and surrounded you with a most attractive environment; there is the river, an infinite source of supply in the garden; and now I have placed you here just to look after things, to guard the position and to till the land'. There is no need for ploughing or harrowing
{60}
or heavy work; it is just a simple matter of tilling. There may have been some digging, but the word is not used; there is no idea of the sweat of the face, which comes in later. It is God making the position attractive to us, and then He would say, 'Not only have I done this for you, but I want to draw near to you, to establish Myself in your heart; I want you to be in covenant with Me; I want the position consolidated so that you will have a conscience in regard of any movements of yours that may violate this contract'.
You might think God is becoming more severe. But He would tell you that He likes you so well that He wants the bond sealed, and it is not to be violated. He does not wish it said of you, That young man has transgressed the covenant. He does not want to have to say that of any of us. He does not want to make any historical allusions to our naughty ways; God wishes to set us up as men, able to keep a covenant, as it were. He wants to have us near to Him and have us under the bond of covenant. It is the perfect law of liberty, because we are surrounded with everything that is delightful; and it should be delightfully attractive to us to be in bond with the God who is so good to us, as I may say, who has given Jesus for us.
Well, this is only the fringe of things; it is what God does for the believer. He impresses on us what He has done for us, as He said to His people Israel: "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself", @Exodus 19: 4. He wants to draw us into covenant with Him, to have a people near to Him, and to make a nation of priests. These were the thoughts He expressed, to Israel, and He would bring us near, too. And He would enter into covenant with us to place us under responsibility not to violate the position. So that we are in a position
{61}
of covenant; we are set up in relation to God, and God would be severe as to this matter. He *commanded* Adam, and said to him, "Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest of it thou shalt certainly die". The time had come for God to be very definite with Adam, and so with us. Dear brethren, we would appeal to the youth as to definiteness. The winds are blowing hard, the storms and the floods are rising, and we had better get our houses built on a rock, which would mean we are to judge all the things that are negative to what we have here. God is rightly severe about this matter of good and evil. It is a crucial matter, and it is imperative that I be exercised about it, for there is penalty attaching to disobedience.
But I go on to verse 18: "And Jehovah Elohim said, It is not good that Man should be alone". Now we have come to a very interesting matter -- a marital matter. Whether in dealing with it spiritually or literally. God would say, I am thinking of you and I can think for you better than you can think for yourself in this matter. He says, "It is not good that Man should be alone". It is very touching that God should think of us as He thought for Adam. Whether Adam had indicated in some way that he had a pressing need in his heart, we cannot say. But what is presented here is that God had taken account of the need in Adam's heart, that in spite of this wonderful environment he was still wanting; and it was not good for him to be in that condition. God was thinking of him in that way. This would all be accentuated as it applies to a believer. We are to make our requests known unto God; not simply to speak of them, but to make them known to Him. He is ready to take cognizance of what we say, "Be careful about nothing; but in everything, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests
{62}
be made known to God", @Philippians 4: 6. He is ready to take account of the prayers and desires of your heart. But He would have us know that He was thinking of that Himself. You will find that God has always thought for you. How wise to let God think for you!
Now the time has come to bring up this marital question, and every believer is to come to this point, though many have never come to it. There are places where brothers and sisters break bread together, but if the marital thought is not in prospect, such meetings come short; they are questionable. Why not make way for marital relations? We are to be married "to another, who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God", @Romans 7: 4. That is something that should come into your heart. As believers we are said to be married to Another who has been raised from the dead. We are not said to be raised from the dead in Romans. We are here in flesh and blood condition, and that is where this matter of marital relations comes in. It is that we may bring forth fruit to God. I touch on that so that the young people may have some thought of what is in the mind of God for them, and think that they are to be companions of the Christ. We are in need of that. Of course, no one should think of literal marriage in relation to Christ. Marriage to Christ is not literal marriage. But if I do not know what it is to be married to Christ, how can I understand what it is to be married according to God? The passage shows how God is thinking of us first, and then thinking *for* us. He is attracted by His own work in you; He loves you; but He sees the dangers; and now He would say, It is not good that you should be alone.
The next thing is wisdom. Once you reach the marital attitude in christian experience, the question
{63}
arises as to what wisdom you have. So that, first of all, God is thinking for Adam, that it is not good that he should be alone, but first He tests him to see if he can *name* things. If you are going to have a husband, or a wife, as the case may be, you should be able to name him, or her; and choose the *right* name. It is remarkable that God brings up this matter Himself. He saw that Adam was in a state that was not complete, but before proceeding in the matter He would see if Adam was able to name things. How often we are deceived and put the wrong names on things. It is most important, in relation to marriage, that I name things aright. If it is to be "in the Lord", then I must consider what the person is. Can I name what is in the person?
Well, Adam is tested by an animal. It is a form of life. God has formed that creature and it is to be named; and God brings it to Adam. Now, in doing so, God is testing him out to see if he is equal to the new relation which He has in mind for him. Well, can he name the animals? He has already said of Adam that it is not good for him to be alone. All these creatures refer to certain features of life in christians. Animals are used throughout the Scriptures to represent features of life in men and women. And Adam was able to name each one. And, as I said, this matter is raised before the marital matter is raised. The same is true of the fellowship, I should be able to name the evidences of life; I should not be deceived; for many *are* deceived and lose their way because of inability to name things or persons. But with Adam, God would say, I am not going to allow things to be spoiled. I will see if Adam is likely to link up with one of the lower creatures. Think of linking up with a monkey or a giraffe! Adam was wise enough to avoid *that*. The names which he gave illustrate the various features found in persons. Think of persons who grovel in the
{64}
earth and never look up to God! Think of a believer marrying such an one! The Lord healed a woman who was bowed down for eighteen years. Satan had bound her. She could not lift herself up. The Lord *named* her condition. *Satan* had done it.
Well, Adam saw that there was nothing to answer to his mind and affections in the lower creation. His mind repelled any such thought as that. It says that "he found no helpmate, his like". It was Adam's own decision. God knew the condition well enough, but Adam decided the answer; he found no helpmate his like. The book of Job tells us how noble some of these creatures are, but Adam would say that none of those creatures was his like.
Adam was qualified now for the divine thought. Whether in natural marriage or spiritual, it is a question of headship, of naming things, of calling persons according to what they are. So that now God can provide what Adam needs; he has shown his qualifications, that he can marry intelligently and that he can marry the object of his affections -- one that is like him. That is the position, and God would work the matter out. What a transaction it was! God was thinking of Adam! And He is thinking of believers; every moment He is thinking of you and for you, to provide for the needs of your souls, so that you might be satisfied. You should not go off after the animals or wander about to gratify yourself. Think of God taking measures to meet your needs! He caused Adam to go to sleep. Think of the blessed God causing a man to go to sleep -- a deep sleep such as would dull every sensibility in his being, so that He should bring into being what Adam needed. And so He brings a woman forward.
Well, I need not enlarge further upon this, but it is said that God brought the woman to the man, as much as to say that He would go the full length for
{65}
you in providing for you, potentially; not bringing this creature out of the man and then letting him find her, but he brought the woman to the man. He is still testing him as to whether this new institution is to be in intelligence. He knows what appeals to our intelligence. God is in this marital relation, whether it is spiritual or literal, it is to be a matter of intelligence, otherwise you will have darkness; you will have sorrow untold.
God does not say one word to Adam, but Adam sees the creature and he says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh". It is the rounding out of the position from the divine side, and Adam is unmistakably intelligent as to what he is doing. He sees all things clearly. So he said, "This time it is bone of my bones" -- that is in contrast to the bones of the lower creatures -- it is now bone of *his* bones, flesh of *his* flesh; "this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". The whole position is rounded out in intelligence, so that from the divine side, at least, there is a pattern and type; there is no room for the devil to come in. The sequel shows that the moral side had to be dealt with, but so far the position is rounded out, I am speaking of it, now, as to how the believer's position is filled out. You are in a wonderful circle and God is providing for every need of your soul; He sets you up in intelligence, and He is asking you to name that brother and that sister. What do you think of them? And so the apostle Paul says to the Corinthians, "I speak as to intelligent persons". The position is not rounded out until we come to that; it is in that connection that we come into the marital relations, that we are intelligent persons and we know what we are to do. The Lord's supper is the bond of all that. Before you get the truth of the Supper developed the apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons, do *ye* judge what I say". You are not a critic, but at
{66}
the same time you can name the evidences of life, and you can say, I am brought into a wonderful circle. That is really what happened when Eve was brought to Adam, I am brought into the joys of family life in the christian circle; it is the rounding out of the whole position, which involves that I am brought into Ephesian conditions, heavenly, spiritual conditions in the heavenlies in Christ. What is there equal to it? Nothing! We have the very best that God can devise for us, and we are set in heaven with companions that we can love; and they can love us.
{67}
COMPLETING MATTERS
@Mark 16: 9 - 20
I wish to speak at this time about the need for the completion of matters in the assembly. This thought has come to my mind in connection with the scriptures read, while in this meeting.
There are persons who question the authenticity of these verses, claiming that they have been added to the book by someone other than the writer of the gospel. But they really are necessary to bind up, or complete, the gospel, and there hardly can be any doubt but that they are a part of Mark's writing. Mark has his own particular way of expressing himself. One thing that characterises him is that he is very brief -- more so than the other gospel writers. But he is most careful to carry matters through to completion. And this is very important, and especially so in assembly matters. The Scriptures tell us that the creation was finished: "And the heavens and the earth and all their host were finished", @Genesis 2: 1. And we are also told *how* the matter was completed. The heavens were garnished, we are told. That suggests adornment -- not only that they were finished, but that they were made beauteous. And Noah finished the ark -- it was completed. The word is, "And Noah did it", @Genesis 6: 22. And so throughout the Scriptures we find incidents in which matters are brought to completion. God would have it so.
The hem of the priest's garment is referred to in @Psalm 133. That suggests a completed matter. The garment had a tidy and orderly conclusion. There were no loose ends flowing. The psalm has in mind Christ glorified and the Holy Spirit given. The garment, therefore, would suggest the assembly where matters are to be completed and orderly; "Let all things be done comelily and with order", @1 Corinthians 14: 40. Tidiness should mark all assembly matters. The
{68}
Lord's garment had a hem. The Spirit of God tells us of it. How perfectly complete were all matters which Jesus did! "I have completed the work which thou gavest me that I should do it", @John 17: 4. And now the Spirit is here to help us that we may complete matters -- and complete them well.
Now in considering the verses read we must take account of what precedes them. It says, earlier in the chapter, that Jesus had risen from the dead and that certain women had gone to the sepulchre where they had seen a man clothed in a white garment who had told them that Jesus was risen. They had received wonderful light, but they had run away terrified and had said nothing to anyone. Now that kind of thing will not help in a crisis. They were of no help at all. They are not presented by Mark in the same favourable light in which the other gospel writers picture them. Mark is concerned about unbelief in the saints. He tells us of the difficult conditions with which the Lord had to deal. This section tells us what *Jesus* did. He had power to overcome the unbelief that was in the hearts of the disciples. What skill He used! We might well wonder where matters would have ended had it not been for Him. And this is the point to which we must come when dealing with difficult issues. How much we need Him!
Mary of Magdala is referred to in verse 9. She is brought forward as a subject of the Lord's work. It says that He had cast out seven demons from her: "out of whom he had cast seven demons". Luke tells us that they *went* out, which means that the work of God in her was such that their abode was untenable. But Mark lets us know that it was a difficult matter, but the Lord had met it and had *cast* out the demons. But now she is available and the Lord speaks to her and she goes and tells the disciples that He had risen and that she had seen Him; but they disbelieved her. It is not only that
{69}
they were unbelieving -- it says that "they disbelieved". It was not a question of their inability to take in what Mary said, but an attitude of resistance to the truth. They actively refused to believe her. This was the condition with which the Lord had to deal in view of making the disciples trustworthy persons.
Next we are told that the Lord was manifested in another form to two as they walked, going into the country. It was in another form. There was a different state of soul which had to be met in these. Why were they going to the country? Were they giving up? Were they finding the pathway of discipleship too difficult? Was discouragement turning them aside? These settings only serve to emphasize the skill which the Lord used to overcome unbelief in His own. The whole position seemed to be disintegrating. All was in jeopardy unless He came in and met the situation. But then, one sister is right. Mary of Magdala was available. She did not flee. She was not unbelieving. She brought the good news but she was disbelieved. And then the two who returned from the country came to the disciples, and they did not believe them. How serious is the matter! It says, "Neither did they believe them". Sometimes conditions of unbelief amongst the saints seem to be just like that. It makes no difference *what* is said; there is resistance to the truth -- they just will *not* believe! But, thank God, we can count upon the Lord coming in unless, of course, conditions become fixed. But that was not so here. Serious though conditions were the Lord still had in mind to bring about trustworthiness in them!
Well, the skill of the Lord is seen in the way in which He deals with the eleven. He manifested Himself to His unbelieving disciples as they lay at table. That was not an assembly setting. The Lord selected the time and the place and the conditions. And He will do just that. It was when they were restful and in a
{70}
softened state -- as they lay at table. He manifested Himself to them *then* and reproached them with their unbelief. He will not fail to administer a rebuke in cases where there is resistance to the truth. His words were no doubt severe, but how they must have affected their feelings! It says that He *reproached* them with their unbelief and hardness of heart. In chapter 8: 17 He had spoken sharply to them, "Have ye your heart yet hardened?", He had said. And their hearts are *still* hard! But the Lord has in mind to make them trustworthy. He is using His skill to complete the matter!
The Spirit, through Mark, records for us that it was "the eleven". One was missing. He had been dealt with, and rightly so. What an influence Judas must have been amongst the disciples! We are not told what he said in conversation with the eleven, but we can be sure that his influence had not been a good one. But he is not with them now. He is in no way responsible for their unbelief now. The fact that he is not here should help. But they are unbelieving and had resisted the truth brought to them by persons who were qualified to do so. And so the Lord rebuked them -- He reproached them for their unbelief. Did they refuse *His* word? They received the rebuke and judged themselves and the unbelief in their hearts. How quickly it happened! How quickly matters were settled when they had to do with the Lord!
And then the Lord gave them a great commission. They were to preach the gospel to the whole creation. Was that commission given to unbelievers? Surely it was not. They were no longer unbelievers, but believers. How skilful was the Lord's dealing with them! It had been severe, for He had reproached them, but it was effectual and it was complete. No question but that He had full confidence in them now. They are now trustworthy persons. How quickly it must have taken place! Immediate action characterises Mark's
{71}
writing. No doubt he felt that much time had been wasted by himself during the time that he was wrong. Time had become a precious commodity with Mark. It is not to be wasted. Mark frequently uses the word "immediately". Indeed, it is a characteristic expression with him. And it is well that we take heed to the word and, if unbelieving, cease to continue in unbelief. Let us accept the rebuke and get right quickly. That would be Mark's advice. And that is the way he records the adjustment of the eleven. It was an immediate matter. And so the Lord has confidence in them and commits this great service of the glad tidings to them as trustworthy persons.
Next we are told that He was taken up into heaven and sat at the right hand of God, I am sure that He would be looking at the disciples as He was parted from them. How would He look at them? Would it be with doubts and misgivings? Would it be a look of rebuke? I am sure it would not be. It would be with dove's eyes. How He loved them! and how they loved Him! He was leaving them as trustworthy witnesses. How well He knew that they were true to Him spite of their unbelief and hardness of heart! They were true lovers. And so it says, "And they, going forth, preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs following upon it".
And so, dear brethren, the Lord would show us how matters are carried through with skill and without delay. The time is short. May we be helped to complete matters in an orderly fashion!
{72}
MOSES -- FAITHFUL IN ALL GOD'S HOUSE
@Numbers 11: 10 - 17; @Numbers 12: 1 - 8; @Exodus 29: 26
You may have observed that I have read in order to speak about Moses. He was one of the great worthies. There were others, of course -- very distinguished persons whom we shall see in heaven. It is important that we should become acquainted with them in some sense; not, of course, personally now, but as the Spirit of God is pleased to picture them in the facts of Scripture. We should become accustomed to them in this way, so that on seeing them above we shall be able to distinguish them from others; for as the stars, so the saints in heaven will each have his own glory. We are all to be glorious. One star differs from another star, we are told, "in glory".
I have selected Moses to speak about him, not as a type of Christ, but, perhaps, as a type of some of ourselves. God waited until he was about eighty years of age before He took him up formally. He had His eye on him before, of course, and he was exceedingly lovely as a babe. He was fair to God, we are told; a sort of formula for extreme fairness, but undoubtedly carrying the idea that God saw fairness in him. How beautiful he was! Other worthies, as remarked, are selected similarly, some of them when very young, such as Samuel. We may say that Moses was selected when he was very young, but held in abeyance for many years to form his character. He was unique in his service. He is said to have been faithful in all God's house. So that he is a model for us as to doing work in God's house. Perhaps but few of us think of having part in the work of God's house, of being workers with God. But Moses is signalised as being faithful in all God's house. And there were others, of course. We have such a man as David: "I have found David my servant", God says, in @Psalm 89. It is a remarkable thing that it should be said that he was found, and yet
{73}
he is regarded as a type of Christ in that psalm. But I am speaking of these men now as types of christians or believers, so that we may feel ourselves not so far away from them -- that they are of us and that we are to become acquainted with them and learn from them in an objective way, but nevertheless truly to learn from them. And so Jehovah says, "I have found David". How delightful that expression is: "I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who shall do all my will", @Acts 13: 22. That is saying more than was said of Moses. It is really Christ that is in mind there, but still it is David, and our minds are led to think of the occasion when he was found among his brethren. God saw to it that he was found in that way. He had been overlooked in the mustering of Jesse's sons, as if he were of little value, but God found him at that time -- a man after His own heart, who would do all His will. It is said of the man in @John 9 that the Lord Himself found him -- another very beautiful thought! And so it is well for young brothers and sisters to hold themselves as findable, and in a desirable place in which to be found. It is a terrible thing to be found in a picture show, for instance. That is very different from being found in this meeting, and God so regards it, too. David was neglected but he was well occupied, looking after the sheep. Typically, he was looking after the saints; and Jesse sent and fetched him, and the Spirit says, "This is he". He does not say, '*That* is he'; it is one nearby; one who at the moment he was brought in was near to God.
Well, with regard to Moses, I have begun with a rather ugly setting, both for Moses and for the people. It was not a season like this when the faces of the brethren are bright and happy, the Spirit of God undoubtedly making them so, but when they were complaining bitterly. Moses was complaining too, showing how the minister may become like the people. The brethren tend to influence the ministers and make
{74}
them like themselves; whereas, the idea is that the minister should make the saints like *him*. It is thus with the Lord; He makes us like Himself. And so, as I said, the people were in a bad state. It says, "And the mixed multitude that was among them lusted; and the children of Israel also wept again and said, Who will give us flesh to eat? We remember the fish that we ate in Egypt for nothing; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlic; and now our soul is dried up, there is nothing at all but the manna before our eyes. And the manna was as coriander seed, and its appearance as the appearance of bdellium. The people went about, and gathered it, and ground it with hand-mills, or beat it in mortars, and boiled it in pots, and made cakes of it; and the taste of it was as the taste of oil-cakes. And when the dew fell upon the camp by night, the manna fell upon it. And Moses heard the people weep throughout their families, every one at the entrance of his tent; and the anger of Jehovah was kindled greatly; it was also evil in the eyes of Moses", @Numbers 11: 4 - 10. That is a sorrowful picture, and we may all thank God that we are not much accustomed to that. But there may be much that is unseen. How many unspoken complaints exist? And so the word is to help us, and it is to call attention to Moses, dear brethren, what a man he was, though failing, somewhat, in this instance. In the book of Hebrews he is said to be faithful in all God's house as a ministering servant, but Christ is the *Son* over God's house. Sonship underlying the position insures the maintenance of what is pleasing to God, and that is the thing to lay hold of, "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus", @Galatians 3: 26. Let us lay hold of that, dear brethren, because that is how God is going to keep things as He intends them to be in heaven, where Christ is to be first-born among many brethren. God is leading many sons to glory. But in @Hebrews 3, the Lord is said to be Son, whereas Moses was a ministering
{75}
servant. So Hebrews contemplates finality, and that which is opposed to the mind of God is reprobate, evil, and to be cast away. Hebrews contemplates finality; and Christ is the leader of our salvation, *made perfect* through sufferings.
Well, now we can see that Moses needed perfecting here. I only just touch on it because the position is somewhat similar to what we are in now. We are in the time of great pressure, a time in which there is much to be done and not enough time to do it, and that tends to complaint and to ugliness. Think of a ministering servant, so pleasing to God otherwise, asking God to slay him -- like Elijah! Thank God he did not kill himself, nor attempt to; neither did Elijah. They put it on God to do it, but God did not do it. God does not take pleasure in killing His servants. He has pleasure in His servants, whom He has found -- those who please Him. He keeps them alive. So, as I said, Moses was not at his best here. Nor does the Spirit of God take any pleasure in recording this of him. He, as it were, must suffer so that we might be ashamed of ourselves when we find ourselves in any state of complaint amongst the brethren. Are we prone to complain? Soon as ever we get to the back of the room do we begin, and when we get to the street, and when we get home? Now this is a sorrowful thing! Dear brethren, it is time for calling a halt to this kind of thing, "What shall we then say to these things?". How many seldom come to the meetings -- have more pleasure at home than at the meetings! How many come but once a week! We are thankful for that once, of course, but others come never at all. The more we stay away the more we shall complain; the more we shall find fault, and presently we may say that we are going out of fellowship. Just think of that! Where will you go? Where would the truth in Hebrews put you? "But *we* are not drawers back to perdition", @Hebrews 10: 39. Think of that word -- drawing back to perdition!
{76}
You may say that you will be saved, finally; but *will* you? *How* will you be saved? This chapter contemplates a terrible disciplinary action on the part of God; but still, God was working with His people, and He was working with Moses. And I want to speak about Moses; about what a man he was in these circumstances. Jehovah's anger was kindled and Moses was displeased. Moses usually was honoured in such cases, where he would have Jehovah be merciful and save His people. But that does not happen here. Moses in no way regulated himself to save the people; he rather spoke against them, as the circumstances warranted. God did not say, You are wrong, exactly, because God Himself was angered; His anger was kindled against the people. But then He took issue with Moses. Moses said, Have I conceived all these people? You put too much on me. He was complaining against God; not only complaining against the people but complaining against God, as Martha complained against the Lord. How ready we are to complain! It is one of the readiest things to come to us -- to complain, and particularly in regard of those who are seeking to do their best for us. Of course, our best is very little; and so with Moses; but still, he was doing his best for the people at that time, and still they were complaining. And so I stress this, how God looks on His servants, and how in times of pressure in the world there is a tendency with us to complain. And the complaining spirit reaches even to those who are serving. It is therefore a most dangerous matter and one to be warned against. We should rather encourage and exhort the brethren not to come into the spirit of the age, the spirit of complaint.
I need not say anything more about this matter; I have said enough; it is rather an ugly situation, but God came in in His own way and He provided others -- seventy men of the elders. Did they complain?
{77}
No! We do not hear a word about their complaining. They were selected by God in these circumstances, and if God selects persons for His service, you can be sure He will not select complaining people. He does not want complaining people. But He selected seventy men and He gave them the Spirit. Think of what God is ready to do for us, dear brethren, to turn us away from our complaints! He is ready to give us His Spirit and grant us the privilege of serving Him in the power of that Spirit, and to take advantage of all the favours there are for such people. The seventy were to be gathered to the tent, and Jehovah said, "I will come down" -- not *send* down, but *come* down; and He did. He came down at Shinar, and at Sodom, and in Egypt, and now He comes down about this complaining matter and to see these seventy men and to give them the Spirit. Who is prepared to be one of these seventy? Is there someone here who wants to be one of these seventy? Would they not always be known thereafter? Surely, they were known in heaven. God says to Moses, "I will take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them". He would take enough to make them useful. Moses was the leader; he would never cease to be the leader in those days, but the seventy would have their part, and I would again urge the young people here to have part in the service like these seventy. There is great room for ministry and ministers. One wonders at the number. Thank God for those that are available!
It must have been a real test to Moses to have been envied. But God would say to us now that what He was to Moses, He is ready to be to any one of us who is seeking to serve. We cannot hope to escape envy; but we can hope to escape being envious. Let us not return envy! Moses did not do it. And God took the opportunity of saying something He had never said before about him -- that he
{78}
was the meekest man in all the earth. Wonderful, that there should be such a man as that! And it may be that no one on the earth knew that. But it was made known when it was recorded in this book! The meekest man in all the earth! That was intended to shut the mouths of the complainers -- the enviers -- his own brother, three years older than he; his own sister, possibly eight or nine or more years older than he. You wonder why they should be envying at that age, but the flesh dies hard. If we in any way cultivate fleshly elements they get stronger as we get older; we have less power to overcome them, so the point is to judge at once any element of envy of one another. Moses knew how not to be envious, and he knew how, earlier, to rebuke one who was envious on his account. So we should refuse all thought of envy of one another, and especially if others may suggest it to us. Joshua said, "My lord Moses, forbid them!" @Numbers 11: 28. But Moses said to him, "Enviest thou for my sake? Would that all Jehovah's people were prophets ... !". That is the language of a servant who knew God and knew how liberal God is, for He does not give His Spirit by measure. He gives us freely of His Spirit.
Well, I must now pass on to the passage in @Exodus 29, I want you to see how God is concerned about His servants; how He loves His servants; how He values them and distinguishes them in heaven and on earth. It is lovely to think of the interest and love that God has for those that serve Him. None are more loved, and that is the reason why I turn to this priestly chapter. It is a chapter about priests, and Moses was among the priests. You may say, I thought he was the mediator. Yes; but he was among the priests. They were Aaron and his sons in those days; at least, that is how they are presented in the chapter. Aaron's daughters were taken account of, too, but I am speaking now of his sons. Moses
{79}
was not a son of Aaron, but he was a priest! He was a brother of Aaron, but he was a priest, nevertheless: "Moses and Aaron among his priests", @Psalm 99: 6. In Exodus he was a priest -- supremely so, for he always had access to God. You could hardly find another like Moses. He went in, we are told, to speak to God. It was as if he always had access to God, and God loved him. God spoke to him "mouth to mouth". It was always a pleasure to God to have Moses come into the tent. He was with God, and so in this chapter where the priests are mentioned, God said to him, "And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of consecration which is for Aaron, and wave it as a wave-offering before Jehovah; and it shall be thy part", @Exodus 29: 26. It was the priests¬ food. But there was food especially for Moses, and that leads me to think of what the Lord Jesus was in service. How few thought of Him; how He was alone in the nights, we are told! He went to the Mount of Olives in the night and was in the temple during the day, to meet the attacks, to meet the criticism of the priests and the Pharisees. What days they were! How little we understand the life of Jesus! What a life it was! What a life of suffering in service! It says in one of Mr. Darby's beautiful hymns:
<blockquote>'Man's boasting love disowns Thee; <br>Thine own Thy danger flee; <br>A Judas only owns Thee <br>That Thou may'st captive be'. </blockquote>
He was in the temple serving daily, doing all possible for men as He moved about amongst them. Who knew Him? Who valued Him? Who took sides with Him? When the test came, 'A Judas only owns Thee that Thou may'st captive be'. The Psalms tell us something of the experiences the Lord had. Was not the mount of Olives a trysting place between Him and His God? Did the loneliness not cease; did the
{80}
sufferings not cease for the moment? Where did He sleep? I do not know, I am not saying that He did not sleep -- far otherwise. But He went to the mount of Olives in the nights; after the suffering, after the toil, after working the miracles! And may one not say that on one of those nights, possibly on many of them, Jehovah said to Him: This is your portion; I am thinking of you. He could say, "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me". Do we ever think of this, dear brethren? The brethren may not think much of those who serve, and may criticise, too. But think of God coming and whispering in our ears, This is your part! You are not to be left without your part; there is something for you! How precious to think of God whispering in the ears of Jesus, This is for you. How the Lord speaks of the Father's love -- "On this account the Father loves me", @John 10: 17. Why should He say that? He loved Him from eternity; He loved Him as an Equal, but He says, "Therefore ..." The Father loved Him "because I lay down my life" -- as if the Father would recompense Him. And so it is that those who, in any way, serve, may hear God say at the opportune time, Here is something for you. You are not doing this service for nothing, "... knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord", @1 Corinthians 15: 58. Keep that before you if you want to serve; the Father will honour you, "If any one serve me, him shall the Father honour", @John 12: 26. And Paul says, "Henceforth the crown of righteousness is laid up for me, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will render to me in that day; but not only to me, but also to all who love his appearing", @2 Timothy 4: 8. If we love the Lord's appearing, if we serve Him, someday He will tell you, This is for you. I do not know of anything more precious than a whisper from heaven: You have been toiling for Me; others have not thought much of it, but I have; this is for you.
{81}
This wave breast is your part. Would anyone take away this wave breast from Moses? I think not! We should keep it before us that the Lord Himself thinks of and gives a portion to those who serve Him. The Lord has a name which no one knows but Himself, and we are told that the overcomer will receive a secret name which no one but himself knows. I would urge this, dear brethren, that we cherish the Lord saying to us, This is for you; for nobody else but you. So that we never need to think that we are forgotten. We are *not* forgotten; we are thought of and valued in heaven.
Well, I would leave this with us all, that we may not be complainers; and that if we are serving at all, we may know that the Lord knows and values the service. And He has something particular for you which no one else shall have but you. May the Lord bless His word!
{82}
THE AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE LIVES OF GODLY PERSONS
@2 Kings 13: 14 - 21
I confess to a certain peculiar liking for this section of Scripture covering the ministries of Elijah and Elisha. They are, as it were, peculiarly homely and practical -- and I might add, human. Elijah and Elisha were representative of God to men, and they were conversant with death. One of them, indeed, was only conversant with it in the moral sense, for he never died; he was one of the great exceptions in the race. He was one of those who did not die; he was taken up to heaven in a whirlwind. And we have, in him, the principle of passing on to others of what he had, so that they too might have it. He, in this, indicates God's way, for whilst Elisha wished to share in what Elijah had, his share was to be on certain conditions; that is, he was to see Elijah as he went up. His wish was -- and it was a noble wish, and one which he obtained -- to have a double portion of Elijah's spirit; that is to say, it was on the principle of increase. That principle is particularly seen in the Lord Jesus, of whom it is said, "He must increase". The principle of our dispensation is increase and those of us who belong to it are in a great wave of prosperity; the prosperity that is marked by increase; by the "increase of God", @Colossians 2: 19. It is said, "growing by the true knowledge of God", @Colossians 1: 10. Therefore, dear brethren, we may each hope to become richer, not to remain in contentment with what we may have acquired so far, but to have more and more. Now Elisha was to see Elijah when he went up, meaning that there was to be keenness of sight or vision. The moment, it was implied, would be short, but the thing he required or desired so much would be his by the use of his eyes, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee,
{83}
it shall be so to thee", @2 Kings 2: 10. In view of all this we dare not be negligent in the things of God. We are here tonight on the ground of vigilance, "What I say to you, I say to all, Watch", @Mark 13: 37. Now Elisha was not unmindful of all this, but his turn came, not to be taken up in a whirlwind, but to die through sickness. One of our number has died this very day, taken from our midst, here. Who knows who the next one of us may be? And so, "Be ready". Well now, Elisha is outstanding as an interesting, practical prophet; not because of his writings, but because of his practicalness and his keenness in the knowledge of men, so as to serve them on God's behalf. And no christian can be other than that, in principle; serving men -- all the race. Elisha kept on and kept on and we are told here he was "sick of his sickness in which he died. And Joash the king of Israel came down to him". He was not without interest but the sequel shows he was not quite as interested as he should be. That is what I am seeking to bring before us all here, this matter of interest, that we may not be found in any way doing the work of the Lord negligently, "Cursed be he that doeth the work of Jehovah negligently", @Jeremiah 48: 10. It is not a time of curse, nor am I here to curse, but at the same time we have these things in the Scriptures, a curse attached to any one careless or negligent in the work of the Lord.
Elisha was going to die, as it reads in verse 14. There might be some alleviation from his illness, but little use of hoping for his recovery. We often wonder why it is that certain should be taken, but these things are taken account of in heaven. Their administration is there, and all is on the principle of the will of God, whether one is on the bed of sickness from which he dies, or whether he is told to go up like Moses to die; it is a question of the will of God. And so it was with Elisha.
{84}
Now I come to what is in my mind -- the passing on from older brethren of what they have, or rather what there is, for at the most they only share in what there is. But what is to be passed on is to be shared in by those who follow. There are a good many here on the following line, not many on the leading line, not many about to die, I am speaking of what is ordinary, the young ones here have good hope to live. You are encouraged in that very point, "that thy days may be prolonged". God would not address that to old men about to die; He says it to young people. "That thy days may be prolonged in the land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee", @Exodus 20: 12. God needs you, born into this world and grown up; God needs you and He is willing to enter into all your matters, aspirations, prospects and purposes. In these circumstances there is perfect normality attached to these things. God, speaking reverently, would take a normal account of youth. I sometimes marvel at the Lord Jesus -- God over all, blessed for ever -- yet taking up a babe into His arms. Luke tells us that the Lord Jesus took infants into His arms. Think of the Lord Jesus, the Creator of the universe, God over all, taking an infant into His arms! The older one gets, the more one becomes fond of children, direct from the Creator. They have received their spirits from the Creator. The Lord knew that, and took infants into His arms and blessed them. Some would forbid it, but He said, "Suffer little children to come to me, and do not forbid them, for of such is the kingdom of God", @Luke 18: 16. He took them into His arms and blessed them. @Matthew 19: 15 says, "Having laid his hands upon them, he departed", meaning that He left them to their parents. Not the grandparents. We must not assume that the responsibility of parents belongs to the grandparents. It belongs to the parents. It is true indeed that Abraham "dwelt in
{85}
tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise", @Hebrews 11: 9. He dwelt with them, but that could only be a characteristic feature. It would be what a grandfather's love would lead him to do in his interest in them as heirs with him of the same promise. And if the Lord took infants into His arms and blessed them, and went away, that did not mean they should not be cared for. Far otherwise! He meant that the parents *should* take care of them. Parents are called upon to do that. "And ye fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and admonition of the Lord", @Ephesians 6: 4. They are to provide for their children, "For the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children", @2 Corinthians 12: 14. So that they have a great place with God. Indeed the Lord Himself tells us, "Their angels in the heavens continually behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens", @Matthew 18: 10. The angels are ministers of children as well as grown people, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?", @Hebrews 1: 14. The angels are subordinate, even to children! So that children are to be cared for.
Now I return to what I have been saying as to Elisha. He was dying, and he knew it. It was the sickness wherewith he died. The gospels give many illustrations of people who were sick and were healed, but this did not apply to Elisha. He was sick with the "sickness in which he died", but he would pass on what he shared, to another. He was not like the king who said, "If only there shall be peace and truth in my days!", @2 Kings 20: 19. That was not the language of Elisha. The king of Israel came down to him. Elisha was a father, and the king of Israel regarded him as a father, I am seeking to bring before us that we are heirs of what other people have shared in and our turn is coming. As
{86}
elders are taken to be with the Lord, the inheritance comes to ourselves. I refer now to what is needed in the testimony, and the king of Israel was needed. He was a king with a certain amount of interest and intelligence. He came down to Elisha and he said, "My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!". Now we might read much into this. It was a phrase that really belonged to Elisha himself. He does not stop to comment upon it, but he does stop to take up how it is going to be with the king of Israel. What is he to be in the testimony of God? What service is he to render to the people of God? Hence the prophet says to him immediately, "Take bow and arrows. And he took a bow and arrows. And he said to the king of Israel, Put thy hand upon the bow. And he put his hand upon it; and Elisha put his hands upon the king's hands, and said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. And Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot". That is, the old, sick prophet is teaching the young king how to serve, and he is ready to learn. And so, dear brethren, it is a critical time for us. Those of us who are older, who feel our service is short, if we are normal with God as He is with us, we shall think of what the young ones are capable of. I am not speaking to the brothers alone; I am speaking to the sisters, too. It is most important the part that sisters have in the service of God. See that you do it; that it continues; that the work of God goes on. It must go on; God has decreed it must go on, and if *we* do not go on, *it* will go on without us. But now there is one who is evidently intending to go on. He is a king, able to fight, and sufficiently interested in doing things well, to come down to the prophet who is sick. One might say, Why trouble Elisha with your affairs? He is a sick man. There is no question about that. Elisha knows he is sick and undoubtedly knows he is going to die, but he is concerned about
{87}
the young men and young women as to how they are going to serve, and that they should learn; that they should know how. That is the great point in this particular passage, not doing things any way or when we wish, but when they should be done and done well! There is no small talk about Elisha's illness. The word is about the bow: "Take bow and arrows". That is the word. Whatever the king had in his mind to say to Elisha, the word was, "Take bow and arrows" and shoot! Do the thing -- shoot. Do it properly, do it well! He did it, we are told here.
What I want to say now is, "Put thy hand upon the bow. And he put his hand upon it; and Elisha put his hands upon the king's hands". Let us not forget that. Do not be ashamed if you do not know how to shoot; learn how to shoot. The old brother knows how, old though he be; he has experience. He is intelligent, his mind active, and clear and right, and he directs the young man, the king, to put his hand upon the bow, "And Elisha put his hands upon the king's hands, and said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. And Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot". Then the word is, "An arrow of Jehovah's deliverance". That was the arrow shot forth in the strength of the prophet's hands, as well as the young man's hands. The younger is to learn from the older; something is done immediately. "An arrow of Jehovah's deliverance". How much deliverance is needed in the gatherings of the saints, some hardly able to move in the service of God, in some cases having two meetings in the week put into one. It is slothfulness and laziness and added to that unintelligence, the want of knowing *how*; hence anyone who does know, whom the brethren think to have knowledge, gets letters asking, What do *you think* about this? and What do you *think* about that? What do you think? That is the point! You
{88}
have a mind given you by God, and you have the opportunity of speaking to God in prayer. Before you write that letter to someone else, test yourself, learn to do things yourself, learn to shoot. The prophet was going to die, and he *did* die. Therefore if there be anything we wish to know how to do, and to do well, get to God about it. Of course there is such a thing as gift of government. It is well to ask such brothers, but, generally speaking we do not need to write about everything; we can try it ourselves, see if you can do it. If you miss one time perhaps you will do it again and do it well. These are very simple, homely, practical things. I am saying them with a view to helping everyone here to get to God. As we were saying, the Lord took a child in His arms. He would show the mother how to do that and do it well, and bring it up for Himself. So "an arrow of Jehovah's deliverance" is worth speaking about. These arrows are needed all over this continent; the land south of us, farther south still, away to the east and away to the west. Things are being left undone or partly done. That is the first thing, "an arrow of Jehovah's deliverance, even an arrow of deliverance from the Syrians" -- that particular section of the enemy that has been against you or against the testimony, "Thou shalt smite the Syrians in Aphek, till thou hast consumed them".
Now the next thing is, "Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said to the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And he smote thrice, and stayed". This is the word to be noted, he "stayed". He did well, he smote thrice, but he *stayed*. The prophet did not tell him to stay smiting. He said, "Smite upon the ground". It is not shooting now, that is a great objective thing, the objective truth put into action. This smiting upon the ground is something relating to himself. It is ground right near me, at my feet, right by me. It is what you might call
{89}
subjective truth. That is with the christian all the time. The Spirit of God is here with the christian all the time, in wonderful patience. The Paraclete is *by* us, the word means that the Spirit of God is near us to help us to shoot and smite on the ground without staying. That is to say, keep on at yourself. The amount of criticism among the brethren is most baneful, distressing, destroying and damaging. The spirit of criticism is not smiting on the ground. It is some one else, but this is at yourself. The smiting on the ground is yourself -- the thing that would hinder you in the shooting. Well, he did not smite more than three times and incurred the wrath of the prophet. I would not like to incur the wrath of the prophet, nor the wrath of the Lord, nor the wrath of the brethren. The christian might be wrathful when others are wrong in their conduct. So, as I said, Smite on the ground, take heed to yourself. See if there be anything damaging the brethren through you, whether by criticism or otherwise. Deal with it well! Deal with it thoroughly, and have done with it! Then, in the next battle with the Syrian, you will be the victor, for we need victory against the Syrian.
So the prophet, "the man of God", was wroth with the king and he said to him, "Thou shouldest have smitten five or six times; then wouldest thou have smitten the Syrians till thou hadst consumed them; whereas now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice". This was said by "the man of God". It is a question of God; representation of God. And you will not be victorious, brother or sister, if you have not gone far enough in dealing with yourself. Elisha did not stipulate the number of strokes upon the ground; the greater the number, as the prophet indicates, the greater the victory! And we *need* victory, dear brethren; we do indeed! And for that we must each one deal with himself; each one must
{90}
deal drastically with things which stand in the way of the service of God, and the service of the brethren.
And then finally it is said, "Elisha died, and they buried him. And the bands of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year. And it came to pass as they were burying a man, that behold, they saw the band, and they cast the man into the sepulchre of Elisha; and the man went down, and touched the bones of Elisha, and he revived, and stood upon his feet". It is the after-effect of a man of God -- the after-effect of the life of a man of God and what it can do. What it does here is to break up the bands, which are a most baneful thing among the brethren, bands of persons thinking alike in some things and others being excluded from their company. It is baneful and damaging, but the way out here is the effect of the bones of Elisha, the after-effect of the life of an old brother or an old sister. One has just gone from amongst us here. It is now a question of the after-effects. Are we to carry on as usual? The attractive after-effects of the life of a godly person must be seen and felt; and they will be, if God has His way. Sons, daughters, granddaughters and grandchildren, are to take it to heart. What is the example set by the prophet, by Elisha? He is dead and buried. It is his bones, not exactly the man, but like the bones of Joseph; they were made much of and carried from Egypt to Canaan. So the bones of Elisha were there, buried in the grave and the buriers of some man, who may not have been of very much consequence in their eyes, cast him into the grave of Elisha, for fear of the band that had come into the land. They cast him into the sepulchre of Elisha, and when he touched the bones he revived and stood upon his feet. It is the after-effect of the life of a godly man as it is carried in faith, for that is the only way. I suppose
{91}
there will be a great dearth here below when all the saints go up to heaven. What barrenness in this poor world! What a moment for the devil! But now it is not so; it is limited because the after-effects of godly people still remain, carried in the affections of the brethren.
And so we have the idea of a man risen from the dead. What can the band do against him? He "touched the bones of Elisha, and he revived, and stood upon his feet". It is an anticipative thought. Ezekiel carries it forward; a great army stands upon their feet, bones brought together, and they live! They are the after-effects, in a sense, presently to be seen in the millennium, as I understand it, of the influence of this present time -- what will be gathered up. The Spirit of God is still here. The bones of the man of God were there, and there was something in the way of spiritual virtue in them which made this dead man live. Are there not such miracles? There are far more miracles than many of us are aware of. We should not be able to come here today without these miracles. As one reviews what is current, it is God acting in relation to what virtue there has been, but those here carry the things in their affections. They know what God can do, and they pray accordingly, and things happen. Many of us here today were here last year at this time. God is doing that for us, and He is going to do more. That is what I had in mind as to what is carried down. We need to take advantage of what there is, such as Elisha, so as to gain from him, as he himself did when he would have a double portion of Elijah's spirit. Hence the great Elisha, and then this man with no name given. He stood on his feet. He was dead, but he was made to live. It was to offset the bands -- the influence of bands amongst the brethren. Think of persons being alike in the outlook of their minds in what is detrimental and abominable to heaven! This man shows
{92}
what is possible as the brethren deal with things. It is the after-effect in the brethren's minds of the affections and the life of a godly man. I hope I am not saying things that are not intelligible to you. So, "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith". And then it says, "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come", @Hebrews 13: 7, 8. The dispensation is going on in life and we want to get the good of what has been carried down by those still living and apply the things and bring God into them and see if there may not be restoration, recoveries, additions and increase amongst us, which I believe will go on to the end.
{93}
THE TESTIMONY AS HAVING PRIORITY TO THE TRANSLATION
@John 20: 19 - 23; @Genesis 24: 61 - 67
These scriptures are often read, but they are read now to show that the testimony of God is going on and that in the current order of things it takes priority to the translation into heaven. The translation to heaven is a fixed matter as to time with God and will happen according to 1 Thessalonians, but in the order of things the testimony has first place, as I may say, the priority. In saying this it is with the hope that all may be moved to have part in it. @Luke 15 may be cited as illustrative of heaven's mind in view of gospel testimony, in view of gathering, and in view of saints being brought into the assembly. That is to say, great activity is contemplated, great industry in the sense of effecting things such as are indicated in the gospel by Luke, and indeed in all the gospels, but particularly those by Luke and John. So that we have the shepherd seeking his sheep, the woman sweeping her house for something lost, and the father waiting for his son so as to have him robed and fitted for the house. All this has priority to the actual translation to heaven. That will happen, as we have said, and the saints are to be comforted by this happening. It is said, "Encourage one another with these words". "These words" would be the reference to the actual translation of the saints to heaven.
Now @John 20 has often been used and is still being used among the Lord's people to lead us into heavenly associations and enjoyments and privileges. But what is in mind now is to show that these, although *there*, culminate in testimony *here* and that that testimony is ordered by God as the testimony of Christ was ordered. "As the Father sent me forth", the Lord says, "I also send you". It says
{94}
further in verse 22, "And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit"; and then finally, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". That is to say, the saints, who are viewed earlier in the chapter as being fitted for heavenly associations and privileges and enjoyments, are now seen as sent by the Son as the Son was sent by the Father. And moreover they are seen as breathed into by the Lord Jesus. Breathed into! Clearly so as to fit them for this service -- the service indicated -- so that it might be rendered with power and with the right spirit -- no less a spirit than the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of Jesus.
What is now in mind is to show that the Spirit of Christ, or the Spirit of Jesus, is to dominate and fill all those who are sent. As the Father sent the Son, so the disciples are sent by the Son, with proper equipment, and particularly with such a Spirit involving such power as is suitable for the commission that He had just spoken of.
Now I speak thus because it is in my mind that although we have spoken much and rightly of the advantages and privileges and enjoyments that belong to the heavenly people, those who form the assembly, yet what is more immediate is the service or commission that is involved in these verses. So that at the present time we have heaven occupied with, relatively, a very few people. We have a goodly number here, for instance, but relatively there are only a few here, although we value them -- every one. It is a time of values -- what such and such a one is worth, not only here among the brethren, but in heaven, because heaven has its valuations and it passes over none who have the Spirit. Everyone who has the Spirit has a wonderful valuation in heaven. And so the idea of valuation must come into our meetings. The brothers have liberty to speak;
{95}
some with ability, but above all some who have the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Jesus. They are thus qualified and are to be noted because of not only having the Spirit of Jesus, but gift accompanying it. The Holy Spirit is a gift, to be sure -- the greatest of gifts -- but at the same time there is what is called gift in the sense of power and efficiency in service and the evidences are seen in such, so that the work of God is to go on in meetings such as these. Thank God such meetings are more frequent than they used to be, and fuller, too. Some of us know of places where they are fuller than they are here -- very much more so. Not that we belittle what we have here. Far otherwise! We value what there is. God has wonderful resources here below. One speaks thus to stimulate our hearts because we have part in what there is. It belongs to the Father; it belongs to the Son; and it belongs to the Holy Spirit; and in a sense, relatively, it belongs to the assembly.
The assembly is the greatest thing outside of divine Persons, and God is going on with it, forming it, fitting it, so that it is growing every day. It began with a few, but according to @Acts 2 the Lord added to the assembly daily such as should be saved. What a time it was! What work went on! What values were to be seen! You get three thousand added in one day. And then five thousand men are referred to, and then you get exceptional, outstanding persons. Barnabas is one of these. There were many others like him. We shall see them all in heaven, and be with them, and share their joys.
Well, as I have said, the work of God goes on. One of the greatest things one knows of at the present time is the work of God. Think of what a real saint is, and then the aggregate of all in the assembly. Persons organized, spiritually, and fitted and compacted into one great thing called the assembly. The greatest name of a thing in the whole universe is
{96}
the assembly. And so we glory in it. Indeed the word is found in the wonderful epistle to the Ephesians, "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". Think of that phraseology dear brethren, and think of yourself -- of ourselves -- belonging to it! It is intended to stimulate us and cause joy to come into our hearts to think of the greatness of what we are connected with, so that we are not overwhelmed by the miserableness of this poor world or its attractiveness and blandishments, or its wickedness. I speak thus for our encouragement for John's writings are calculated to fit us for this very thing and to set us up in life. The great point in John is life, "In him was life". That was the word about the Lord Jesus, "and the life was the light of men". So the point to be dwelt upon for the moment is life. And the service is to be carried on in life according to these verses in John and according to the typical verses in Genesis that have been read.
And so our passage contemplates the disciples in a certain position, in a certain place. And importance is attached to the fact that they were there -- "where the disciples were". That is the idea. And so we have to think of what is going on; what is current! what is being done in the way of formation, and calculate that it is a question of the *persons* we are dealing with. Our position in this hall, for instance, is just incidental, nothing more. It has no spiritual value save that it houses us for the moment. Heaven regards it in that light, but otherwise it is nothing. There is nothing attached to it in a spiritual sense. And so it is with our meeting rooms, of which there are some good and some poor (and the Lord is putting it upon us to have suitable meeting rooms) but their importance is that they house or afford facilities for the brethren to meet in. We do not want to embellish them. All we need is comfort. The Lord
{97}
comes in amongst us in these very places, and, of course, while He is there they are wonderfully augmented -- we need not deny that -- for the Lord *does* come.
And so here, according to what I have read, "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you". Now you notice what I have already remarked, and am now stressing, that it is a question of where the disciples were, and that they were in danger of being affected by some intrusions. If these intrusions are effected mentally, of course, the enemy can use them and does, alas! But the saints are not indifferent to that. We are not told who shut the doors, but we are told that they were shut for fear of the Jews. And that gives us some inkling as to how these physical matters stand in relation to the service of God. But the main thought, as I have said, is where the disciples were. If it was in a tent, well, it was where they *were*. If in a room -- an upper room -- it is where they *were*. They dominate the matter. The importance of the persons and what they are engaged with, dominates the matter. The Lord says, according to Matthew's report: "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". Notice, it is *them*, alluding to the persons. That is, it is in the midst of *them*, whatever it may be that surrounds them or houses or shelters them. It is a question of these persons and that the Lord is there. He is there to help them in whatever they do. They are doing it but He is there to help them, and who can help like Him! We can count on that day in and day out -- some of us, at least -- and the Lord proves how true He is.
{98}
Well now, the next thing is to bring in how He changes or affects them. It may be a cold day, or a hot day, or a day of trouble, a day of calamity. Whatever it may be, think of how the Lord may act for us! Here the word is, as He comes in, "Peace be to you". It is as though He would say, That is the state you are to be in; I am not coming in simply to see and hear and then go, I want to affect you; I have something for you to do, I have a commission for you and I want to affect you so that you will be fitted to do what is in My mind that you should do. And so He says, "Peace". "Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you. And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side". So that you can see how the Lord is concerned about us, dear brethren, ministering peace to us. And it was no empty thought or proposal. It was a real thing, and it had a real effect upon them: "Peace be to you". It is not simply peace in the house or in the room, but "Peace be to you". Well, the word is that they were glad because they saw the Lord. But then other things happen, too. He said "Peace be unto you". He intended that their hearts should be touched by it, be filled by it. And then they were glad because they saw the Lord. Think of how their hearts were affected! It was the Lord Himself, not simply that He came there spiritually, it was His very self -- the Lord Himself, and they were affected according to that. It was the real presence of a real living Person, and they were glad. It was a felicitating time -- a wonderful time -- no such time in the whole universe as it was at that moment. There were only a few of them, but they were all affected. And then again He says, "Peace", as much as to say, I want you to continue in peace, that it may not be simply a matter for the moment but a continued matter while I am here. I want you to be filled with peace, and undoubtedly
{99}
they were, for there is not a single discrepancy in the account of this chapter. All is perfect. It is a very encouraging thing to have something perfect brought to us. And that perfection can be brought about in ourselves. It is one of the things that belong to us, that we are capable of, to be full of peace: "Peace be to you". And it says, further, "He shewed to them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord. Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you: as the Father sent me forth, I also send you. And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit". Now you will understand, dear brethren, that the question of the Spirit comes up. It is not exactly what we get in @Acts 2, for the Lord had not yet ascended, but yet it was the Spirit of Christ, the Son of God. God Himself was there and so the breathing was of the Lord -- the same One who breathed into Adam was now breathing into His disciples another life -- indeed to *us*. We cannot say much beyond the fact that it was physical life that was breathed into Adam, but here it is spiritual life, and therefore how wonderful the position is, dear brethren: "He breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit". So it is not simply a question of saying that we have the Holy Spirit, but whether we have *received* the Holy Spirit. The Lord says, "Receive the Holy Spirit", but He had already done the breathing. So that there is some action on our part and that action is an appreciative action, that we are glad to get the wonderful Gift that the Lord is giving, and that is the Holy Spirit, "Receive the Holy Spirit". It is a question of each one of us challenging his heart as to whether he has received the Holy Spirit, and if he has, whether his conduct is according to it, that he is expressing the Spirit of Jesus and nothing else.
{100}
And now the next thing is "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". You can see now how very full and practical all this is, dear brethren. I am now referring to the forgiveness of sins and as to whether we are all in possession of the forgiveness of sins -- that precious possession that we have, that we know we are forgiven and that we know this very thing from the Holy Spirit; that is to say, from the saints by the Spirit, because the point here is that "whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". It is a question of what the saints can do for us, and how the Lord equips us and qualifies us to carry out the commission that He has put upon us; namely, the continuance of the work of God in the power of the Spirit in the sense of the forgiveness or remission of sins, and the retention of sins -- that the saints have power to do both. You say, That is extraordinary! I never heard that before, that the saints can forgive my sins! Well, it has to be understood, I am speaking exactly as the scripture says in this chapter. And it is for each of us to understand what it means to be forgiven in this sense; that amongst the Lord's people we can realise what it means to have the forgiveness of sins, or on the other hand, sorrowful to say, that our sins may be retained, that we have not judged ourselves, that we are going on in some way that the Lord would reprehend, that we are not allowed to be free with the brethren and not allowed to have a place among them. Why is it the brethren do not forgive us our sins? Why others and not us? Well, it is a question of the state we are in, the conduct we pursue. The saints cannot lay their hands on us; our conduct is not suitable to the assembly.
Now I turn to @Genesis 24. I just want to say a word about Isaac and Rebecca so as to amplify
{101}
@John 20. From verse 61 to the end of the chapter, a long chapter, we have this matter that I have in mind to speak of just for a moment. First, as to Rebecca herself; how she followed the man, I am speaking of her now as the type of a characteristic sister, on a high level, characteristic of the assembly. And it says that she followed the man. That was the order. The servant of Abraham, the greatest servant of the house, was in charge. He is a type of the Holy Spirit as in charge of us here, today, so to speak. He is in charge, and so it says that Rebecca followed the man, "The servant took Rebecca and went away. And Isaac had just returned from Beer-lahai-roi, for he was dwelling in the south country. And Isaac had gone out to meditate in the fields towards the beginning of evening. And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, camels were coming". My theme is not simply that Isaac is a type of Christ and that Rebecca is a type of the assembly, but that both Rebecca and Isaac are also types of saints. And it is now a question of how the masculine side is to fit and how the feminine side is to fit. I have spoken about Rebecca following the man, which is a good feature. She was subject. But then Isaac is occupied with the Holy Spirit. He is returning from Beer-lahai-roi which first came to notice at the time of Abraham, when Hagar was seen as a type of an unruly sister. She was not subject to her mistress. But the Spirit of God is seen as having to do with her at the well Beer-lahai-roi. That is to say, that well is a type of the Spirit as dealing with such a person as Hagar. The sisters may become unruly and misbehave, but Hagar, in the grace of God, becomes subject and returns to her mistress. And this well is first seen in connection with her, which is a very important point. But still, her son was a wild ass of a man. She was a poor mother. Although she had a son who was a son of Abraham, she was a poor
{102}
mother. She did not bring up her children rightly. She did not properly nourish them, and many a child suffers because of the failure of the mother in nursing her children. But my point now is to show that Isaac is occupied with this well. It is available to *every* person; it was available to Hagar, and now Isaac is coming to it and going to it, and while he is doing that Rebecca comes. Now both Isaac and Rebecca afford us examples of suitable conduct and occupation. Isaac was a man of leisure, not like Joseph, who was a man of great affairs. Isaac was a man of leisure and able to meditate and to ruminate, and he sees Rebecca coming, and he is thinking of what is carrying her. She is coming to the meeting. How is she coming to the meeting? How is she attired? Is she occupied with ordinary things on the way? No, the facts show that she is in every way right, so that she takes her veil as soon as she sees Isaac. But Isaac saw the camels -- the things that carried Rebecca. And so it becomes a question of how we are carried in dealing with the things of God. What carries us? And then another thing is that it was a time of mourning in the house. Isaac's mother had died. It was a time of death. We have just heard that a brother has died. We cannot but feel that. And it is a question of how we behave in a time of death. We read of its being better to go to the house of mourning than the house of feasting. That is important to bear in mind, for there is such a thing as mourning. It is wholesome to think of it even if it is for a person who has not been walking with us, but who once did. And we are going to bury him, although he died out of fellowship. We should be rightly affected by such an occurrence. It is like God to bring about contrition in such a case. We have had such deaths and we have been grieved by them, and it is wholesome to be grieved by them, but at the same time to be with God about them and
{103}
to recognize that burial is suitable for such a one. Ananias and Sapphira were buried, and Stephen was buried. The brethren made great lamentation over Stephen. You can understand how the death of a man like Stephen would affect the saints. They made great lamentation over him, and it is quite right to do so. We have had that experience. But I must come back to Isaac, and then I will finish. Isaac was grieved about his mother, but he was comforted. That is to say the state of things was changed in his house by Rebecca, I want you to notice that. Someone has asked, How long did Isaac and Rebecca live in Sarah's tent? I cannot tell you that, I would say a very short time. To confirm that, it is said that Rebecca had a house, and there was fine clothing in that house and she used some of that clothing with which to clothe Jacob. It was a house, not a tent, which confirms my remark that the period in which Isaac and Rebecca resided in Sarah's tent must have been fairly short, because a house had come in and was occupied by a suitable person, and that person was Rebecca. She became a good wife. She ruled the house. She guided the house, and the house is to be guided by the wife. It is quite clear from the facts mentioned that she guided the house. In fact, in later life she shone better than her husband, and that may have application to assembly history, because Isaac is not always a type of Christ, nor is Rebecca always a type of the assembly. That phase of her history came to an end. And we have to bear in mind here that she was led into Sarah's tent; that is to be noted -- led into it -- which I suppose would show what her place was to be, that she was not to lead, she was to be led and Isaac did the leading. He led his wife into his mother's tent and she adorned it. She was glorious in the house. She knew what to do and what to say on many occasions.
{104}
Now that is about all that I have to say, dear brethren, but I think that it is instruction that ought to stay with us, for the idea of being commissioned attaches to us. It is a matter that we should be very humbled in speaking of at all, because we are in the time of small things and therefore we cannot assume to have much in the sense of commission. At the same time there is such a thing as having a commission. It would be a poor thing if there was not such a thing attaching to our position, but there is. And Isaac and Rebecca are in that position. They are in Sarah's tent, set there to carry out the behest of Jehovah. And they do so.
In chapter 25 it is mentioned again that Isaac was at the well Beer-lahai-roi. It is as much as to say he was constantly going to that well, meaning that we must keep our eye on the Spirit, "Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall no way fulfil flesh's lust". So that we carry on, dear brethren, in a simple way in the sense of commission. As the Lord Jesus was sent of His Father so we have a commission to carry out as having to do for men in the sense of remission of sins; and having received the Spirit we should walk in the Spirit and so promote the work and pleasure of God.
May God bless the word to us.
{105}
"EGYPT IS RUINED"
@Exodus 10: 7 - 11
I need not make any apology for speaking because I believe the brethren are glad to have me speak; but I want to speak of something that may be helpful to us. I wish, particularly, to stress verse 7: "How long shall this man be a snare to us? let the men go, that they may serve Jehovah their God, dost thou not yet know that Egypt is ruined?"
Now, dear brethren, I feel quite at liberty to refer to the ruination of Egypt, because Egypt is typical of this present evil world. It is not much of a country now, but still, it was used by the Spirit of God to typify this world. Pharaoh's bondmen said to him, "How long shall this man", which as we know was Moses, "be a snare to us? let the men go, that they may serve Jehovah their God". Why do you hinder them? Why do you interfere with them? The matter is very plain, why do you not let them go? "Dost thou not yet know that Egypt is ruined?".
That is a very solemn word, dear brethren -- the ruination of a country! If any one goes into the world, we speak of him as going into Egypt. If you want the world you go to Egypt. But the word is, "Dost thou not yet know that Egypt is ruined?". So that the world is a ruined state of things. You may say that you are well off in business. But you have *no* resources if Egypt is ruined! If the world is ruined, and you are in it, *you* are ruined! It is an awful thing to think about, but I should like, especially, to enlarge on it to the young people here today. If you are seeking after the world, or building yourself up in it, the word here is, "Dost thou not yet know that Egypt is ruined?". Can I say anything plainer than that? It is, more or less, a repetition of what I have already said, but it is very remarkable,
{106}
very plain, very humbling, and very solemn: "Dost thou not yet know that Egypt is ruined?".
It says that Moses and Aaron were brought *again* to Pharaoh. This is a second court, so to speak. The devil is making another attempt -- to build the world up again, perhaps. I say to every one, Be on your guard against building up Egypt. To faith it is ruined already and there is no reason why you should be building up Egypt.
And so, dear brethren, it says, "Moses and Aaron were brought again to Pharaoh. And he said to them, Go, serve Jehovah your God". But the sequel shows that Pharaoh was not honest about it, as is often the case amongst men. He said, "Go, serve Jehovah your God", but he was not sincere as to it at all. He asks, "Who are they that shall go?". Moses answered, "We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters; with our flocks and with our herds will we go; for we have a feast of Jehovah". It is wonderful what feasts the brethren have. Think of what the brethren feast upon at the present time! It would appeal to us all. How precious it is to have our feasts week by week, as we might say, on the first day of the week. And so the word is, "we will go with our young and with our old". The children -- all of them -- will go to keep that holy feast of Jehovah! The children must go. They must be let go. But it rests with each young man and young woman not to seek Egypt, for Egypt is ruined.
Of course, men are going on with their businesses, and doing well in a certain sense, but then, spiritually, the world is ruined. Therefore, let us not be found in it. Let us not seek after it. Let us keep out of it and go on according to God and God will be with us.
Pharaoh said to them, "Evil is before you!". This is just a threat! It is double mindedness! "Not so:
{107}
go now, ye that are men ..." says Pharaoh. But it is remarkable that the sisters have acquired such a great place amongst us, and that they should be with us at such a time as this. They have part in the feast, also! But, in what Pharaoh says, the *men* are brought forward here. If any are to go, the *men* are to go. I am sure that there is not a young man here who would not be stirred up at a time like this, "Serve Jehovah! for it is that ye have desired". You have desired to go. You have desired to get out of the world. And there is nothing, spiritually, in Egypt. It is very solemn! The whole world is ruined, in principle. But you "have desired" to go out of it. "They were driven out from Pharaoh's presence". Pharaoh has no use for you. The world has no use for you. If you want the world you may get it, but you will find that it is ruined. And there is very little time now, dear brethren; let us go on with the assembly. It is remarkable how the truth of the assembly has developed in these our days, so that it is greater than ever before. God has wrought and the truth has come out, and the Spirit of God is working to lead the brethren on. Egypt is ruined; let us take this to heart and get well out of it and get on with what God is doing!
We have enjoyed what is outside of the world as together here, by ourselves, with the brethren here, rejoicing. We are holding a feast of Jehovah, I must say that I have a great joy with the dear brethren here at this time.
{108}
THE PARACLETE
The Holy Spirit sent down and so with the saints, the church, now corresponds with the Angel who accompanied Israel through the wilderness. The Angel of Jehovah would keep them in the way and "bring thee to the place that I have prepared", @Exodus 23: 20. They were enjoined to "be careful in his presence, and hearken unto his voice". He would bring them in unto the Amorites, "and I will cut them off", says God.
Romans opens up what the Spirit is in relation to the *gospel*. Corresponding with the light the Spirit sheds abroad the love of God in the hearts of believers. He enables them to fulfil the righteous requirement of the law; He is in them a *new state* and His mind in us is life and peace. Christ in the believer, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness; and our bodies shall be quickened by His power. By Him we put to death the deeds of the body and so we live. We are led by Him as sons of God, and by Him, the Spirit of adoption, we cry, "Abba, Father". He witnesses with our spirit that we are children of God. As in us He is not our spirit, nor does He absorb our individuality. In Galatians *He* cries, "Abba, Father" -- using our vocal powers, as it were; in Romans *we* cry by Him. The latter indicates growth, and is what God intends; a *son* (the believer) is speaking, rather than the Spirit. The Spirit is not a son, but has (in Christ first) become the Spirit of Sonship and so brings the *consciousness* of sonship into the believer's heart, and so *he* cries, "Abba, Father". And in the saints the Spirit makes intercession for them according to God.
The position of the saints in relation to the testimony is worked out in @Romans 12 -- Israel's relation to it being in view in chapters 9 to 11. Chapter
{109}
12 corresponds somewhat to the ordering of the tribes in @Numbers 2. Believers are at the divine disposal and so the kingdom of God is in chapter 14. It alludes to God here by the Spirit in moral sway and blessing -- as of old He was in the midst of the tribes, they being set around His dwelling in four sets of three each. The kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. @Romans 15 is *energy* -- at least, in Paul -- in service and testimony, the Levites¬ part, as in Numbers.
{110}
PETER IN @ACTS 9 - 11
"I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren", @Genesis 24: 27. This passage covers the apostle's position or course as presented in these chapters.
In the earlier chapters (1 to 5) his lead is evident. In chapter 5 mention is made of his *shadow*, cures evidently being effected thereby. This points to spiritual substance -- what was there in him. After this Peter is not mentioned by name until chapter 8 where, with John, he is *sent* to Samaria. He seems, therefore, to represent the spiritual wealth in the assembly. Others, such as Stephen and Philip, are used actively. At Samaria Peter takes the lead to meet an emergency, but otherwise he is personally out of view until chapter 9: 32. Here we see him passing through all quarters; that is, he is "in the way", in the current of the mind of God, for this was now bearing toward the nations. His movement suggests spiritual sensitiveness, and now, being "in the way", he is divinely led. He is enlightened and prepared at Joppa to go to the house of Cornelius at Caesarea -- to use the keys the Lord gave him to admit the gentiles into the kingdom.
In chapter 12 Peter is an object of attack by the enemy, but preserved, evidently representing spiritual wealth of experience and authority, brought forward again in chapter 15.
The divine pains taken to prepare Peter to receive the gentiles, and Ananias to receive Saul, are touching and instructive.
{111}
PRINCES
@Numbers 7: 1 - 89
"The princes of Israel, the heads of their fathers¬ houses, the princes of the tribes, they that were over them that had been numbered" -- full titles and offices.
The bullocks and waggons denote the thoughtfulness of the saints, in a rich way, for those who are serving -- those who *toil*. They were given to the Gershonites and the Merarites -- those who carried *heavy* parts of the tabernacle. All this comes out in Acts.
Nahshon gives the lead -- prince of the tribe of Judah. This offering or giving of the princes reflects *God* -- He loves a cheerful giver. Thus *each* prince *has* a *day*; the offering was spread over *twelve* days.
There were three vessels -- one large and one small silver vessel *full* of fine flour mingled with oil. A brother may present Christ in a larger or smaller way; it is Christ in either case; the *quality* is the same. The gold vessel is small, a *cup full* of incense -- quality for God in the way of odour. It is a sweet savour of Christ in those that are saved and in those that perish.
Princes coming from different parts and without consultation and yet each offering the same as the others, typifying unity of the Spirit, all have the same thoughts of Christ. The aggregate of their gifts, enumerated in verses 84 to 88, is the "dedication gift" of the altar. At the end Moses goes in to the tent of meeting to speak with God, but God speaks with him first -- then Moses speaks to God. God's speaking is according to His mercy and authority -- all founded on the ark of the testimony.
{112}
"JEHOVAH HEARKENED TO THE VOICE OF A MAN"
@Joshua 10: 14
God hearkened to the voice of a man when the sun stood still, and heaven helped Israel in the execution of vengeance on their enemies. Now contrast that with the voice of Jesus! "Father, forgive them", He says, "for they know not what they do", and the clock stops. Christ dies and goes into the grave. He is raised from the dead by the glory of the Father.
That does not involve judgment. In that word, "glory of the Father", we have the germ of a new day. It was in the heart of the Father that there should be such a day. He was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, and now He "has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens", not on His own throne yet but in the Father's throne.
The day is governed from the Father's throne -- by a Man. A Man! Stephen sees Jesus in the brightest spot in glory, he saw the heavens opened and the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand. He kneeled down and cried, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". Wonderful reflection of the Father's throne and of the prayer uttered by Christ! Wonderful reflection of the character of the day which the Lord had made! He was equal to it under the most painful circumstances. It was not a time of curse, and hence he prayed for his enemies; he was a perfect reflection of Christ in the midst of the darkness in Jerusalem. How one would seek to be that, to be unaffected, to be here according to the divine appointment, maintaining in one's ways and walk and spirit the character of the day which Jehovah has made, and rejoicing in it. May God grant this to us!
{113}
LIFE AND ETERNAL LIFE
@Mark 10: 30
Although life and eternal life are used interchangeably, especially by the apostle John, yet in Romans they present different ideas. Eternal life is an end in view, whereas life (chapter 8) is connected with the Spirit: "the Spirit life", and so present. Life in this sense is power -- it involves ability to be free from the flesh, so as to fulfil righteousness here. There is also the "springing up into eternal life". The latter is clearly objective and outside (above, morally) the present condition. I do not think it right to connect eternal life with our present mortal conditions, and therefore I regard it as wrong to place it in the wilderness. It is the life of God's purpose for man and is necessarily the other side of death. The fact that it is said to consist in the knowledge of God and of Christ as the sent One only shows that the moral element is possessed by those who have it -- that is, they know God as the supreme Object of veneration, and a Man, tested in every way and found, in contrast to Adam, to be infinitely obedient. The cross (all that entered into it) was essential to this obedience being fully expressed; to apprehend rightly what "sent" involved, we have to ponder Gethsemane and the cross, and the light thus acquired has a great effect upon us, both as regards God and Christ, and relatively as regards the world. So that clearly eternal life belongs to another order of things -- "in the coming age life eternal".
{114}
"WALK IN LOVE"
@Ephesians 5: 1, 2
"Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children, and walk in love, even as the Christ loved us, and delivered himself up for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour".
This shows us the idea of the way of life: "walk in love", not simply when you are in the meeting; it is a question of *walking* in it. A person who walks in love has his foot dipped in oil; he has a peculiar kind of walk, "Looking upon Jesus as he walked" -- that is the pattern, that is the walk. "Walk in love". Christ was for God's pleasure, and as we walk in His footsteps we are for God's pleasure, and no greater privilege can be ours. It is given to us to be here in this world, where Christ has been, where the apostles have been, for God's pleasure. It is a responsibility too, so do not put it away from you. It has been seen in men of like passions with ourselves. We have the Spirit of God; we have the example of Christ, the example of the apostles. "Mark them which walk", says the apostle, "so as ye have us for an ensample". Remember the apostles, remember Paul; in them we see the reflection of the walk and ways of the Lord Jesus Christ.
May He give us in these days to be in His hand, and to remain in His hand; for as we remain there the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in us. His work shall be promoted in us, and thus we shall be for His pleasure here.
{115}
"THERE IS A PLACE BY ME"
@Exodus 33: 21
God said to Moses, "There is a place by me". Did you ever think of that -- a place by God for you? It is a question of position -- you are to stand on the Rock. May I encourage you to think of this. God said, "there shalt thou stand". I especially urge the idea of place -- a place by God. The position is in Christ, we have a place outside the world altogether; we have a new status, and God has put us there. He has put us "in Christ".
{116}
Pages 116 to 404 -- "What We Have Come To". U.S.A., 1949 - 1950 (Volume 198).
WHAT WE HAVE COME TO (1)
@Hebrews 12: 18 to middle of verse 22
J.T. The assumption is that the brethren know the Scriptures comparatively well, especially the epistle to the Hebrews written by Paul, as we suppose. We are supposed to know our Bibles. We have come to look into the Bible and these remarks are made so that we may have exercise about it, each one of us, brothers and sisters, so that we may hear, and hearing we may understand. If we do not understand, we can ask again.
The first positive thing is mount Zion. It is thought that we should consider a little the earlier verses because they refer to what we have not come to. We have not come to the mount that could be touched; it is not what is visible. That is to say, "Ye have not come to the mount that might be touched and was all on fire, and to obscurity, and darkness, and tempest, and trumpet's sound, and voice of words; which they that heard, excusing themselves, declined the word being addressed to them any more, (for they were not able to bear what was enjoined. And if a beast should touch the mountain, it shall be stoned; and, so fearful was the sight, Moses said, I am exceedingly afraid and full of trembling)". These verses refer to what we have not come to. They are terrible verses, and they remind us of what we all were liable to -- the judgment of God. These are negative thoughts. I thought it well to call attention to them first so that we might have the background of the verses before us of which we shall speak later. There are eight things mentioned in the verses before us that we shall take up later.
{117}
S.McC. I think what you have said is interesting. The solemnity that is in these verses seems to be stressed throughout the epistle.
J.T. Of course, we are to bear in mind that it is a christian epistle. The first chapter is glorious, "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son". The word is literally 'in Son'. God in Son -- God Himself speaking, so that it is a wonderful epistle in that sense. It is a christian epistle and yet these verses found in this chapter are terrible verses, really. In the same chapter it says, "our God is a consuming fire". And we would think solemnly of all that because it is a terrible background, but at the same time he is reminding us of the wonderfulness of what belongs to us in Christ, what we are in Christ.
S.McC. It really, as you say, throws into relief the glory of the system that is centred in Christ in that way in heaven, does it not?
A.N.W. Would it be right to say that mount Sinai is defined but not named, whereas mount Zion is named and not defined? Would it be according to your thought for us that we should learn to define mount Zion for ourselves?
J.T. Sinai is the mount that could be touched -- it is physical and visible, whereas Christianity is not that. It is not visible or physical, it is spiritual and unseen.
A.N.W. I thought it was striking that it was not named, but defined with all those terrible features, whereas mount Zion is just named and you are suggesting what it would mean to us.
J.T. You might say you get it in history, what could be touched, but when you come to mount Zion you cannot get it from history; it is not what
{118}
men are acquainted with, really, but it is the subject of our conversation.
H.B. @Deuteronomy 4, in relation to the mount Sinai, would show that there were darkness, clouds and obscurity. Yet behind that it says, "the mountain burned with fire to the heart of heaven". In man after the flesh there was that which hindered the heart of heaven being fully known, but now it is known in mount Zion, in christianity.
J.T. The heart of heaven -- I think it is well to mention clearly what is said. The heart of heaven -- a rare expression, should be emphasised, for it is a wonderful expression and belongs to the economy.
S.McC. What does mount Zion convey to you in relation to christianity? Does it convey a different thought from what it was before?
J.T. I wonder if we have dwelt enough on the negative side before we come to mount Zion, whether we all understand what is meant by the negative side contained in verses 18 to 21.
J.W.D. "Moses said, I am exceedingly afraid and full of trembling". Would you bring that into practical experience in any sense now?
J.T. It is a question of what souls go through in the presence of God. Many go through experiences and they feel they are lost and are overcome. So that it is hard to say what may be said about these earlier verses, these negative verses. We are to search ourselves as to what we are going through in our souls, whether we are going through anything like this, and then we shall see the blessedness of mount Zion.
A.S.C. It says in regard of mount Sinai, "obscurity, and darkness, and tempest, and trumpet's sound, and voice of words; which they that heard, excusing themselves, declined". Would you help us on that?
J.T. It is intended to impress us with the enormity of sin. The more we judge it, the more we shall
{119}
enjoy the blessedness of forgiveness and the presence of the Spirit, who gives us the consciousness of forgiveness.
A.S.C. The word was addressed to them, but they excused themselves from it, not taking on the matter.
J.T. That is true, bringing out what we are and the enormity of sin, and whether we are judging things fully and coming into christianity, conscious of forgiveness of sins, and the Spirit of God, and having a place in the assembly.
S.McC. Is there a link in @Romans 7, in the man going through that experience in which the law bears upon him, with the negative side in this chapter?
J.T. That is so. "O wretched man that I am!". Why does it say that? That is what I have in mind, as to what the law really implies and how we are to be delivered from it. "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of death?". Then he says, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". He got deliverance. If we have not, we should search our hearts. We come thousands of miles to be here and we want to get something. If we are going on with things which are not according to christianity, we want to get rid of them and go on with things which bring us to full christianity. "O wretched man that I am!". Then the answer, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". Then he says further, "I *myself* with the mind serve God's law". That is christianity. "But with the flesh sin's law", a true confession.
A.N.W. In verse 20 the writer interposes, "for they were not able to bear what was enjoined". Would the Spirit's coming mean we are empowered to bear what is enjoined?
J.T. That is what mount Zion means. It is a new principle like the constitution of this country. A new principle -- mount Sinai was an old one.
{120}
V.C.L. Did Paul himself understand something of this principle of the enormity of sin in the three days when he neither ate nor drank?
J.T. I am glad you brought that up -- what Paul went through in those three days and three nights.
V.C.L. Afterward he stood up and "preached Jesus that *he* is the Son of God". Was that like coming to mount Zion?
J.T. That shows how the truth laid hold of his soul. He "preached Jesus that *he* is Son of God". Mount Zion implies the Son of God, for it is the answer to all with which we are dealing here.
J.McK. Does @Exodus 20 help as to bringing the matter of sin before the people? They said to Moses, "Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die. And Moses said to the people, Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not".
J.T. So that they trembled. The whole position was somewhat modified, but we need much more than that as we come into full christianity. That is to say, we need new birth, forgiveness, the Spirit, and all that enters into the blessedness of the Spirit. We need to understand that we must be born anew, which is the first thing we get in @John 3: "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God".
J.McK. So that is the basis of God's work in our souls as He cleanses us.
J.T. That is the basic thought, in the beginning, for the believer. He sees the kingdom.
E.G.McA. 'Enjoined' is the word in the latter part of verse 20, "they were not able to bear what was enjoined". That is an obligation, whereas, mount Zion is a spiritual privilege to which we have come.
J.T. Quite so, it is just a question of where we are. Some of us have come thousands of miles and it is a joy to see so many here in Chicago. One has
{121}
known it for fifty years and one is thankful for what is here today, but the question is what we have come for. Are we here to contribute, and are we ready to receive the truth? Because that is the point, to get the good out of these meetings. "Ye shall know the truth", it says, "and the truth shall set you free".
A.N.W. Is there something to be said about the mediator? The mediator himself has to say, "I am exceedingly afraid and full of trembling".
J.T. Of course that mediator was not Christ. Christ is our Mediator, "The mediator of God and men ... the man Christ Jesus". Moses was not that.
A.N.W. I only thought much depended upon our Mediator in that way positively. This shows that even Moses, acquainted with the presence of God Himself, was afraid. It shows what the position involved.
J.T. In the denominations around us, it is a question whether the idea of the Mediator is known at all. It is "the man Christ Jesus", the Man with feelings, governed by love and grace peculiarly. The idea of mount Zion is grace, or more accurately, mercy. It is the extension of mercy to men with all that flows from that.
B.W. Should not the truth be clear to us and not obscure? Is the negative side here helpful in that way, for often times we are not clear about the truth?
J.T. Quite so. What is ministered and conveyed in our Bible readings, is to be the truth and our relations are to be in love, love governing us and love in the truth, too. That is the gospel, really, the gospel worked out in Paul's ministry, especially Romans which is the basic idea of the gospel.
J.W.D. Why does Paul bring in the terror of the Lord in the section that deals with the judgment seat of Christ?
J.T. Why not? There is so much looseness, even among ourselves, and how much looseness there is
{122}
abroad among nominal Christians! The terror of the Lord is introduced because God is not mocked and we are to be serious. How much looseness and worldliness there is! Indeed, in coming to a meeting like this, if we have nothing before us but a good time and travel, it is a solemn thing to come and have the word of God opened up to us. Are we ready for it? Are we open to receive the truth? It says, "ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free". We should expect that at a meeting like this.
J.W.D. So that woven into the curtains of the tabernacle were the cherubim, a symbol of divine government. Should we take account of the cherubim?
J.T. Very good, it is a symbol. It is not a question of what it is literally but of what the symbol means.
J.W.D. Would the idea of the cherubim indicate that God's government protects what is so precious, so glorious in Christ? So in coming to these meetings we have before us the positive things, but also the cherubim. The idea of the cherubim has to be faced, too.
J.T. It is a question of the government of God. The seraphim are more holiness, but they go together.
W.H.C. Is the thought of the cherubim involved in the chastening in the previous portion of this chapter? Why does this portion come just here in this chapter?
J.T. Very good. A remarkable thing that it should be brought in, especially that our God is a consuming fire. Not God simply, but *our* God, the Christian's God. If we want to be faithful with men, we are not hiding it.
S.McC. What you have been saying is most important as bearing on our coming to these meetings,
{123}
because if worldliness is allowed in our minds and ways we shall not have the truth, shall we?
J.T. That is just what I am thinking about. These terms cherubim and seraphim are symbols. What are they symbols of? We have to make an application of what a symbol means.
A.N.W. Burning is attached to both of them. The first mention of the cherubim is, "He set the Cherubim, and the flame of the flashing sword".
J.T. That is government. A remarkable thing that it should come so early in the history of man. Satan had come into the order of things that God had set up and that is a solemn thing. God intended to deal with evil at once.
C.C.T. In speaking about coming to these meetings, we would not have in our minds excusing ourselves and declining the word.
J.T. It is a very good thing to accuse yourself, but to excuse yourself when it is a question of sin is not good.
E.G.McA. Is the passage referred to, "Our God is a consuming fire", to check us that we might not think too lightly of mount Zion and what it is in the ways of God?
J.T. We are not to take mercy too lightly.
H.B. Would a word in Isaiah help? "To this man will I look: to the afflicted and contrite in spirit, and who trembleth at my word".
J.T. Trembleth, that is very good.
J.W.D. "And great fear came upon all the assembly". Do you think we are often conscious of that?
J.T. You refer to Ananias and Sapphira with whom God dealt so severely? "Great fear came upon all". If we are solemnised by the judgment of God, it helps us.
J.McK. Does @Romans 6 bear upon this? "Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid".
{124}
J.T. Just so. "God forbid". That is a good phrase to notice.
E.G.McA. You suggested a very beautiful contrast between Moses as mediator, who exceedingly trembled and feared, and Christ our Mediator full of sympathy. Would you open that up? We might have in our minds that the Mediator is someone austere. I was thinking of what you said in your prayer, referring to Corinthians, "the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", the greatness of the Person in whose face that is seen, so that we might enter more into the good of Christ as Mediator.
J.T. Mr. Darby once said, What is lovable in me is not of me, but of God. What is lovable in any one of us is of God. It is not mere niceness. We need more than niceness, we need righteousness and holiness.
E.G.McA. That brings in Christ as the Mediator in sympathy and tenderness, does it not?
A.N.W. There must be a reason why it was the skin of the face of Moses that shone, not exactly the face, but the skin of his face.
J.T. Very good, but it is a deeper matter in Christ, very beautiful, too, the face of Jesus Christ.
A.S.B. Would the beginning of the chapter help us in this regard? It says, "laying aside every weight, and sin which so easily entangles us" and "looking stedfastly on Jesus the leader and completer of faith", and, later, the Father's chastening of sons is in order "to the partaking of his holiness".
J.T. "Leader and completer of faith". The Originator of faith. So that the thing is to see what Christianity really is, and what it really is seen in Christ personally, the face of Jesus Christ. Christianity is Christ, really.
A.S.B. What you said earlier in regard to the end of the chapter, "Our God is a consuming fire", is what I was thinking of. Holiness has been subjected
{125}
to the fire and its perfection brought out. All that is connected with the beginning.
J.T. Nothing else will do, but what can be tested by the fire. You cannot let anything pass except that. Every sacrifice was by fire, too.
A.G.L. Is there much around us that corresponds with mount Sinai, its obscurity and darkness, and do we need deliverance from that to arrive at mount Zion in our own souls?
J.T. Yes, especially the young people, for they do not tell us what is really going on. God has patience with us and pities us. That is a condition that can be rectified by the truth. The Lord said, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free". There is a remedy for it. These meetings are that we might apply the truth.
A.G.L. So that if we have come by way of mount Zion, we are not afraid to come to God the Judge of all.
J.T. We shall come to that, please God, the Judge of all. It is an elevated thought, the top, so to speak, in dealing with the matter.
W.McK. In @2 Corinthians 4 which was already mentioned, it says "God ... who has shone in our hearts". Does that involve what we have here, that we come clearly and definitely into the knowledge of God?
J.T. Very good. "For the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". That is Christianity, really. What we have come to; that is what we are trying to aim at now. Mount Zion is what we have come to actually. It should be felt in a meeting like this that we have come to these things, these characteristics.
J.McK. Would you say that as we come to mount Zion the sense of mercy fills our souls with the knowledge of the greatness of the love of God, for we do not deserve it, deserving judgment instead?
{126}
That would enable us, especially the young, to be firmly founded in the truth you are developing.
J.T. So that referring again to verse 22, "Ye", meaning the Hebrew christians, "have come to mount Zion". That is the first thing; the next is "the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem". We will have to try to confine ourselves to mount Zion now because it is one of the greatest things; it is foundational and belongs to the system we are connected with. The system is that we have a High Priest in heaven who is touched by the feelings of our infirmities and then we have a Priest on earth. The Spirit of God is not called a priest, but He is here nevertheless in a priestly way to aid us in our infirmities and to add His help to our weaknesses.
F.H.L.C. Does the scripture you quoted from, @John 8: 34 - 36, connect with our chapter? "Verily, verily, I say to you, Every one that practises sin is the bondman of sin. Now the bondman abides not in the house for ever, the son abides for ever. If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free".
J.T. Quite so. The Son expresses the full thought of christianity. The Lord Jesus as the Son of God expresses the whole matter of liberty, involving the Holy Spirit too. The "therefore ..." is a matter of sequence, "If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free". The Corinthians were not abiding in that. Some of us were quoting a dear brother who is now with the Lord, He spoke about beautiful things and among them was the Man of @John 8, the Lord Jesus, the Son of God.
S.McC. You made a very interesting remark as to the Spirit being here in a priestly way. Would you say a little more about that? Does that fit in with the service suggested in @Romans 8, interceding?
J.T. I would think so. Of course, as I was saying, the Spirit is not called a priest, but the Lord Jesus is. The idea of priesthood is in Christ, in Christ as
{127}
Man; it is not a question of the Spirit by Himself, but Christ as Man. But at the same time the Spirit takes on priestly service because He adds His help to our weaknesses, and He is sympathetic with us in our weaknesses. I am sure you would agree with that, it is a very beautiful thing to have before us, that Christ is in heaven and the Spirit down here, not on the earth simply, but in the assembly, for that is where He is.
S.McC. That is excellent, showing how the position is maintained here below, equal to what is on high.
A.N.W. Is it too early to ask how far the Spirit's service as a Paraclete goes in relation to our individual matters?
J.T. I think it goes a long way. He deals with matters in relation to us in a spiritual sense. I would not say He looks after us in our ordinary affairs in our families. I would not want to say much about that. He goes a long way as a Paraclete. The word refers to Him as alongside of us so as to take care of our interests, truly to take care of the interests of Christ. He looks after everything.
A.N.W. It says, "in things relating to God", in @Hebrews 5. Would that govern the service of the blessed Spirit?
J.T. I suppose that is right.
A.N.W. It is the spiritual side.
J.T. There is much needed as to the truth of the gospel being presented to us. The priestly attitude of the Lord Jesus above is to take care of all our interests. He is above and the Spirit is here in the assembly to care for all that relates to God.
J.McK. Is it your thought that in the preaching of the gospel the idea of mercy should be stressed?
J.T. I think that. Mr. Darby refers invariably to grace, but I think mount Zion is more accurately mercy. Mercy is extended to us in our need, in the
{128}
direness of our need as men and women in this world.
J.McK. So that mercy is really sovereign, from God Himself.
J.T. I am sure.
J.W.D. Would that be the basis of the Spirit making intercession? Why can He make intercession?
J.T. Do you mean the basis of redemption? I think that is the basis for everything. Therefore the Lord Jesus became Man to make everything perfect, so that salvation should be complete; all that relates to the salvation of men should be complete.
S.McC. It says in @Romans 8: 27, "But he who searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he intercedes for saints according to God". Do you understand that to mean that He is maintaining here the blessedness of what is on high, where Christ is interceding in the presence of God for us?
J.T. I would say just that. @Romans 8 is so full in that sense. The number of times the Spirit is mentioned is remarkable, probably thirteen or fourteen times, and it is to bring out the volume of spiritual power resulting from the presence of the Spirit Himself here on earth where we are. He makes intercession according to God for the saints.
J.K. "The Spirit joins also its help", is in connection with prayer, is it not?
J.T. Just so, "Joins also its help to our weakness" is how it reads.
J.K. "The Spirit joins also its help to our weakness; for we do not know what we should pray for as is fitting, but the Spirit itself makes intercession with groanings which cannot be uttered".
J.T. I think that is very precious, and especially important for the young people -- there are a good many here -- so that they may get the good of the
{129}
gospel. The time is ebbing out; we are almost into the millennium, but it will not be nearly so great a time as this is. This is the greatest time, the greatest dispensation. It is the longest, but we cannot tell how much longer it will be, but it looks as if it is very near the finish.
A.S.C. We get the psalmist's apprehension of mount Zion in @Psalm 48, "Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King". Is that for our encouragement now?
J.T. Just so. David comes into all of this very much and especially in that passage you quoted, for David is the author or editor of the Psalms; not that he wrote all of them, but I would say he was probably the editor. In any event, he had a great deal to do with them, being called the sweet psalmist of Israel. The word 'sweet' would imply what the grace of Christ is in the Psalms and one psalm may be cited peculiarly. In speaking of the ark, he says, "We heard of it at Ephratah, we found it in the fields of the wood". That means that he was a boy, maybe, when he heard of it at Ephratah, which was very likely where he was born. He says, "We heard of it at Ephratah, we found it in the fields of the wood", showing how real he was as a young man or boy.
H.B. The same psalm goes on to speak about God choosing mount Zion and says, "I will abundantly bless her provision; I will satisfy her needy ones with bread".
A.B.M'N. Does the thought of the kingdom enter into what you have been saying?
J.T. That is really what we are dwelling on, so we have spoken about new birth, which is basic to all that has been said. In @John 3 it says, "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God". *See* the kingdom -- that is a real question
{130}
for everybody, whether he sees the kingdom. Then the next thing in that same chapter is, "Except any one be born of water and of Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God". These are real basic matters as to the kingdom. And what we are saying now is of the highest importance. The question is, Are we all getting what the kingdom really means, the kingdom of God? It says, "the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit".
A.N.W. The summing up of the matter in chapter 12 is, "Wherefore let us, receiving a kingdom not to be shaken".
J.T. Receiving it, not seeing it, or entering into it, but receiving it. That is another thing, a beautiful thought. It is a question of inquiring whether we see, or enter into, or receive the kingdom of God, a kingdom which cannot be shaken.
A.G.L. Does the thought of the constitution of christianity enter into that?
J.T. I think it does. These items are all basic to what we are saying now because it is what is constitutional, whether we have seen the kingdom or entered into the kingdom or received the kingdom which cannot be moved; let us "have grace, by which let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear". We have come here many times and our dear brethren have prepared for us. We have come long distances and we do not want to come for nothing.
E.F.C. Is it important that we see that mount Zion is the place of rich divine provision? It says, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". I was thinking of the geographical setting and whether we understand the rich provision in the word of God and the sacrificial work of Christ, and the mercy of God as Abraham and David proved it in type.
{131}
J.T. What you are saying now reverts to Abraham, to the mount of Jehovah, not mount Zion or Sinai, but the mount of Jehovah which was very near mount Zion. "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". It is very near, but it is mount Zion where things are fully provided for us.
J.W.D. Is not the idea of a right secured to us seen in mount Zion, an inalienable right connected with christianity? I am referring to @John 1, "to them gave he the right to be children of God". Mount Zion represents the constitution, the right of every christian to be in its glory and liberty. Mount Zion really constitutes the right of everyone of us to this.
J.T. You are alluding to @John 1. Now let us allude to the end of this epistle in regard to the word 'right'. It says in chapter 13: 10, "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle; for of those beasts whose blood is carried as sacrifices for sin into the holy of holies by the high priest, of these the bodies are burned outside the camp. Wherefore also Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate, therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach, for we have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one". I think these two scriptures are well to keep before us, what christians have a right to, that God has given us that right. We have no right to anything as natural men, whereas mount Zion refers to what we do get and what we have in the Spirit and what christianity implies.
S.McC. Would the answer in the believers be seen in @Revelation 22 in the washing of the robes, that they may have the moral right? There is a moral answer to the right that is presented to the believer, "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life". It is established
{132}
on a moral basis on our part showing that we surely realise what we are dealing with in mount Zion.
J.T. The idea of right, so that all these passages surely ought to help us as to christianity.
W.H.C. Is verse 28, "Wherefore let us, receiving a kingdom not to be shaken, have grace, by which let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear", in the apostle's mind that we should move forward? There is to be power seen in us.
J.T. I think so. The apostle, undoubtedly Paul, would endeavour to get the Hebrew christians into the reality of christianity and we should go forward into it.
E.G.McA. I would like to refer once more to your reference to the Spirit of God moving here in a priestly way, as it seems to me all that has been said since greatly helps if we take account of it. If I do not know how to pray, the Spirit helps. And the fact that it says our infirmities without designating them shows it includes them all in connection with the mind of God. That is a wonderfully encouraging word in regard to the Spirit here at the present time.
J.T. Very good. It reminds us of the continuance of divine service, what brethren are going on with. And there is no doubt that in what we are going on with, God is helping us, and the first day of the week is the day in which we enter on divine service. We usually have three meetings, the first for the breaking of bread and it is alluded to in @1 Corinthians 11: 17. The apostle says that he came to the assembly, but there were certain things that he could not praise them about. At the same time he did praise them about other things, but what he did not praise them about was when they came together, they failed in what belonged to the assembly. There are peculiar joys that enter into the first day of the week when we come together. So I will read a verse or two in @1 Corinthians 11, verse 17. "But in prescribing to
{133}
you on this which I now enter on, I do not praise, namely, that ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse. For first, when ye come together in assembly, I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it. For there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you. When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper. For each one in eating takes his own supper before others, and one is hungry and another drinks to excess. Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking? or do ye despise the assembly of God, and put to shame them who have not? What shall I say to you? shall I praise you? In this point I do not praise". Now, he says, I am going to tell you what is proper, "For I received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you, this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come. So that whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty in respect of the body and of the blood of the Lord", and so forth, I thought it was an important matter that we should come to it intelligently and we should see how the Lord is looking on what we are doing on the first day of the week, and we should see how much there is in it for God and for the service of the Lord Jesus. I thought it would be a good opportunity to bring forward these facts, so that the truth of the assembly should be with us thoroughly on the first day of the week so that we should continue in it, increase in it, and that the numbers
{134}
should increase and not diminish, but increase and not be divided by sectarianism. I have suggested all that I have said, dear brethren, because the time is pretty well up now and I think we should take to heart what is going on at the present time and what we have part in so that we should continue in it and increase in it.
{135}
WHAT WE HAVE COME TO (2)
@Hebrews 12: middle of verse 22, "and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem"; @Revelation 21: 1 - 7
J.T. The suggestion for this time is @Hebrews 12, beginning with verse 22. We have had mount Zion already. Next is the "city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem", to which is to be added "myriads of angels, the universal gathering". After that we shall consider the remaining part, that is, verses 23 and 24. These things will be severally before us during these three days. It is thought wise now to add @Revelation 21, also, which treats of the heavenly city. We shall later come to "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven". But we should be occupied now with the city. The assembly is the assembly of the firstborn; that we shall have to consider by itself and we shall perhaps see how important it is, related to the assembly in a peculiar way; "The assembly of the firstborn". These references do not include the saints from the beginning, that is to say, the saints from Adam or Enoch, but refer only to the assembly itself; it properly is an idea to be viewed entirely by itself. It is a matter of the firstborn. That is to say, the place that each one has as firstborn, and they are registered in heaven. It is not an earthly position; it is a heavenly position. The earlier reference in the previous verse is to heavenly Jerusalem, to a city. It is a city really, the capital of the coming world, but the assembly of the firstborn is to be viewed by itself. We should see that the assembly itself is in mind and it does not include other things mentioned here, such as angels. And then God Himself, the "judge of all; and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to Jesus, mediator of a new covenant", are brought in. All of these are separate thoughts and are not included in the assembly of the firstborn, but what is before us primarily is the heavenly Jerusalem, because
{136}
that refers to a city, to a capital, which is the very centre of God's government and ways.
S.McC. How do you view the twenty-four elders in Revelation and what they symbolise in relation to this thought of the city of the living God?
J.T. Well, the first thing that has to be said is they are not mentioned here, but no doubt are included in what is said. They are mentioned throughout the book. The four and twenty elders, that is to say twice twelve, include the whole patriarchal period, whatever that period may be.
S.McC. I was interested in what you have already said as to what we could include in this matter that is before us now and what we could not include.
J.T. These eight items have to be spoken of as they are stated -- Paul wrote this probably, and they are to be taken up as presented here. We first begin with mount Sinai, a negative thought, showing what is opposite to what is represented in mount Zion; then we have mount Zion which is in relation to David. David begins his regime there and it gives character to his whole kingdom and ministry.
J.W.D. Would the city that Abraham looked for be included in this city?
J.T. Well, we are not told what it is. It is a question of spiritual understanding and comparing what Scripture says. It shows what a remarkable man Abraham was; what a place he had in divine ways and counsels. So that he looked for a city which has foundations whose builder and maker is God. It would rightly compare with what we have in the book of Revelation in that respect, because it says much about foundations, but the city in verse 22 is set by itself. It is the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem. We have to see what that means, whether what is said about the church of the firstborn is included, for the city, the heavenly Jerusalem, is mentioned by itself, then the myriads of
{137}
angels are mentioned, and, after that, the assembly of the firstborn.
A.S.C. Is it right to link what you are saying with what we have in chapter 11 in relation to the patriarchs, "God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a city"? Do we now arrive at the city in chapter 12?
J.T. Well, we have to be sure what is alluded to, because we cannot say that the assembly of the firstborn is alluded to in that city. First we have mentioned here the heavenly Jerusalem which may also allude to the assembly of the firstborn, but we have to treat it by itself. The city is one thing and the assembly of the firstborn another.
J.McK. Is it over against the earthly Jerusalem, indicating that God is now operating from heaven instead of from earth?
J.T. Quite so.
A.N.W. In the details of the city in chapter 21 there are two twelves, one in relation to the tribes and the gates, and the other in relation to the apostles of the Lamb and the wall. The names of the twelve tribes inscribed on the gates would perhaps have an earthly bearing, for it says the names inscribed were those of the twelve tribes for the sons of Israel.
J.T. It has to be treated as a city anyway. To be clear about it in our minds, the first reference in verse 22 here is the city, the heavenly Jerusalem. Verse 10 of @Revelation 21 is also the city. In verse 8 it says, "to the fearful and unbelieving", and so on; then verse 9 says, "And there came one of the seven angels which had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues, and spoke with me, saying, Come here, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife". In the earlier part of the chapter it is *as* a bride, but here she is formally called the bride and undoubtedly is the assembly, the Lamb's wife.
{138}
E.G.McA. You spoke of this heavenly city being the capital, the centre of God's government and ways. Is that thought in advance of Zion and the liberating thought in connection with christianity in contrast to the old regime?
J.T. Well, of course, we have to keep to the facts, and the facts are that Zion is not properly called a city. It was part of Jerusalem really, not a total thought, but part of Jerusalem. It is called the city of David and we, of course, would therefore think of it as the capital, the place of rule, whereas the assembly of the firstborn and all that has been said about it is to be regarded as heavenly, wholly heavenly, having no earthly connection at all. It is indigenous to heaven really.
C.C.T. Is not that the reason it is mentioned here in Hebrews as the heavenly Jerusalem and in Revelation as the holy Jerusalem? It removes any earthly thought whatsoever, does it not?
J.T. Very good. Only the question is what it includes, whether we may not be at times making too much of it, I mean going beyond what it includes. Here we have what is said of the heavenly Jerusalem. To be accurate we must think of things just as they are before us in Scripture.
A.B.M'N. It is called the city of the living God, but would the addition of heavenly Jerusalem give it its character?
J.T. You see these items referred to in verses 22 and 23 are separated by semicolons, an accurate separation for each one. The next thing spoken of after mount Zion is the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem. The item after that is the angels, which is another thing. What we are especially touching on is heavenly Jerusalem; what it is not, what it is, and what it may be. It is a time of accuracy from the divine side, I mean.
{139}
J.McK. Does @Galatians 4 help as to what you may have in mind? Over against Hagar corresponding to Sinai in Arabia is Jerusalem above which is free, which is our mother, as if to indicate the way in which we begin in relation to these things.
J.T. That is in Galatians, of course, and intended to help Galatian believers really, but it is alluded to in this book. The writer of Hebrews is the writer of Galatians and, no doubt, they would allude to the same thing in a sense; but it is a question of whether they do, you see, and whether we may be inaccurate in stressing a thing like that unless we are sure, and so here the word is heavenly Jerusalem. That is by itself, and then we have taken the liberty of reading in the book of the Revelation to show what this heavenly Jerusalem may be as treated by John. John wrote the book of Revelation, not Paul, and John has a different point of view. I do not say that there is any contradiction, far be the thought, but, at the same time, we have to be careful in alluding to things, to look into things, and to see what is said.
A.N.W. While it is said to be holy in both cases in @Revelation 21, the point here is to emphasise that it is heavenly.
J.T. Just so.
S.McC. In the letter to Philadelphia, the Lord brings into the minds of the saints this thought of Jerusalem. Would that be what the Lord has particularly in mind in our day, to give us a distinct impression of the assembly in this way?
J.T. Would you be kind enough to read the passage in @Revelation 3 as there are several things mentioned.
S.McC. "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more at all out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the
{140}
new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God, and my new name".
J.T. That is clear enough. It probably means the same thing as Paul does. So it is now a question of considering further. We have the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and then we have other things that we have to provide for. Where are they and where do they come in? Verse 22 says, "myriads of angels, the universal gathering". That is angels, of course, a large number of them, myriads, and then the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven. They are to be by themselves; they are registered in heaven. And then God Himself, the Judge of all, and He, of course, would cover all those involved to whom judgment applies, even those that are not the Lord's. Then "to the spirits of just men made perfect". Who are they? We cannot say they belong to the assembly. They are the spirits of just men made perfect. That is one setting by itself. Well, we have to look back in the history of humanity and see where there are just men who are not included in the assembly, who are classified by themselves, the spirits of just men made perfect. God would take account of all that came in after Abel, showing us and all those to whom the apostle wrote that God is taking account of men as such and their spirits are taken account of. They are in their graves, but their spirits are taken account of. But they are viewed as perfect in some sense. We have come to them. Of course, we are not told where they are, but they are taken account of here. These matters we should look into, dealing accurately with Scripture to get all the good we can out of it. If God is calling attention by His servant to the spirits of just men, well, who are they? We say it includes Abel. We are entitled to include him because he was a just man and now we come to him as being perfect in some sense in the divine mind. That is to say, it must include the
{141}
redemptive work of Christ. There would be no perfection without that.
J.McK. Does this suggest to our minds that heavenly Jerusalem is connected with the operations of God from heaven so that the saints are to become more spiritual in sensing those operations?
J.T. There is that which God has in His hand, which He is operating.
J.McK. The idea of administration, which should cause us to be exercised to become spiritual, to be in concern with God's operations.
J.T. Just so. Think of the value of being in it. The first day of the week is the day when all these things come into mind.
E.G.McA. What is the import of the living God in connection with heavenly Jerusalem?
J.T. The idea of living is over against judaism or anything else morally dead. God is over against that, the living God.
E.G.McA. It is in contrast to all that is morally dead, formality, rationalism, and so on.
J.T. Just so. It is now all around us in christendom. Judaism has passed away, but it is making an attempt to re-establish itself now in what is called Israel, but it is a poor, miserable thing. There is nothing of God in it, nothing living about it, and we do not need to pay any attention to it; only, of course, you wonder at the way it is spoken of and treated by so-called Christians around us. But the living God is the living God and is over against what is dead morally.
J.McK. We have been speaking of the first day of the week and all that is available to us in the service of God. Do you have in mind the distinct place the Spirit has in this service, as well as Christ, so that we come to the living God and heavenly Jerusalem?
J.T. It is the living God who is served. But we have the Church of England and others with all
{142}
kinds of forms; dead forms. The living God, and the Spirit, and the saints, too, are living.
J.W.D. It says that the God of glory appeared to our father Abraham. Did God anticipate these spiritual operations?
J.T. Very good, meaning it is glory to belong to these things. All emanates from God; even the creation itself, what there is in it of glory is from God.
A.G.L. In chapter 9 the apostle speaks of "Christ, who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God, purify your conscience from dead works to worship the living God". Is that connected?
J.T. Just so. The worship of God requires a living state of things. We have it in @John 4. It is the worship of God. The Father seeketh such as His worshippers, and the Lord speaks of Him, too, as the living Father.
V.W.H. In @Matthew 16 Peter confesses, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". That was really where Christ first saw the assembly, was it not?
J.T. Very good. It shows that Matthew deals with things that we have just been speaking of. What Peter confessed alludes to christianity, where things should be living.
A.N.W. Does the omission of the article in verse 22 throw emphasis on the character of God? It is literally 'living God', not *the* living God, each time.
J.T. Quite so, or you might say "To city of living God". You might read it that way.
S.McC. In the opening chapter of Genesis much is made of the female side and the woman is bound up with the matter of government. Would this verse help us to see how the assembly is bound up with this matter of government?
J.T. That is very good. I might add that the word 'man' in @Genesis 1: 26 includes woman, but the woman is not there. If you follow it strictly, the
{143}
rendering in the first part of chapter 2 does not give the woman, but chapter 1 includes her. She is not seen until the end of chapter 2. God said of Adam, I will make a helpmate for him. There was no one suitable. It is as if he was looking for a woman and he found none suitable to himself, but God says, I will make him a helpmate, one suitable to him, and He does. He builds a woman and then He brings her to the man and does not say anything. But Adam says something, he says to Jehovah, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called woman". So she does not appear literally in the first chapter; yet the word is, We will make man in Our image and We will make male and female; it is the plural. In chapter 2 we have the woman in actuality.
S.McC. That helps us as to the greatness of the place the assembly has in this matter of government.
J.T. We can read now from the 9th verse of chapter 21 of Revelation, I think it is well worth reading because we have come to such an important subject.
S.McC. "And there came one of the seven angels which had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues, and spoke with me, saying, Come here, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife".
J.T. The word is not the same as verse 2 of chapter 21, "Prepared as a bride". That is a figure, but here, I will show you the bride. It is just what she is that is shown.
S.McC. "And he carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a great and high mountain, and shewed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God. Her shining was like a most precious stone, as a crystal-like jasper stone; having a great and high wall; having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are those of the
{144}
twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. On the east three gates; and on the north three gates; and on the south three gates; and on the west three gates. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. And he that spoke with me had a golden reed as a measure, that he might measure the city, and its gates, and its wall".
J.T. The brethren have just to consider what is really meant, whether this includes all men from the beginning, and so forth. It clearly alludes to the assembly, for the foundations have the names of the apostles of the Lamb.
S.McC. "And the city lies four-square, and its length is as much as the breadth. And he measured the city with the reed -- twelve thousand stadia: the length and the breadth and height of it are equal. And he measured its wall, a hundred and forty-four cubits, a man's measure, that is, the angel's. And the building of its wall was jasper; and the city pure gold, like pure glass: the foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with every precious stone, the first foundation, jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald; the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprasus; the eleventh, jacinth; the twelfth, amethyst. And the twelve gates, twelve pearls; each one of the gates, respectively, was of one pearl; and the street of the city pure gold, as transparent glass. And I saw no temple in it; for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb. And the city has no need of the sun nor of the moon, that they should shine for it; for the glory of God has enlightened it, and the lamp thereof is the Lamb. And the nations shall walk by its light; and the kings of the earth bring their glory to it. And its gates shall not be shut at all by day, for night shall not be there.
{145}
And they shall bring the glory and the honour of the nations to it. And nothing common, nor that maketh an abomination and a lie, shall at all enter into it; but those only who are written in the book of life of the Lamb".
W.McK. Would the fact that the assembly, viewed in her eternal relations in verse 2, is called the holy city indicate that government in some sense enters into the eternal state? We have been speaking about the assembly as the seat of God's government.
J.T. I think it should be limited to the thought here. I do not think our minds are entitled to bring to the eternal state the matter of government. The allusion I think is to the heavenly capital of the millennial day.
A.N.W. Would it be correct to say that all the verses we read have a distinct earthly bearing, which could not quite be said of verse 2, "I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband"? Would that be distinctly the heavenly side?
J.T. It would.
A.N.W. In other words not exactly for show, but seen.
J.T. Then you have the view of it in @Hebrews 12, verse 23. We have to consider what that would mean. The firstborn have the first place with God. They are not earthly, but what belong to heaven, are indigenous to heaven.
J.W.D. It includes only the assembly, I gather. Is that right?
J.T. It is the assembly of the firstborn and includes only the assembly. The same would be true of the first reference, that is, heavenly Jerusalem. But then we have to make allowance for the other items which we should come to later, such as the spirits of just men made perfect. We cannot be sure they are included in the heavenly city. How are
{146}
they to be spoken of accurately? Then the idea of the covenant. The covenant does not belong properly to the assembly, but there is a new covenant, as it says, Jesus the Mediator of a new covenant, and the blood of sprinkling. Why should all these things be mentioned unless there is something vital meant? And I think we have to go back to the beginning of humanity before Israel and the assembly were formed.
V.C.L. What is the link between Paul's word, "Ye have come", and the millennial setting in @Revelation 21? @Hebrews 12: 22 says, "Ye have come" as though it is a present matter, but is not @Revelation 21, which you have just had read for us, largely millennial from start to finish?
J.T. We have to be careful because the millennial conditions include the present conditions in some sense, whereas this 21st chapter refers to the new heavens and new earth, not the present. So we have to make allowance for that. It is new, I do not think the millennial earth will be altogether new in that sense.
C.C.T. Is that why it says, "new Jerusalem", also, in chapter 21?
J.T. Quite so. In verse 9 it says, "There came one of the seven angels which had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues, and spoke with me, saying, Come here, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife". It is a great and high mountain, and he "shewed me the holy city, Jerusalem".
A.N.W. It is called the new Jerusalem in verse 2.
J.T. The holy city is undoubtedly in mind here. She is shown as the bride, the Lamb's wife. So that I am only trying to maintain accuracy in dealing with Scripture that we may get all the good God intends us to get out of it. So these scriptures must be carefully read. Revelation is written by John, clearly, and the Hebrews by Paul. Not that there is
{147}
any difference spiritually, but at the same time God used John to write about these final conditions to show us that that is what He had in mind, that we might see how different they are from the present time.
V.C.L. The wife is mentioned in @Revelation 21: 9, "The Lamb's wife". Would that include this present time?
J.T. Yes, quite.
V.C.L. Would not the bride in verse 2 exclude the present time?
J.T. The bride adorned, that is a figure. We ought to be free to apply it, but at the same time it is a figure in verse 2.
J.McK. Is the purpose of God seen in the assembly of the firstborn registered in heaven apart from the matter of responsible history. God in His grace having registered our names there?
J.T. Surely, the place of the assembly is there indelibly. It is a peculiar thing, it is a precious thing and is looked at by itself. But then before that we must come to heavenly Jerusalem because it is a question of government, the capital of the universe at some particular time.
W.H.C. We often say the city speaks of administration and speaks only of administrative features.
J.T. The city has a great place in @Revelation 21 and 22, a greater place there even than in Hebrews.
W.H.C. Would you say a little more about other features of the city, such as beauty and power, as well as administration, and, as you said, the place of God's operations?
J.T. God has His own primary thoughts in mind in dealing with what is historical in our dispensation. He has His own thoughts in mind always. Here in Chicago, how much is there that is in keeping with what the heavenly city is? There should be improvement as to divine administration in the assembly,
{148}
because *heavenly* Jerusalem is the word, and we are dealing with the greatest things of the assembly. Why have we not more to show for the Lord's sake? It is well worth thinking of, because we are to rise up to the greatness of God's thoughts for us.
H.P.R. Verse 9 of @Revelation 21 says, "One of the seven angels which had had the seven bowls ..." Is that a millennial scene or connected with the millennium?
J.T. It refers to the present time. Those seven bowls refer to judgment. The seven last plagues bear on the conditions we are in now. These bowls refer to the power there is with God to execute judgment by them.
S.McC. In this book the great cities of the world come up for judgment, but the book finishes with a greater city, the assembly. What is to fill our minds in Detroit, Chicago, and New York is what God has in these cities.
J.T. What God sees when you come together. There are two meetings in Detroit, something for God to take account of as a witness, to work out things, and that is the idea that is in the divine mind. God is pleased to come down to very small things, but yet there is the reminding of God, to use that word, and God reminds us, too, of what is in the divine mind. Two companies of brethren come together to take account of certain things. That is pleasing to God and it is pleasing to yourselves, of course, and is to us, too, when we hear of it. You had meetings there lately that were pleasing to the brethren. I am referring to practical things that we should carry away with us. We can put them into effect. They refer to something that is in the mind of God.
J.W.D. I think you mentioned in London that this refers to the assembly, the Lord having so much
{149}
enjoyed His relations with the assembly here that He brings her forward in the millennial setting.
J.T. Very good. That is what our brother alludes to in these last plagues, implements of judgment. His judgments are here now. That is the idea. God is executing them now.
S.McC. Would it be that as we are formed in the features of the assembly we should know how to act in the position in which we are, in matters of government and administration?
J.T. That is what we should be getting out of these meetings. Are we all correct? Do we know what to do, and do we do it?
C.C.T. It says in @Revelation 21 that John was caught away in the Spirit. Would that be for us locally? As we are caught away by the Spirit, we would be able to view these things in the right way.
J.T. There was reference in prayer to the blessed Spirit having part with us, a most precious thing.
V.C.L. In @Ephesians 3 we see these things working out. It says, "in order that now to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God".
J.T. Very good. An excellent scripture.
V.C.L. I was thinking of the word '*now*' in view of your emphasis.
J.T. Very good. This is the time of testimony and we are in it ourselves. The divine mind was seen at the outset, after the Spirit came down. The twelve apostles began to act before Paul came, but, when he came, he greatly augmented what was there and so you get the full thought of the assembly.
A.S.B. In your reference to the seven last plagues, did I understand you to say that judgment is operating now, and is that with the intent of bringing out the character of the city in its holiness, the city of the living God?
{150}
J.T. That is right. There are things that God will do in the millennium that He would not do now because we are in the dispensation of grace. Here in Chicago or Detroit we would not put anyone in jail. Such things are not being done now. Severe physical things will be done in the millennium that are not being done now. We are dealing with things in a spiritual way and what is dealt out in the way of judgment in the assembly now is not physical but moral.
S.McC. In relation to that, would the Lord's words apply, "Put the sword into the sheath", but it will come out again, will it not?
J.T. It will. The Lord will deal with things on that principle presently.
A.G.L. You spoke of the seven bowls as being here now. Are they here in the minds of the saints as having a divine judgment of evil?
J.T. Just so. We are to judge evil on the same principle, but not on the same pattern, but the thing is there nevertheless. A brother is to be put away; we withdraw from him if he is not fit to be in fellowship. The Lord helped us to change the word 'putting away' to 'withdraw'. In the meantime, we go on the ground that the Lord Himself laid down for us. We are not using physical means now; we leave it with God. 'Putting away' is in accord with the original word in @1 Corinthians 5. The apostle says, "deliver him ... to Satan for destruction of the flesh". Satan will do that, not the brethren, but it is clear the man was restored. It is not physical, although there is a certain physical thing done in withdrawing from a person, but not in the sense of putting in jail or the like. We do not do that. It is God's judgment.
J.McK. So that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
E.T.P. Peter says, "The time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come". Has
{151}
that a present bearing for us, alluding to the present bearing of judgment among us?
J.T. It has not actually come, that is, physical judgment. Read that passage again.
E.T.P. @1 Peter 4: 17, "The time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come; but if first from us, what shall be the end of those who obey not the glad tidings of God?".
J.T. That is a serious way to put it. Peter is not dealing with the physical side, with actual punishment, but it is put in such a way as to be before us in dealing with evil.
A.N.W. Our position in the matter of judgment is set out in chapters 2 and 3 of this book, whereas, from chapter 4 onward, it is more the things that are hereafter. @Revelation 2 and 3 are assembly matters, the Lord's judicial moves in relation to the churches, knowing their works, and finally standing outside Laodicea knocking at the door. "*I* rebuke and discipline as many as I love; be zealous therefore and repent". I thought that referred to the assembly time.
J.T. No physical dealing there yet.
A.N.W. It is to come.
J.T. What is physical in cases of discipline is not what is in mind. It is a question of what kind of judgment begins. It should be in our minds that material things will happen presently. The Revelation is full of it, both in the beginning and the end, and in the middle, too. Up to chapter 19, all is judgment, you might say.
A.G.L. God executes the judgment that we have already arrived at in the assembly.
J.T. Exactly. We have it in our minds; we do not put a man in jail. That will happen presently. In the meantime, we are working according to what they did at the beginning; that is what we go by as to discipline.
{152}
C.C.T. Would a judgment about unionism be one of the judgments of the assembly?
J.T. We cannot have fellowship with that kind of thing. God will deal with that.
J.W.D. "And the sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed". That is an entirely different principle from what operates today.
J.T. Very different. We are dealing with things in the assembly now. What they did at the beginning is the pattern for us.
W.McK. Why would you not use the expression 'putting away'?
J.T. It is assuming to have the same assembly power and authority as they had in the beginning. Twenty-five years ago we thought it right, but we have been helped to see that we could not assume to have such authority as they had at the beginning when the apostles were there.
A.N.W. At the beginning there was the word of the apostles as to how things were to be done. What you say is a balance, for you could not abrogate @1 Corinthians 5, but @2 Timothy 2 is to be taken account of.
W.H.C. In relation to Babylon it says, "Rejoice over her, heaven, and ye saints and apostles and prophets; for God has judged your judgment upon her".
{153}
WHAT WE HAVE COME TO (3)
@Hebrews 12: 22, "And to myriads of angels, the universal gathering"; @Hebrews 1: 5 - 14
J.T. It is thought that we should segregate this part of our subject -- that is to say, what we have come to -- in this reading, to look into the subject of angels according to what is stated of them in the first chapter. Angels are a higher order of being than men, and were created before men. We cannot say how long before, but clearly they were created before and are designated by Job as sons of God. So they are highly dignified in the divine mind and in divine service. It is thought that we should be a little more conversant with them, especially as it is said in @Hebrews 1: 14, "Are they not all ministering spirit, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?". That is to say, we are the persons, men are the persons in mind to be ministered to. "Ministering spirits", it says, "sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation". They were evidently used from the outset of the creation of man. Their service begins in the book of Genesis and runs through the whole Bible to the book of Revelation. So that it should occupy us, at such a time as this, as those who seek the truth and we might say are among those who inherit salvation. Angelic ministry is a prime element in our salvation. Even as to the Lord Jesus Himself, He said He could ask His Father and He would give Him more than twelve legions of angels, and so we read too, that an angel came and ministered to Him.
S.McC. Does the service of angels bear mostly on our external circumstances, such as our journeyings, our occupations, our bodies, and the like?
J.T. Quite so. Then it is remarkable how they enter into divine things, and how some of them are designated archangels, having a special place with
{154}
God, and how much they can tell us of things that we even do not know about. An angel spoke to Mary, the Lord's own mother, and instructed her. All through the Scriptures we get remarkable instruction from angels and, therefore, it becomes incumbent upon us to look into what Scripture teaches us as to them, and it is thought that this meeting should be devoted largely to the subject.
E.F.C. Do some angels serve in a priestly way and others in a military way? For example, Gabriel in priestly service and Michael in military service.
J.T. These are important things to notice, and you can see how in the ways of God they are employed in very great matters, very extensive matters, even in matters on which, as to ourselves, great things depend. Therefore the suggestion to all of us is that we should look into the matter and see how we may rely on the angels at certain times to help us. Not at all that we should pray to them; that would be idolatry and would be very wrong, but still we may ask God about them.
E.F.C. Why do you think their service toward those of the circumcision was more pronounced than toward the uncircumcision? They are linked with Peter in a direct way, whereas, with Paul they are referred to as standing by.
J.T. That is a matter for us to look into and see whether a certain class of saints, the Jewish element, among the saved are paid more attention to than the gentile. I would hesitate to say much on that point, for I would think they are available to all of us. The word in verse 14 of chapter 1 is, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?", not only those who are Jewish and not only gentiles, but all.
A.N.W. On the boat when the shipwreck was imminent, Paul says, "I exhort you to be of good courage ... For an angel of the God, whose I am
{155}
and whom I serve, stood by me this night, saying, Fear not, Paul".
J.T. Then again we have one of them destroying a hundred and eighty-five thousand men at once.
S.McC. In the book of Daniel their service seems linked with the opening up of prophetic events. Would that bear on the matter you are referring to, speaking to us about divine things? They come, do they not, in relation to the unfolding of prophetic matters to Daniel and all the people?
J.T. It is said he was greatly beloved; that is very touching -- "O Daniel, man greatly beloved", the angel told him.
S.McC. Would there be in that way an intimate link between the angels and those who are in the testimony, as understanding the place they have and that they are dear in the sight of heaven?
J.T. Quite so. We begin to inquire in our minds how high they extend upward, the place they have in divine operations and then how they extend downward too. We get, for instance, in the gospel of Luke, a multitude of the heavenly host celebrating, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". That is, they are entirely unjealous as regards men, as ourselves. They respect us as servants would respect their masters, so to speak. They would respect those who are heirs of salvation.
A.N.W. Mark tells us that as driven by the Spirit into the wilderness, the Lord Himself was ministered to by them, "And the angels ministered to him".
E.G.McA. You would say that the angels instruct us according to that passage in Daniel, "And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, Daniel, I am now come forth to make thee skilful of understanding". And then in verse 11 of chapter 10 Gabriel says, "O Daniel, man greatly beloved, understand
{156}
the words which I speak unto thee, and stand upright; for unto thee am I now sent". It shows that they can tell us things.
J.T. Quite so. Especially Gabriel as to the seventy weeks, "Seventy weeks are apportioned out upon thy people". A very important epoch, and it was entrusted to them to tell Daniel about the bringing in of "the righteousness of the ages". These are great matters and they were entrusted to angels.
J.W.D. Do you mean we can be conscious of the personality of angels actually speaking? It was an actual angel, an actual being that spoke to Daniel. Are we conscious of the personality of these beings or is it an indirect service we are conscious of in an indirect way?
J.T. Our time is somewhat limited and we must make the most of it, but I think what you say is of supreme importance in the subject, and I will begin with such cases as refer to the Lord Himself, a divine Person, how angels regard Him and then their place in the service of God. What should occupy us to begin with is the exalted beings who are engaged in divine service, and what men say to angels and what angels say to men. How much intelligence they have, and whether it is to be compared with what the great apostles, like Paul and Peter, would have, and even how much any of us here in this day of small things might have as compared with angels who are invisible to us. We cannot say we see them, but they are here. We ought to be aware they are here; they are to be discerned, for things are happening by them. I think these are the lines which we should pursue for we want to get the full thought as nearly as we can in the time we have. I would suggest that we keep on as we have already done. We should consider how divine Persons Themselves deal with angels.
{157}
J.McK. Does the matter of @John 5 help? "An angel descended at a certain season in the pool and troubled the water. Whoever therefore first went in after the troubling of the water became well". There was an awareness of the angel's movements, while perhaps not yet seen with the physical eye.
J.T. Very good; an awareness, but the one man who needed it did not get the good of it.
A.N.W. At the end of the book we are reading there is an exhortation as to hospitality for by the exercise of it some entertained angels unawares. I suppose they may be in that form; they were represented as men, but they were angels.
J.T. That helps to clarify our subject. Regarding the persons who appeared to Abraham, one of them was the Lord Himself. Jehovah, as the sequel shows, but two of them were angels, and so we take these examples of how angels may be with us and how we may be with them.
A.S.C. In @Acts 12 the angel said to Peter, "Rise up quickly ... Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And he did so ... And going forth he followed him and did not know that what was happening by means of the angel was real". That would illustrate the service of angels in relation to matters.
J.T. That is a good illustration and helps to keep things within bounds that they may be intelligible to us, that we may carry away some thoughts that may help us, that we may have to do with angels in a conscious way, and that we may seek to have an experience of this kind, asking God to give it to us. @Acts 12 furnishes a very interesting case. Herod attacked the assembly and slew James with the sword and then proceeded to take Peter. Peter was put in prison between two soldiers, having been delivered to four quaternions of soldiers to keep, and he went to sleep. Someone was speaking about that in Bristol the other day and he told us reproachfully that Peter
{158}
should not have been asleep, but it does not seem any reproach should be attached to him. He was in danger of being slain at any moment, but asleep, evidently dependent on God. We can take up these cases one by one, keeping the subject within bounds so that some of us, at least, may become useful in knowing what angelic service really is. It is going on all the time and we are enjoying it at this very moment in this hall.
H.B. In @2 Thessalonians 2 there is that which restrains. Might their service be occupied with that?
J.T. "He who restrains", and "that which restrains". "He" would be the Holy Spirit. It is important to keep before us that there is a restraining power at the present time against anti-Christian elements. There is government which God has appointed. "The powers that be are ordained of God". They are useful to us and we may count on them.
C.C.T. Do we see the service of the angel in @Acts 11 in regard to Cornelius¬ house; salvation is connected with it?
J.T. That really begins in @Acts 10. Peter became concerned and went up to the house top to pray and he became in an ecstasy. While in that state something happened; he saw a sheet come down from heaven knit at the four corners and containing the quadrupeds of the earth, the creeping things of the earth, and the fowls of the heaven. It came to him and a voice said to him, "Rise, Peter, slay and eat. And Peter said, In no wise, Lord". That is to say, there is something there for us to learn. He used the word 'Lord' to the voice. He discerned it was a voice and it undoubtedly was a divine Person talking to him and I would say it was the Holy Spirit. Peter says, "In no wise, Lord; for I have never eaten anything common or unclean. And there was a voice again the second time to him, What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common. And this took
{159}
place thrice, and the vessel was straightway taken up into heaven. And as Peter doubted in himself what the vision which he had seen might mean", he was doubtful, and the Spirit of God says to him about the three men who came to seek him, "Go down, and go with them, nothing doubting". The Spirit of God told him to go and Peter accepted that. All that comes into the subject we are dealing with.
C.C.T. I was referring to the angel saying, in chapter 11, that Cornelius could be saved. Was that angel here connected with salvation as in the first chapter of Hebrews?
J.T. You should begin at chapter 10. Cornelius is there, and Peter coming into the whole matter is used to instruct Cornelius and his company about salvation, and the result is the Spirit of God fell on all that heard Peter. The Spirit of God fell on them there. There was no solicitation; the Spirit of God did it Himself. They did not ask Him to come; He just did it Himself.
J.McK. It is singular that after the angelic help to Peter in @Acts 12 he "related to them how the Lord had brought him out of prison". Did the Lord deliver Paul out of the lion's mouth by angelic service to him? We recognise they are sent forth by God on account of those who inherit salvation.
J.T. Yes. Angelic service is immediate and effective. We all ought to understand this so that we may come into it consciously and intelligently, and pray about it, for they are God's ministers.
J.McK. We direct our thanksgiving to God.
A.N.W. The way it is put in chapter 10 is helpful. "... Saw plainly in a vision, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming unto him".
J.T. He was intelligent and he understood it was an angel, showing it is quite possible for us to have such an experience and to know what experience we are having.
{160}
W.H.C. Why was it that in the temptations of the Lord, one thing that came before Him was the question of the service of the angels? "The devil takes him to the holy city, and sets him upon the edge of the temple, and says to him, If thou be Son of God cast thyself down; for it is written, He shall give charge to his angels concerning thee, and on their hands shall they bear thee, lest in anywise thou strike thy foot against a stone".
J.T. All that is most instructive and enters into what we are saying. We have to get the subject in order, and have in our minds what is happening daily in an unseen sense so that we may be ready when the time comes for us to have part in it, and to know that we are having part in it.
A.B.M'N. Would this give us an intelligent sense of what we mean when we say we are dependent on God? While we recognise these are ministering spirits to us, we consider them as sent forth from God and we give Him thanks for their service to us.
J.T. Are we experiencing such service and have we intelligence enough to know we are experiencing it and do we give thanks to God when the thing happens? Something happens; an unseen power causes it to happen. Is it a divine Person or just an angel? Can we tell?
A.S.B. Daniel says in regard to Gabriel, "And he informed me, and talked with me"; such information is valuable to us in our circumstances.
J.T. Now we are getting to the subject. He informed him; information is given to us. Have we had that experience? Can we say it was actually divine Persons, or was it an angel?
A.S.C. Linking on with that, in the New Testament, we find Gabriel standing by Mary in view of the incarnation.
J.T. She was evidently given to understand. The angel said "*I* am Gabriel, who stand before God".
{161}
He spoke to Mary and to Zacharias. These are wonderful things and they are within the Scriptures. They should be within our range and, so far as I am concerned, I want to know the thing, have the experience, and, if I have not had it, ask God to give me the experience that is needed. If we are in trial and there is something to be done, there is no reason why we should not ask God to intervene, if it pleases Him to do so, angelically.
A.S.B. That is the word used in that section, "I am now come forth to make thee skilful of understanding".
J.T. Very good, "Skilful of understanding". We should inquire whether we have anything like that in our experience and speak of it intelligently to the brethren.
S.McC. What you have said just now clarifies the matter in our minds, that in speaking to God in regard to certain matters we should be free to ask Him for angelic service. It is very helpful and opens up a lot for us to consider. It is very testing to discern the help of angels. The Spirit speaks to us and we have the idea of angelic voices. It would call for discernment.
J.T. Quite so. As we progress and as things happen daily in the world among the nations that may affect the testimony. God would help us to ask Him, God, about it, that they might be checked for the sake of the testimony. We should look for results after the meeting for prayer. We might get the answer on Tuesday or Wednesday, I am speaking practically. What happens is just like that. Things are happening every day and we might have to say to them, and effectively too. God has myriads of angels, and they are not idle, they are at His bidding and He is ready to use them and, if we keep on praying, He will use them, and use them even if we do not.
{162}
S.McC. What has been going on in connection with the Taft-Hartley bill is an illustration. We should be free to ask God to intervene angelically.
J.T. I would say that fully. We see what is happening and we ask Him in our prayer meetings and in individual prayer as well. The Lord Jesus is over the whole matter and we can count on God to act for us. Things are happening in these ways, and it is important that they should happen. Why not ask God that they may happen?
V.C.L. Would the help which we have had in discerning the different operations of divine Persons, and especially those of the Spirit, now make way in our souls that we might discern angelic service under God's hand?
J.T. That is just the point. The word is myriads, myriads are used and available, all ministering spirits sent out, active, and our prayer would be in connection with what God would do.
J.W.D. In the Old Testament is there a different basis? Gideon says, "Alas, Lord Jehovah! for because I have seen an angel of Jehovah face to face, ... And Jehovah said to him, Peace be unto thee: fear not; thou shalt not die". It seems accompanied in the Old Testament, and even with Zacharias in the New, by a sense of fear.
J.T. All that is of great importance in what we are dealing with and, if we proceed on those lines and keep within bounds, we will reach something that will affect us in our minds. We shall get intelligent results.
J.K. In Manoah's time the angel appeared to his wife and informed her that she was to have a son; he told her of the kind of son, and what she was to do, and she says, "A man of God came to me, and his appearance was like the appearance of an angel of God". She discerned the angel.
{163}
J.T. Quite so. Let us pursue those lines and think of how we may occupy ourselves and whether we converse about these matters, whether we are conversant with them or have them intelligently, so that we can occupy each other with them. How great a matter it would be and how the state of the saints and the work of the saints may be affected by it! How changed we would be, instead of being occupied altogether with this scene, our clothing, and the like! We are gradually brought into the divine world and we come to the idea of the universal gathering, myriads. We become occupied with all this; and you can say, Well, what a remarkable experience during the past month, and the brethren could come into it. J.N.D. refers to a voice from the unseen world. It would greatly elevate the state of the saints to look into these matters and talk about them. They are real matters.
E.T.P. Angels are also connected with children and sisters. The children's angels "continually behold the face of my Father" and the token the sisters wear is connected with the angels. Why are the angels connected with the token which the sisters wear?
J.T. That is very important. You are alluding to @1 Corinthians 11, and these things are practical. It is a question of what the sisters wear on their heads.
S.McC. It is very practical and important, in relation to what you are saying about the unseen world, that the sisters should be conscious, as drawn into the matter, of the angelic hosts looking on and the support they would afford.
J.T. I know that is so, not that I am calling attention to myself, but I know things happen, even in the night seasons, and you wonder what causes them. That is just what we are talking about now, angelic service. God sends them forth to minister, and they are really for us.
{164}
A.N.W. Can we learn from the case of Philip? The angel acted in a kind of preliminary way, giving him general directions and then, as he heeds it, the Spirit speaks to him.
J.T. I think angels may represent simple ordering of circumstances in business matters, and so on, but the Spirit has to do with higher matters, and @Acts 8 is a good illustration of it, for the Spirit takes part in the matter.
A.N.W. Do you think it is proper to use the word 'providential'?
J.T. Yes, it is.
T.L.S. Does @1 Corinthians 11 mean the angels are concerned about order as to the man and the woman?
J.T. Yes. There is a volume of such matters to consider, I have been trying to keep the subject in order that our minds might be affected by it. There are so many things which could be brought up that you could hardly enumerate them, but there are certain outstanding matters to consider, such as @Acts 8 and @Acts 10. Paul said the angel stood beside him. These are important men before God, Peter and Paul, and we might learn from them in their experiences and count on God to give us something like that. We are to follow what the apostles did that we might have the same experiences and might bring them to the attention of the saints so that we become elevated in what we think about and do.
V.W.H. In @Acts 10 the Spirit of God speaks to Peter, but the angel speaks to Cornelius. Is there a difference in the order?
J.T. That is a thing to be noticed. The Spirit of God did not speak to Cornelius, but He spoke to Peter.
A.S.B. With reference to @1 Corinthians 11 as to the recognition of order by us, especially by the sisters, I was thinking of the fulness of it in relation
{165}
to @Matthew 25, the Lord coming in His glory and *all* the angels with Him to establish that order.
S.McC. One of the things that troubles us most is fear, the fear of man, the fear of the power of the enemy, but what you have been drawing attention to would help to eliminate that, so that we might be more restful in regard to divine interests.
J.T. There is a great deal of anxiety. We should not be too apprehensive about things. Sometimes we have fear and there is no cause for it; angels come in to support us, so that we may not be unduly apprehensive.
A.S.C. Linking on with that Paul said, "For an angel of the God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood by me this night, saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must stand before Caesar; and behold, God has granted to thee all those that sail with thee. Wherefore be of good courage, men, for I believe God".
J.T. Very beautiful, and brings ancient history down to us. But the Spirit is not history, but with us in present experiences. In the incidents recorded as to Paul's shipwreck, the thing is made very tangible to us because the Spirit of God brings it down to us and angelic service brings it down to us too, so that we may say we may have something like that. We could have it, and why not have it? I believe what we speak of now elevates the brethren if we take account of things that are happening.
C.C.T. When Peter comes to himself in @Acts 12 he says, "Now I know certainly that the Lord has sent forth his angel".
J.T. That is an experience that he had and talked about. But I would like to be able to talk of it too, and we ought to get into the custom or habit of talking about these things instead of ordinary, physical things.
J.McK. I was wondering about the passage in @2 Corinthians 11: "Thrice have I been scourged,
{166}
once I have been stoned, three times I have suffered shipwreck, a night and day I passed in the deep: in journeyings often, in perils of rivers, in perils of robbers, in perils from my own race ... in perils on the sea, in perils among false brethren; in labour and toil, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness". Would this indicate that the angels were ministering to Paul in all these circumstances?
J.T. What an interest heaven has in all that! Another thing that comes to mind at this time is the divine system at work. Christ is the Head of it in heaven, the Holy Spirit is down here, and angelic service is continuing in it. Both the Holy Spirit and the Lord Jesus Himself are engaged in superintending the whole matter. We come into it, we are those who are heirs of salvation.
J.W.D. He says, "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies". Is that an actual angel or is it symbolic?
J.T. It is symbolic there because it is a book of symbols. Sometimes you have angels mentioned, such as Michael, "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel". The Lord Jesus sent an angel representing Him peculiarly.
A.N.W. Does not an angel in some cases represent a divine Person Himself?
J.T. Yes, in some cases. In chapter 10 it is undoubtedly the Lord Himself.
J.W.D. Do you think there is a spiritual possibility of discerning one angel from another? Jesus speaks of "mine angel" and Peter says "an angel". Sometimes angels are distinguished by name.
J.T. Michael is mentioned as known in some sense; he looked after the body of Moses.
E.G.McA. Linking up the statement, "Myriads of angels, the universal gathering", with chapter 1: 14, "sent out", would indicate that God is looking
{167}
down and, through the angelic hosts, taking care of the saints even before they ask for it.
J.T. They are sent out. What experiences have we had in our lives of these matters?
E.G.McA. When Daniel was praying and the angel came to him, he says, Your prayers were heard from the beginning. Then God sent Michael, one of the chief princes, in answer to it. The priestly and military angels were operating on behalf of Daniel that he might understand what God had in mind.
P.W. Does Jude come into this? "Michael the archangel, when disputing with the devil he reasoned about the body of Moses, did not dare to bring a railing judgment against him, but said, The Lord rebuke thee".
J.T. There is an illustration of angelic service in connection with the body of Moses. It is brought out that there was a matter of controversy in connection with the body of Moses between the devil and an angel. The book of Jude records it. Something happened and the Lord knew and recorded it. The Lord knew the tribes would have made something of the place where Moses was buried and would have made use of it to make an idol to worship. God would not have it; God would not let it be known where He buried Moses; a very great distinction He gave to Moses.
J.McK. Is the angel who binds Satan a person or symbolic?
J.T. I think it is an angel.
J.McK. "And he laid hold of the dragon, the ancient serpent who is the devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the abyss, and shut it and sealed it over him".
J.T. A very good illustration of the power that angels have in the service of God.
J.McK. It is a great encouragement to our hearts, in view of all the opposition against the saints, that
{168}
angelic ministry should sustain us and direct our hearts to God.
J.T. Yes, there were one hundred and eighty-five thousand slain by one angel in one night.
V.W.H. Some angels are quite versatile in their service. The same one who had part in the judgment connected with the seven bowls of the seven last plagues shows John the bride, the Lamb's wife.
J.T. Showing what is in our favour and what we really ought to come into and to speak of to one another for the encouragement of each other.
W.McK. Would Luke help us to look for something specific in the way of angelic service? "The angel Gabriel was sent of God to a city of Galilee, of which the name was Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary". How specific the whole matter is.
J.T. The Lord Jesus¬ birth is an infinitely blessed matter, involving the ministry of angels.
{169}
WHAT WE HAVE COME TO (4)
@Hebrews 12: 23 (Second half)
J.T. We committed ourselves at the beginning of these meetings to these verses in @Hebrews 12. We have followed it up so far and one's thought is that we should still consider these scriptures. To this end we shall read from verse 23, beginning at the clause, "to God, judge of all; and to the spirits of just men made perfect", these two items. The first is God. The fact that we are confining ourselves to very short passages in no way interferes with the magnitude of the things that are before us. We are said to have come to, "God, judge of all" and then secondly "to the spirits of just men made perfect". It is now a question of concentration of the mind, first on this great fact that we have come "to God, judge of all". Whether we can concentrate our minds on this wonderful statement, whether we can become expanded, because it is a matter of expansion now, is the test. The verses are so great and full, indeed so infinite that it is a question whether we can become expanded commensurate with the magnitude of the thought of "God, judge of all".
E.F.C. Does God, in this instance, refer to all three divine Persons?
J.T. I would say that. God is stated in this full way. He is not one of the divine Persons, it is God as such, and God as Judge of all. Not Judge of all the wicked only, but *all*, corresponding somewhat with the statement in Ephesians, "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". But here it is "God, judge of all". It does not say the kind of persons or whether they are men; the range includes all beings, and we can assume that all matters, everything, will be rightly and infinitely dealt with.
{170}
A.S.B. Does Peter give us a lead in this? In regard to the Lord Jesus in the first epistle he says, "for Christ also has suffered for you, leaving you a model that ye should follow in his steps, who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who, when reviled, reviled not again; when suffering, threatened not; but gave himself over into the hands of him who judges righteously".
J.T. Very good, a very apt scripture to bring in. Peter is dealing with the government of God, so that, in whatever has to be gone through, we are restful, we commit ourselves to God.
H.B. Would it be right to link up what Abraham says, "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right"?
J.T. Just so, "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?". But when we come to this passage it is even more than that. It does not say all men or whether they are christians or believers, it is simply "all". Those of us who know Him have more and more confidence. We can be restful, committing things to God who is the Judge of all; everything is included, such as international maters, industrial matters, and all other matters. We can be restful as leaving the whole thing in God's hands.
C.C.T. Is righteousness in view in regard to the Judge of all?
J.T. Quite so. Righteousness must be there. But then we are not qualifying God. We just, as it were, face the great thought before us and see whether we can expand intelligently and feelingly as to it. If we know God as believers we are all the more restful in saying we have come to God.
W.McK. Is there a link between this and what we have in 1 Timothy, "God who preserves all things in life", and "the blessed and only Ruler"?
J.T. Quite so.
S.McC. In relation to expansion and our coming to God the Judge of all in this setting, does it stand
{171}
related to the present time, to the assembly as linked with all the thoughts of God and to every thought of God being carried through in the assembly at the present time?
J.T. Quite so. The only question now that arises is what the scripture says here; we have come to God the Judge of all. We cannot say that it is a question of the service of God or any feature of judgment that is to be instituted, but can we expand to the wonderful thought of God as the Judge of all?
A.N.W. Is there a link between the spirits of just men made perfect and God as Judge?
J.T. Quite so, but it is better to keep to the statement that is before us. Can we in our intelligences look up to it and weigh the thing as we are here sitting together? If we take illustrations, in this country the capital is Washington and we have come to Washington. We have already dealt with certain features, but now we come to the main thought of the head of the government, the one who is in the place of Judge of all. Even a criminal can have recourse to the President. That is the way the thing should open up to us. If we know God and have confidence that everything can be committed to Him, we can be restful. Everything will be adjusted. Whatever question has to be adjusted or adjudicated, we can be restful because all is sure to go well in the presence of God the Judge of all.
E.G.McA. Is that what Paul had in mind in @Acts 20 when he said, "I commit you to God"?
J.T. Surely, but he said more than that, "To the word of his grace". Committing us to God is qualified by "the word of his grace", but here it is judgment. God the Judge of all; it is the presence of Him who is the Judge of all. Are our minds, intelligences, consciences, and affections able to open up to that, to expand in it, so that we are brought into it?
{172}
V.C.L. Is it more a question of the nature and attributes of this glorious Person to whom we have come rather than His operations, what He is in the majesty of His Person more than what He is doing?
J.T. Quite so. It is not what He is doing, but what He is, the Judge of all. That means, of course, in the expansion of it what He is doing, what He is capable of, what we may expect from Him.
A.N.W. In the economy all judgment is committed to the Son; the Father judges no one, but the point here is God, God the Judge of all.
J.T. It is important to point out that all judgment is committed to the Son; that is a question of departmental delegating of certain things to the Son, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand", but then God Himself is here; are we able to open up to that?
E.G.McA. "God, judge of all", would that include the judgment of angels who have not kept their original state?
J.T. Just so. It does not say who the beings are; it is simply "all", so that it is God Himself and our having come to Him as the Judge of all. If any question of judgment comes up, if it is angels, for example, what will happen? The book of Revelation tells us what will happen, death and hell cast into the lake of fire. The book of Revelation would help us on the point of judgment, but it is a question of judgment of the wicked. But the word judgment is not confined to anything in the way of penalty; judgment here is any matter requiring adjudication; maybe the righteous are involved in it.
E.G.McA. Your remark as to restfulness of spirit greatly helps us to leave everything to be adjudicated in the hand of the one who is God the Judge of all.
J.T. Just so.
K.R. It says in relation to perverting of judgment, "Marvel not at the matter; for a higher than the
{173}
high is watching", @Ecclesiastes 5: 8. Does that bear out what we are saying?
J.T. Yes, "A higher than the high". The higher one is God.
A.S.C. Did Peter learn something about God, the Judge of all, in relation to the matter of Cornelius? When he was told to eat, he said, "In no wise, Lord", but the voice said to him, "What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common". He learned that this was God's matter and not his. He recognised God as the Judge of the matter, did he not?
J.T. Yes. Therefore, it was a question of adjudication; whether or not the door should be opened up to the gentiles. The time had come for that important matter. Peter was not ready, but he was made ready; God the Judge of all made him ready, "What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common".
E.F.C. @Hebrews 4 says, "And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". Would that be God the Judge of all in that sense?
J.T. "With whom we have to do". Just so.
J.McK. In @Romans 11, Paul says, "Thou wilt say then, The branches have been broken out in order that *I* might be grafted in. Right, they have been broken out through unbelief, and *thou* standest through faith. Be not high-minded, but fear, if God indeed has not spared the natural branches; lest it might be he spare not thee either". Is that in the sense of God acting as Judge of all?
J.T. Very good. That is within the enclosure of the three chapters of Romans in which the admission of the gentiles is in question. The result is to be that all Israel shall be saved.
W.H.C. Does Nebuchadnezzar come into this? "Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour
{174}
the King of the heavens, all whose works are truth, and his paths judgment", @Daniel 4: 37.
J.T. Well, there is another thing. Nebuchadnezzar is a man who is at the parting of the ways in view of the government of the world being taken away from the Jews and handed over to the gentiles. Nebuchadnezzar was called a king of kings. So that it is a matter of God's right to hand over the government of the world to the gentile monarchies, the four monarchies. That is another great matter for us to understand. The problem involves the four gentile monarchs to whom the government of the world is handed over by God. I do not know if we all understand it. In regard to Daniel, "Seventy weeks are apportioned out upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to close the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make expiation for iniquity, and to bring in the righteousness of the ages, and to seal the vision and prophet, and to anoint the holy of holies", @Daniel 9: 24. The whole matter is clarified for Daniel and it is brought down to us now. We are living in the last monarchy, which "was, and is not, and shall be present" (@Revelation 17: 8), which is the Roman. The final empire is the Roman empire and we are coming back to it presently. It is not now, but it shall be and, according to the book of Revelation, we have to wait for that. We have to wait for the revival of the empire itself. It is well worth our while to look into the subject of the four monarchies. It is a technical word used prophetically, dealing with the handing over of the government of this world to the four monarchies. The first is Babylonian, the second the Persian, the third the Grecian, and the fourth the Roman. The Roman is the one we have to do with and will have to do with; in the meantime, in principle, it exists now. So that now we come to God; that is what we are dealing
{175}
with, but we want to look into that matter, for God will deal with that as with all other matters.
E.T.P. This statement, "God, judge of all", is not only calculated to make us restful, but also to sober us in that all our movements are weighed by God.
J.T. Very good. It is a question of patience. God is all powerful.
A.N.W. Could we bear to come to God the Judge of all if we had not previously come to mount Zion?
J.T. Just so. The question of the gospel, mount Zion involves that. The matter is all settled in our hearts if we know God.
A.S.B. Is there a word of encouragement for us in what David says in @1 Chronicles 29, verses 10 - 12: "And David blessed Jehovah in the sight of all the congregation; and David said, Blessed be thou, Jehovah, the God of our father Israel, for ever and ever. Thine, Jehovah, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the splendour, and the majesty; for all that is in the heavens and on the earth is thine: thine, Jehovah, is the kingdom, and thou art exalted as Head above all; and riches and glory are of thee, and thou rulest over everything; and in thy hand is power and might; and in thy hand it is to make all great and strong"?
J.T. Very good. That brings up the question of headship, God is Head of all. The head of the woman is the man, the Head of the man is Christ, and the Head of Christ is God. That is, God is Head, the principle of headship ultimately reverts to God Himself. We have to understand how that works out. It is stressed in David because it is David that brings all that out, the thought that God Himself is Head, not only King but Head. These are great thoughts that we all do well to look into, in order to get on in the truth. These eight items we are dealing with should be looked into.
{176}
J.McK. Is there an analogous thought in @1 Corinthians 15: 28: "But when all things shall have been brought into subjection to him, then the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him, that God may be all in all"?
J.T. Very good. That brings up another question that has already been raised, whether headship in God will go on into eternity or whether it is just a millennial thought. I think, however, it is an eternal thought. Headship must revert to God, must be centred in God Himself, and the Son Himself must be placed in subjection to God, that God may be all in all.
V.C.L. Is there a link between God the Judge of all and the way God turns to Moses in @Exodus 3 after observing the people and names Himself "I AM THAT I AM"?
J.T. That is very apropos. In the beginning of Exodus it is a question of God, and whether God, at that particular juncture, should be known in Israel, and God elects, as it were, to retire into Himself, I cannot use a better word than that. He retired into Himself and made Himself known, and the answer in Moses¬ heart was that God is all in all.
J.McK. Does the headship of God in eternity imply that all will be in the way of influence and control from God Himself?
J.T. Quite so. The more we know God the more restful we are about that. Everything will be resolved, everything will be settled. There will be a reason for everything. That brings up another thing, the idea of @Ephesians 2, beginning at verse 19, "So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
{177}
corner-stone, in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord". Now I turn to this because of the word 'temple'. That will explain everything in the millennial day, the temple will explain everything. I only refer to this to bring out that Ephesians is the suitable passage to find it. The reading is "being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone, in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord". That is to say, the assembly is increasing to something and that something is the temple and that implies everything will be solved in the temple. The idea of the temple is the solution of every problem. Every problem is solved in the temple and the assembly is that temple; it is God's assembly and it is growing to a holy temple in the Lord. The whole matter is clarified here as to the millennial day.
E.G.McA. So that in @Revelation 21 in connection with the millennial day it says, "And I saw no temple in it; for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb".
J.T. Very good. That helps in what I have in mind because it fits in with Ephesians.
S.McC. In relation to what you said as to Jehovah and what it says in @Revelation 21, "God himself", it is a touching thing, is it not, that, in the secret of His being, in so far as He can be known by finite persons like ourselves, He desires to be known? "God himself shall be with them, their God".
J.T. Yes. All the divine thoughts and affections must go on to that, "God himself shall be with them, their God".
E.G.McA. Would @Revelation 21 connect with this? "And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband".
{178}
J.T. Quite so, from God as such. That is, the holy city comes down from God. She is indigenous to heaven, not here and not going to heaven, but there already. She comes down from God out of heaven.
E.G.McA. So that the assembly is seen in its greatness as being the temple of God.
J.T. I would say that. Everything will be clarified in the millennial day; in the eternal day everything will be perfect.
N.B. What place do the saints have in this matter of judgment? Paul says to the Corinthians, "Do ye not know that we shall judge angels?" @1 Corinthians 6: 3.
J.T. Very good. @Revelation 18 says, "God has judged your judgment upon her". That is, God has respect for the judgment of the saints.
E.F.C. In coming to the practical side of having to do with God the Judge of all, are we not to be exercised as to the matter of pleasing Him? Enoch had the testimony that he pleased God, and in the first epistle to the Thessalonians the apostle speaks of walking so as to please God.
J.T. It continually comes back to us that perhaps what most of us need is the principle of restfulness. We are not to be in turmoil, but restful in the presence of God, Judge of all.
E.G.McA. Would restfulness in God be more pleasing to Him than simply walking in righteousness?
J.T. Just so, I am sure what pleases God more than anything is that we know Him. We are restful because we know Him, "He understandeth and knoweth me", @Jeremiah 9: 24. That is pleasing to God. He has those before Him who know Him and are restful in the knowledge they have of Him.
T.L.S. We can carry on God's service in a known way on that ground?
{179}
J.T. Just so.
W.McK. This matter of restfulness in God is peculiarly intensified in the letter to Philadelphia because the Lord stresses it, so much. "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more at all out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God, and my new name", @Revelation 3: 12.
J.T. So that God is so pleased that He puts His name upon the overcomer. Therefore, the word, 'overcomer' must come into what we are talking about because that is what we are now in the presence of.
S.McC. Do we have to hold in our minds, in a balanced way, the supremacy of God involving all three divine Persons, and the order in the economy in which God is presented to us in the Father?
J.T. Just so, so that we have to come back to the idea of specifying divine Persons, whether we know them, whether we can specify them, whether we know the Father as Father and know God as God, including the three Persons. Also whether we can specify the name of the Son, and the name of the Spirit, and whether we can specify each of the divine Persons. That would help us greatly in the knowledge of God.
J.W.D. Is the complete idea seen in the thought of God as love? "He that abides in love abides in God, and God in him".
J.T. That is good.
J.W.D. Is that God in the supreme sense?
J.T. It is in the economy. He is known in the economy as love.
A.N.W. John makes a striking reference to the Lord in his gospel, chapter 13, "Jesus, knowing that his hour had come that he should depart out of this
{180}
world to the Father", is one passage, but there is another, "that he came out from God and was going to God" as though it was beyond the economy, as we might say. Is that right?
J.T. Well, we have to watch that saying 'beyond the economy'. We have to think carefully, because in what way do we know Him except in the economy?
A.N.W. He was Son of Man where He was before. Is that not beyond what we speak of as the economy? I am thinking of it now that you are mentioning it.
J.T. God has come into the economy, the Father and Son and Spirit, but, of course, that is dependent on the fact that the Son has become Man. It is a question now whether we are on sure ground in saying 'beyond the economy', whether we have the right to say we have to do with Him in any other sense than in the economy.
A.N.W. I only followed up what was suggested, that we should distinguish divine Persons, but to distinguish between the Lord going to the Father and going to God seems sublime. His going to God, when He Himself is a divine Person, is supremely wonderful.
J.T. Just so, but how much do we know about these things? What can we say about it? How does the Son go to God apart from the economy? Because the Son became Man and you have to say He belongs to the economy, and He goes from that point of view. As to the abstract thought, I am doubtful about our touching that, I think we ought to stay where God is pleased to come to us and I think that is in mind here. We have come to God, and we know the God that we have found, 'Patient, gracious, powerful, holy; all His grace shall there abound'. And I think that is a safe place to be; where God has placed Himself within our reach.
{181}
S.McC. I think what you have said is helpful because there has been a danger of thinking that, in touching the supremacy of God, we are taken outside of the economy, whereas we are not. We only know God as revealed.
J.T. I think that is right, and I am sure we do well not to baffle the saints in any sense, but keep things where they are, because if you go outside of that we are apt to get lost in our minds.
J.McK. The greatness of the economy and God in it is brought to light in the word which Paul speaks to Timothy: "Now she who is a widow indeed, and is left alone, has put her hope in God, and continues in supplications and prayers night and day", @1 Timothy 5: 5. He is bringing it down to a widow in her loneliness, that God in the economy is available to her.
J.T. That is good, a question of the widow.
J.W.D. While we cannot know God outside of the economy, would not Scripture impress us with the infinite majesty which is before us in God? "The King of those that reign, and Lord of those that exercise lordship; who only has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see; to whom be honour and eternal might", @1 Timothy 6: 15, 16.
J.T. We have to bow to that, "whom no man has seen, nor is able to see".
J.W.D. The scripture brings that before us, to impress us, in some sense, with what we cannot know.
J.T. Quite so. We might proceed from this majestic thought, having spoken so much of it. One hopes the brethren would carry away something about having come to God the Judge of all. Now the next thing is the "spirits of just men made perfect". And the mind has to travel back to a time when men were just and died. Some of them have been
{182}
seen alive since, but, in the main, they are still in death, but we have come to them, not as dead, but as made perfect. The spirits of just men made perfect. We cannot say these belong to the assembly because they are not so represented here. They are presented as just men, not angels.
C.C.T. Noah is the first to be called a just man.
J.T. Just so. We get the men from Abel and onward until Abraham comes in, but up to that time it is a question of Adam and those who followed such as the seventh from Adam. Beginning from there, on down to @Genesis 6, then down to @Genesis 9, and down to Abraham gives us the men in mind in that period.
E.F.C. It says of Abel that he yet speaks. Would that mean that we come up against his sacrificial spirit in that way?
J.T. Quite so, "Having died, he yet speaks".
S.McC. This could hardly be said, could it, before the incoming of Christ, the incarnation, and the work of redemption?
J.T. It could not be regarded as perfect before that. These men who have died are now made perfect in their spirits. It is the spirits, you notice.
H.B. Would the last two verses of chapter 11 of Hebrews have some bearing on what you have been saying? "These all, having obtained witness through faith, did not receive the promise, God having foreseen some better thing for us, that they should not be made perfect without us".
J.T. That is right. I think that would bear on it, not made perfect without us. But then we have to abstract them in the sense that we have come to them according to this passage, the spirits of just men made perfect.
E.F.C. Is there a possibility of this working out in persons who are alive today?
J.T. Well, in the assembly, on the first day of the week, we are able to abstract ourselves and get into the thought of the service of God, I would go with that. You are dealing with the ministry, how the spirits of men are made perfect. How can we be in the assembly on the first day of the week unless our spirits are perfect?
{183}
E.F.C. So that perfection is not dependent on the completion of our course?
J.T. No, for us it would involve the possession of the Holy Spirit.
T.L.S. Does this involve the wealth that came out in Old Testament men?
J.T. It does in the sense that they are the spirits of just men. You could not say they were perfect then; they are the spirits of just men; that is the point here.
T.L.S. Would it be cumulative now in that sense?
J.T. Cumulative in those that we have come to, if, in our minds, we apply the thought of redemption; it is abstract, of course, because they have not their bodies yet.
A.N.W. We would have to include a man like just Lot.
J.T. Just so. Showing how extensive the thought is. He is called righteous Lot, showing that, although in the government of God, he got into Sodom, God regards him as righteous.
W.G. How do we come to the spirits of just men made perfect?
J.T. Well, the apostle Paul says that we have come to certain things and one is the spirits of just men made perfect. It is just a matter of light in our souls so that we can regard it in that way; we have light about these men. You say, Well where are they? We cannot say. Matthew says many bodies of the saints that slept arose and entered into the
{184}
holy city and appeared to many. We can say that, but what more can we say? We cannot say where they are now, but we can say they are perfect, they belong to the perfect ones.
W.W.C. Does the mount of transfiguration indicate the high spiritual character of these just men? Elias, it says, spoke with Him.
J.T. Just so. There appeared to them Moses and Elias and they spoke with Jesus. That is a special thing; it is a vision. You cannot just say you have come to them. We can say it in a sense, but Peter and John and James had come to them for a moment in a way.
A.S.C. In relation to the incoming of John the baptist, it says of Zacharias and his wife, "they were both just before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless". Is that in line with your thought?
J.T. The question now is where to place them prophetically. Do they belong to the Jewish economy and only it? It is a question of where to place them. If the Spirit of God is indicating that we have come to just men, it is a question of what dispensation they were in. Now they are called just men; what dispensation do they belong to? Well, I would say the dispensation about the time of Noah, running down to @Genesis 9, because they are separated here from other things to which we have come. They are not in the Jewish economy, are not like David or Solomon or even the prophets, because the prophets reach on to the future. It is a question of what there was earlier, how God took account of men and things earlier. We now have the assembly and there was the Jewish economy, and God is taking account of these. God, at least, had men of that type at that time. We now have come to their spirits made perfect.
{185}
E.G.McA. You remarked about Paul coming to God's thought in regard to these men. Does it indicate that there is a completion of the whole matter? Otherwise, the spirits of just men would be something incomplete, would it not?
J.T. I believe that is the idea. Paul by the Spirit is presenting the completeness of the position, the completeness of the unseen world as regards the men of the antediluvian day. They came in before Abraham, before the Jewish economy. I think that is the way we have to arrive at it. They have an existence and their existence is perfect, and we have come to them.
J.V.C. Does this magnify God to us? With God all things are possible.
J.T. Just so, it shows what He can do.
J.McK. The scripture states that those who draw near to God, "must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them who seek him out", @Hebrews 11: 6.
J.T. It is a question of coming now, coming to the light.
J.V.C. Now it has come to light who they are.
S.McC. Did I understand you rightly that this does not include Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses and David?
J.T. That is what I would think; these are antediluvians in general. We ought to take account of them rightly for we have come to them and they are made perfect. That is the way I would look at it.
S.McC. I had never thought of it in that light, I always thought it included Abraham, but I can see what you have in mind.
J.T. Abraham is called of God and belongs to a family and that comes down to us through judaism.
C.W.A. Would this encourage us in view of the conditions that existed then? "The earth was corrupt before God", but God was able to preserve and carry through this witness.
{186}
J.T. Everything is taken account of. That is the point we have in these items we are dealing with. We have other items to come to and I am sure we will have help in them.
F.H.L.C. It says God is just and the justifier of him who believeth in Jesus. In what way could you apply that scripture to the spirits of just men made perfect?
J.T. You cannot say they believed in the sense in which that scripture mentions believing.
F.H.L.C. Can we view anyone being made perfect apart from the redemptive work of Christ?
J.T. No. Of course, they are perfect and that will be seen in the millennial day. The perfection which will be seen is based on the redemptive work of Christ.
{187}
WHAT WE HAVE COME TO (5)
@Hebrews 12: 24; @Exodus 24: 3 - 15
S.McC. @Exodus 24, part of it, is suggested because it brings before us, as few chapters do in the Old Testament, the greatness of the Mediator. We shall bear in mind, of course, that it stands in relation to the old covenant and we are dealing with it as a matter of type. The verse we have read in @Hebrews 12, which finishes the things that we have come to, alludes to Jesus the Mediator, the Mediator of a new covenant. It is a touching allusion, which should affect every heart that loves Christ, that among the things that we have come to, we should have this closing reference to Jesus. Not to the Lord Jesus, but to Jesus, His personal name, the name that He uses Himself in the end of the book of Revelation, "*I* Jesus". This verse points to His particular glory in mediatorship. There are many glories, of course, which attach to Christ and which faith delights to take account of, and this is one of them. As we have already had it in our meetings, this includes more than the assembly. Rightly speaking, the covenant is not linked with the assembly; it belongs to Israel. The saints of the assembly, of course, come into the gain of the spirit of it as suggested in the Corinthian epistles, so that this is a more inclusive expression here, but our attention is focussed not so much on the new covenant itself, but on Jesus the Mediator of it and the blood of sprinkling. We are thus reminded of the sacrificial basis on which things are going forward and effectuated. We are not to forget that; it is put here among the things that we have come to, although it is the blood of sprinkling that is referred to. The personal reference in verse 24 to Jesus, I think, should touch our hearts.
J.McK. As coming to Jesus, it is not only a matter of coming to Him as such, but as the One who is
{188}
Mediator of the new covenant. The spirit of the covenant and what it suggests are available for us. The Mediator is Jesus Himself.
S.McC. That is right. We are brought into touch with the Person who is, and has been able, to establish the conditions on which persons can be set up in relation with God on the basis of established righteousness. It would involve that persons in liberty with God have a sense that certain things that stood out in moral history have been resolved and the persons set up in liberty with God. We have come to the Person that is able to do that.
A.S.B. It does not say *the* new covenant, but *a* new covenant. Would you help us in that?
S.McC. Well, I think there is something interesting in that, because the point would be more the character of the thing. It is not to focus our attention on the official side, but on the character, a new covenant.
A.N.W. Have we not been helped in the matter of the new covenant in connection with the Supper in that regard? We used to dwell very much on the new covenant, but it seems the matter has been greatly enhanced by the emphasis on the words "in my blood", bringing before us the Person, as you say. It is the Person that is the great matter.
S.McC. Exactly, rather than the covenant itself. So here the Person is the great matter. Notice it does not say *the* Mediator, it is "Jesus, mediator of a new covenant". The attention is drawn to the Person and His ability to operate and to work out matters involved in the new covenant.
A.G.L. Would it help to have a word on the difference between the 20th of Exodus and chapter 24?
S.McC. Well, it is interesting to see the liberty that there is in @Exodus 24. We find the youths mentioned, the thought of the sprinkling of the blood brought in, and then the elders and Moses and
{189}
Aaron going up and eating and drinking in the presence of God, the God of Israel. There seems to be suggested in @Exodus 24 the liberty that we do not have in chapter 20.
A.G.L. In chapter 20 we have in type what we have not come to, the thundering and the lightning and Moses drawing near to the obscurity where God was. Here you have an easier and happier setting; they draw near to God Himself. Would the matter of the Hebrew servant coming in between the two chapters account for the two different views?
S.McC. I was just thinking of that. @Exodus 21, which comes in between @Exodus 20 and 24, points in type to Christ coming in on the principle of love and establishing the conditions in which in liberty we are set before God.
C.C.T. Would this great thought as to the Person be very stimulating to all of us? We have had God, Judge of all, and now we have Jesus, the Man. Would it help us in our movements here?
S.McC. It would. It points to the great mediatorial feature in the system, something that we cannot forget or lose sight of. The thought of the mediatorship, although it is applied here in regard to a new covenant, brings into our minds the special place that Christ has in regard to this great extended realm of things to which we have come. There is a distinctive glory, I suppose, about each of the Persons of the Deity. There is something about Jesus that is distinctive, as, for instance, it was He who died for us. The Father did not die for us, nor did the Spirit die for us. We are to take account of what is specific to certain Persons in that relation. This verse reminds us of the specific glory of Christ in mediatorship.
A.S.B. As Jehovah the Saviour, He is the Mediator, is He not? His hand is on God and men, so that both sides are involved in mediatorship.
{190}
S.McC. Very good. It comes up in Matthew's gospel, "Thou shalt call his name Jesus". It is interesting and bears on the whole gospel for it is the great administrative gospel. It is helpful to see that we have come to a Person who holds in His hand the solution of the moral question, because the new covenant, as we think of it, bears on the moral question, "Their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more", @Hebrews 10: 17.
V.C.L. Did Paul arrive early at some understanding of this? "*I* am Jesus, whom *thou* persecutest". As soon as he is converted he preached Jesus, "that he is the Son of God".
S.McC. I am sure he did. Reference was made at the opening of these meetings to the need of many to be brought into the joy of what christianity means, the forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Spirit. Well, that is an important thing. We have come to mount Zion, the new principle which involves the extension of mercy towards us, setting us up in proper relations with God on that ground. But this final touch coming in after the thoughts of the city, heavenly Jerusalem, and the universal gathering, the myriads of angels, and God the Judge of all, and the spirits of just men, this thought of Jesus the Mediator brings us to a fuller side in regard to the matter.
E.G.McA. It has been said that every time a covenant has been brought in, it is in regard to some need. What would this covenant convey as to our need at this time in regard to divine things?
S.McC. It is well to bear in mind that the epistle is written to Jewish believers and they are accustomed to Jewish terminology. The covenant as they would understand it bears upon their liberation, their being set free, set up in happy relations with God. These Jewish believers would understand how God has established conditions on an unalterable basis, the basis of redemption, by which persons can be in
{191}
relation with Himself. The need would be in the persons, especially having the service of God in mind as this epistle has. We should be free and on happy and easy terms with God on the basis of what has been effected from the divine side.
E.G.McA. Is that the reason for the word 'new', a different one from the old -- altogether new?
S.McC. It is important to keep that in mind. The marginal note to the word 'new' signifies what is fresh and youthful in contrast to what is fading away. The apostle speaks of it in this epistle and there is somewhat of an analogy in @Exodus 24 in the reference to the youths.
E.G.McA. Their mediator, Moses could not bring them into what God had for them.
S.McC. Therefore, as we said at the outset, we are dealing in @Exodus 24 with an old covenant, but it is permissible to use it as a type. Certain things are set out typically in that chapter which bring out the liberty of certain relations with God in certain settings.
J.McK. In regard to the footnote, would what is fresh and youthful affect the minds and hearts of those who come to Jesus, coming in the sense of that instead of the arduous and burdensome way of the first covenant which they were unable to fulfil?
S.McC. That is a great matter, and it is especially important, in view of the service of God, that our souls should be rightly affected by the glory of mediatorship in Jesus so that we should all have a good start, we may say, in assembly service, in the service of God. We can all start together and we can start on a common basis. This is one of the things that we have come to, Jesus Mediator of a new covenant, to the Person who is able in every way to set us free from every darkening influence, everything that would engender bondage, everything that would make us ill at ease in the divine presence.
{192}
F.H.L.C. Is the blood alluded to here connected with the old system for the reason you just gave us in regard of the epistle itself?
S.McC. I think so. It is Jewish terminology; they would understand all these expressions. When Paul is writing to the gentiles, he uses a different means of expressing himself, but the thing in principle is there.
A.G.L. Is there confirmation in all that you have been saying in Matthew's gospel? The Lord in referring to the covenant speaks of His blood being "shed for many for remission of sins", this dealing with the whole moral question.
S.McC. I think that is right. Matthew would link in that way with what we have here. It is especially important that persons should be free for the service of God, because these things that we have come to are all to help us in regard of the truth, arriving at an understanding of what is in the divine mind so that we should be happy and free in our relations with God, especially in His service.
J.K. We had previously in connection with mount Sinai that if a beast touched the mountain it was to be stoned, whereas, in connection with Jesus, there is that which comes within our range. He is so accessible in that way.
S.McC. I think that is the point. The very name Jesus would bring up the thought of accessibility.
A.N.W. Are we not, in this verse and in the verse speaking of God, coming to the kernel of the constitution before a Jewish mind? I think that would help in going back over the meetings. To God and to Jesus -- are we not touching the kernel of the whole constitution in that way?
S.McC. I believe we are. Divine Persons are related to this range of things. It is not only ideas or thoughts to which we have come, but we have come to divine Persons, and divine Persons, of
{193}
course, in a relative way; God, the Judge of all, and Jesus, Mediator of a new covenant.
W.H.C. The eighth chapter speaks of what He is going to do in another dispensation, "And they shall not teach each his fellow-citizen, and each his brother, saying, Know the Lord; because all shall know me in themselves, from the little one among them unto the great among them". Is that what we are to arrive at?
S.McC. Well, that would be the point. The great end in the covenant is that persons should know God. It is linked with the house of Israel. We come into the spirit of the thing, of course, in @2 Corinthians 3.
T.L.S. All the arrangements of service are in His hands. The Mediator has to do with all service. Does mediatorship refer especially to the service in this passage or does it include more?
S.McC. It has in mind that persons have come to these things which we have been speaking of in the course of our inquiry into the truth. The covenant does not stand related to mountains, cattle, or angels, but it stands related to a people secured by divine power on the basis of delivering grace and brought to God Himself. It stands in relation to these, but the stress is on Jesus the Mediator of a new covenant.
C.C.T. So that, by seeing the Person and the place He has as Mediator, I am set free and I seek my place of freedom.
S.McC. I think so. We need help in regard to our links with Christ, especially as to being free. It is not just a matter in the service of God of using the terms that are proper to the position, but our souls should be free; we should be constitutionally free, and I believe this would help us, Jesus, Mediator of a new covenant. Many things could be referred to in connection with Jesus, but this particular feature, Mediator of a new covenant, stands out here.
{194}
J.McK. Is there not a peculiar effect on our souls as we take the Lord's supper, especially as we consider the place the cup has in it? Paul says he received from the Lord that "This cup is the new covenant in my blood", bringing peculiarly before us the Person of Jesus Himself.
A.N.W. @Hebrews 10: 19 reaches the top-note. "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus". Liberty is there.
S.McC. It is an important matter that we should be set up in a sense, as Mr. Wigram says, of 'Not a cloud above -- not a spot within'. As we have to do with God, with Jesus, and with the Spirit, in the service of God, we are lifted out of what would hinder or mar our liberty in the service.
W.McK. We were speaking about the service of the Spirit augmenting the priestly service of Christ. Does the Spirit also augment the service of Christ as Mediator?
S.McC. I believe He does. We might read chapter 10: 15, "And the Holy Spirit also bears us witness of it; for after what was said: This is the covenant which I will establish towards them after those days, saith the Lord: Giving my laws into their hearts, I will write them also in their understandings; and their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more". We can see how the blessed Spirit augments the great service of Christ in relation to our liberty in serving or worshipping God.
E.F.C. Do we not get a similar thought in @2 Corinthians 3 as the apostle speaks of having such confidence toward God and of the Spirit of the living God? Would that not involve the freedom and liberty that we have in approach?
S.McC. Well it does, and bearing on this thought of augmenting we have, for instance, verses 17 and 18 of @2 Corinthians 3. "Now the Lord is the Spirit,
{195}
but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", or the 'Lord Spirit'. That shows us how the blessed Spirit is augmenting the great service of Christ, intimately bound up with and adding His touch to the service and ministry of Christ so that we should be free and in liberty in divine service.
H.B. We can be at home in the conditions of transparency and clearness of @Exodus 24: 10.
S.McC. That is it. Nothing to resolve, no issues to face; they have all been faced. We are in the place of the "form of heaven for clearness", as it says.
A.S.B. In Matthew you were reminding us, with regard to the remnant, that He gave Himself a ransom. In @1 Timothy 2, we have "For God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all", extending the character of the thing to our day, showing that we are never beyond the mediatorial position, the moral question having been dealt with.
S.McC. I am sure there is something in that. It behoves us to keep in mind the glory of Christ in this relation. It is so easy to lose sight of it, Jesus Mediator of a new covenant; it involves His work, what He has done and what He does, and we are not to forget that. It seems as if the writer has been saying we have had these six different things before us, but, before he finishes, he reminds us of Jesus in this way, Mediator of a new covenant, and it should touch our souls.
E.G.McA. In the old covenant there were many restrictions called for and commanded, and there were many things outlined, but in this passage there are none of those set forth in the new covenant, but we come to know all the good, the grace, the liberty,
{196}
and the love by coming to the One who is the Mediator of it. So we are enlarged in it as coming to the Man Himself.
S.McC. Exactly. As this epistle brings Him before us, and as we take account of the greatness of the Person, in contrast to all others, who has been able to effectuate the work that He has? It is a great matter and we were reminded in London by our beloved brother, not with us today, in a way which affected all our hearts, that we have always to keep in mind that redemption underlies the effectuation of the purpose of God.
V.C.L. This morning we were reminded of the night of the Lord's betrayal, a night never to be forgotten by any one of us. Is not that a part of what is to affect our feelings as to how great this Person is?
S.McC. Exactly. The verse seems to have in mind that we should not forget the Person. There are many things that we could think of in relation to Him, but now our thoughts are challenged in this verse in this matter, "Mediator of a new covenant". He has been able to establish the conditions in which our hearts may be free in the presence of God.
E.G.McA. He is also able to maintain it.
S.McC. A good thing, to maintain it. There is a good deal of cloudiness among us, but the thing to keep in mind is the greatness of the truth, that we have come to, "Jesus, mediator of a new covenant".
E.F.C. The greatness of Jesus is seen in Moses in type in verse 2 of chapter 24. It says, "Let Moses alone come near Jehovah; but they shall not come near; neither shall the people go up with him". It is a matter of the uniqueness of Moses.
S.McC. I am sure that is in mind, because the chapter brings out in type the greatness of the mediator as few chapters do. @Exodus 24 has been alluded to as one of the greatest chapters in the Pentateuch,
{197}
and its greatness stands in the ability of the mediator to go where no one else could go; we are reminded of that in the Person of Jesus. He can go where none other can go.
E.F.C. It is through Him that we have such confidence towards God.
S.McC. Exactly. The importance of our position in that way is related to this Person in His mediatorial capacity in this verse.
J.V.C. Is that also set out in that we see Jesus crowned with glory and honour, by the grace of God tasting death for everything?
S.McC. Well, that is an allusion to His death bearing on things as well as persons. The covenant is particularly linked with persons.
J.W.H. There seems to be something simple about the way the initial service starts here in the youths. Is that the effect of the new covenant in its simplicity upon us?
S.McC. It is a great matter that spiritual youthfulness among us should be in the liberty suggested in this section. It says in verse 5, "And he sent the youths". That is, they are under the hand of the mediator. The mediator is stressed in this chapter in what is referred to and they are under the hand, in type, of Jesus the Mediator. It is a wonderful thing to be under His hand, available and subject in that way.
C.C.T. They had ability also, "And he sent the youths of the children of Israel, and they offered up burnt-offerings". They were useful in this service now because they were free.
S.McC. They were. The remarkable thing is that Moses should think of them and bring them into this position involving glory, because this chapter involves glory, and the bringing of the youths into it suggests that the work of God in this setting is to fill out its part and place in the service of God.
{198}
A.S.C. As having come to Jesus Mediator of a new covenant, we find One who is able to sustain us in our affections to the carrying through of all that is being wrought in our souls. To Moses, the people said, All that the Lord has said will we do, but there was not that in them which could hold their hearts and affections to it.
A.Bm. In @Exodus 24 we have the suggestion of freshness and liberty in the youths. We get in @2 Corinthians 3, "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord". There is freshness and liberty.
S.McC. The matter of freshness should have a great place in the service of God and that is the point in this chapter. @2 Corinthians 3 has especially in mind our freedom and liberty in the service of God, the Lord Jesus and the Lord Spirit particularly operating with that in mind.
J.McK. How do we come to Jesus in this sense? Is it an individual or a collective matter? It is rather suggestive that @Exodus 24 is the whole assembly of the children of Israel. Can I arrive at this apart from coming to the Lord's supper, remembering Himself, and bearing consciously in our spirits all that He has gone through to establish this for us and to open up the service of God?
S.McC. Well, I am sure the verse in @Hebrews 12 is a general statement of the things that we have come to, not specific as to time, when we have come to Jesus.
A.N.W. It is not that we should come to it or that we might come to it, or how we come to it, but that "ye have come". "Ye have come to mount Zion" and to all the other items in the constitution. It is for us to solve what is involved in coming to them.
S.McC. That is it. So that allusion was made to America, the capital, and the constitution. Some of
{199}
us have come to it and we have come to all that is in it. The question as to whether we have the enjoyment of the different features of it is another matter, but the fact is that we have come to it, we are in the presence of it, and it is operating towards us. The great thing is for us to be in the happiness and joy and blessedness of what it means.
E.F.C. Would you say our participation in the service of God would show whether we have come to it experimentally, or not?
S.McC. Well, I would say that. It would show whether our souls are in the liberty of these great things, the great system of things alluded to here.
J.McK. I think perhaps the young, as well as all of us, would get distinct help from that. If I have not taken my place at the Lord's supper, I cannot take the ground of having come to Jesus Mediator of a better covenant. Is not the light and joy of it in our souls brought out by being with Christ and moving on to the service of God?
S.McC. Our practical enjoyment of it will show itself. It says, "Ye have come to mount Zion", in verse 22, "and to Jesus, mediator". It is not a matter of state in the saints. It is a matter of what we have come to, what belongs to the system, but whether we have the enjoyment of it is another matter. I may be at the Lord's supper and yet not in the state or enjoyment of it.
J.McK. This matter is basic. The understanding of that in our souls, all that we come to, and the greatness of it as administered by Christ would greatly help us.
S.McC. I am sure that is right, and so reference was made at the beginning of our meetings to many who may still be in distress and darkness of soul. What we have been getting of the truth is to help us into the liberty and joy of what christianity really is.
{200}
A.B.M'N. Does the acceptance of this blessed truth give us the whole matter in our souls at once?
S.McC. Well, I think we need to have our eyes open to what is toward us in this setting. We have come to it and these things are toward us; whether we are getting the gain of them is another matter.
A.B.M'N. Light in contrast to the darkness.
J.K. Was it not said at the beginning there is that which we have not come to and that which we have come to? This is the positive result.
S.McC. Exactly. The bearing of these things towards us, as having come to them, is in mind. I do not think the point in the writer's mind is that it bears on some and not on others. It bears on all. Whether we are getting the full gain of what mount Zion means, or the city means, or the myriads of angels, or God Judge of all, is something that we have to look into.
C.C.T. Was not that the exercise of our beloved brother as to these meetings, that we might understand and come into the joy of these matters?
S.McC. That is it. We are all in the system and the Lord is helping us to get into the truth and know its bearing upon us.
A.G.L. Would chapter 11, the great faith chapter, help us? It says, "Faith is the substantiating of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen". This great unseen world is referred to.
S.McC. Well, that is it. The man of the world does not see these things to which we have come. This is all part of the great unseen realm of things, but seen by faith and known to faith.
E.T.P. Your reference to state is helpful; if I understand you correctly, it is not a question of attainment, but what God has arrived at for us.
S.McC. That is the point and we have come to it. The question is whether by the Spirit we are enjoying
{201}
what is involved in it, as come to it, is another matter, but one thing that should help us in regard to the service of God is that we all have a common basis to start on and that is a great thing to bear in mind.
E.G.McA. Would this particular reference to "Jesus, mediator of a new covenant" be the culminating thought in the apostle's mind? He supports us as coming to these things and brings us into the practical good of them. We are not left simply standing as having come to something, but have the support of the Mediator, the support of the system.
S.McC. That is it, so that we shall be sustained in right relations with God, because @Exodus 24 has in mind happy sustained relations with God. The blood of sprinkling brings up the great matter of what covers the position.
A.S.B. @John 3 was referred to at the outset, "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God", but @John 9, which is the answer to it, says the man came seeing. The Lord presents Himself to him in that position.
S.McC. That would bring up the matter of whether we really see what is involved in what we have come to. We are there, we have come to it. The question is whether we see it, that has been in mind in searching out the truth these days.
A.S.B. You are emphasising being observant.
A.N.W. We should not overlook the statement in verse 22. The apostle does not say 'we' have come to mount Zion. The statement is, "Ye have come to mount Zion". In that way it is not only a matter of instruction for them, but also for us today.
S.McC. It might have said, 'we' have come to it, but that might be apostolic or linked with the apostle, but it distinctly says, "Ye have come to mount Zion", whereas in Corinthians you remember how he makes a distinction in regard of certain things, "But *we* have
{202}
the mind of Christ". He does not say 'but ye have the mind of Christ'. It is very important that we should see these differences.
E.F.C. Would you say the greatness of the blood of Jesus, to which this no doubt alludes, would be unique in the sense that Jesus was a divine Person? That is why the blood is so great.
S.McC. Exactly. The blood of sprinkling, an interesting matter. @Exodus 24 amplifies the thought of sprinkling, speaks of the people being sprinkled. "And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words". It is a remarkable statement; we have a lot of blood in the chapter, as you will note, and it is good to be reminded of the place the blood has, not only its bearing on the book, but also its bearing on the people.
A.G.L. What is the thought of sprinkling as over against the thought of His blood being poured out? Our hearts are sprinkled in @Hebrews 10. Would that be an application?
S.McC. It would involve all that as entering into the matter of our clearance in this system of things. In @Exodus 24, the liberty of verses 9, 10, and 11, involving the side of ennoblement and happy relations in that setting with God, serves to amplify the thoughts in mind in @Hebrews 12.
T.L.S. Seeing seems to be stressed in @Exodus 24.
A.N.W. The great contrast is seen also because @Hebrews 12 is the Mediator, whereas @Exodus 24 is the blood.
S.McC. That is it. When we think of @Exodus 24, we think of it by way of contrast. When we come to @Hebrews 12, Jesus is not only the Mediator, but He also supplied the means on the basis of which the people could be set up in right relations with God.
{203}
A.S.C. Would you help us on the thought of "speaking better than Abel"? Of Abel God said to Cain, "Thy brother's blood is crying to me from the ground", @Genesis 4: 10.
S.McC. Well, I think the point is that the blood in this setting is not crying for vengeance. We have come to "Jesus, mediator of a new covenant; and to the blood of sprinkling, speaking better than Abel". The grace of the position is emphasised in this setting; it is not a matter of vengeance or judgment, but it is towards us in all the conditions of grace and blessing which are in mind in this section.
E.G.McA. This section, in regard to the sprinkling of blood, brings us into favour with God rather than bringing in distance.
S.McC. It does. Bearing in mind that Cain is a Jewish type, and bears on the Jewish position, it is all the more interesting that the blood speaks better than that of Abel.
C.C.T. Is verse 11 of chapter 24 the outcome of the sprinkling? Having freedom, "They saw God, and ate and drank".
S.McC. What a delightful position of such nearness to God and in such complacency! Of course, the position is not perfect here; when we come to christianity how different the position is!
C.C.T. That is a type of our freedom. We are able to sit down restfully to eat and drink of the things of God.
W.McK. Does the thought of expansion enter into the matter of speaking in @Hebrews 12? Moses spoke *all* the words of Jehovah. There is great room for response and feeling in the matter of the covenant.
S.McC. Well, it is very interesting. So there is room for the opening out of the truth. The volume of blood in this section should affect our hearts as should the opening out of the truth. The blood in
{204}
this connection would have a salutary effect on our minds, precluding lightness in attending these meetings. The blood in its bearing upon us and the teaching connected with it would help us in our souls.
A.N.W. The last two verses have the sense of favour, "Wherefore let us, receiving a kingdom not to be shaken, have grace, by which let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear. For also our God is a consuming fire".
S.McC. We are to bear that in mind, over against all that obtains. What Abel had to face comes into mind in this connection. We have the blood of sprinkling, speaking better than Abel. That is a remarkable thing because Abel is the great witness to righteousness.
A.G.L. "Having died, he yet speaks", @Hebrews 11: 4.
A.H. I would like to ask about the order in @John 3, "Except any one be born anew", and then "Born of water and of Spirit", and then entering into the kingdom. We need help to see what we have come to and then to enter into it livingly.
S.McC. I think so, so that the moral process is individual in the last verse you referred to -- the moral bearing of the truth upon us. It is a great thing to see, in finishing the things to which we have come, this touching allusion to Jesus in His mediatorship and the blood of sprinkling. We are not to forget that, in all the glory of what has been mentioned before.
W.H.C. Why is there such a warning following this wonderful passage we have been reading? "See that ye refuse not him that speaks". "For also our God is a consuming fire".
S.McC. It is a solemn matter to refuse divine speaking. This letter makes a lot of it. We do not sufficiently realise the authority of the speaking that we have been under the last two days. It does not dawn on us so greatly as it should. The authority of
{205}
the speaking from heaven, coming as it does through a distinctive vessel, is to impress us as we are in the presence of it. To take issue with it or to refuse it is a serious matter. You see persons who think nothing of taking issue with such speaking.
A.S.B. "Insulted the Spirit of grace", is a serious charge (@Hebrews 10: 29).
S.McC. A solemn matter. You hear of persons who think nothing of challenging a servant as to his ministry, what he is bringing forward; they forget the authority of the speaking, what lies behind it, and the seriousness of taking issue with it. Of course, we search the Scriptures to find out if things are so, but the great matter in this epistle is to see the authority that lies behind the speaking, for, in this epistle, the refusal of it is apostasy.
{206}
READINGS ON DANIEL (1)
@Daniel 1: 1 - 21
J.T. The proposal at this time is not to look into the prophetic side of Daniel's book, but rather the moral side, if the brethren will take in what that means. It is a very prophetical book, of course, dealing with the powers that be, those powers which took the place of Israel. All this is in mind, but, as I said, the mere matter of prophecy is secondary. What is first is the moral side, especially as it bears on young people. So chapter 1 is selected because it deals with it, first of all in the removal of Israel as God's representative here on earth and next in the introduction of the Babylonians and Nebuchadnezzar; then the account given of these four young Jewish persons who are mentioned in this first chapter is in view of the youth among us at the present time, because there are old among those who are ministering, and it is just to remind the youth that they should be ready as Daniel and his three companions were ready when the time came. If what I say is intelligible, the brethren will say so, I am sure.
C.H.H. Is it important to see what is represented in the powers that sought to influence in a subtle way so that only a comparatively small number of all the youths were maintained? The subtle way in which the authority of Nebuchadnezzar would seek to defile the youths and get them into his system? Is not that prevailing today?
J.T. There are the powers that be, of course. They are not much removed from the world; they are selected from the world, but at the same time are under God and we take them from God's hand. They are ordained of God; the powers that be are ordained of God, we are told, and God has His own hand in matters; that perhaps should come before us. Then we may see how the dangers of youth
{207}
enter into the matter, because the powers that be are drawn from the world, and certainly in our own disposition we are apt to seek after power in that sense, and glory. We are apt to seek after the power and glory that belongs to the ruling class and the point now is to see how these young men in this chapter are able to keep themselves from what is defiling.
R.W.S. These youths are able to keep the testimony and hold the position. They were just a few in the testimony, the great public body taken captive in Babylon. Looking at appearances we would give up, but it is a question of being with God in relation to these moral exercises.
J.T. That is exactly what is in my mind. We must look at this from the standpoint of the youth among us, those who are needed to carry on the testimony, and one can thank God there are a good many of them relatively. Some, of course, have turned aside, alas! That has to be mentioned too, the moral condition of some who have given way to the enemy; it exposes certain of us and is to be detected.
A.B. Would constitution be in mind in regard to these young men?
J.T. Now tell us what constitution means in your mind.
A.B. I was thinking of what you said in regard to our younger people, the need for the refusal of certain things that would damage them constitutionally, even in regard to the powers that be. So the great matter of food in the scripture is to establish us and to carry us through relative to God and what is of God here.
J.T. I see now what the word 'constitution' is in your mind -- how we are formed, what our habits are.
A.B. Exactly.
{208}
E.J.M. Had you in mind that the young people among us in a moral sense are of royal lineage, and that God has them in His mind even though they may be set in untoward circumstances in this world? Hence meetings like this contribute to their moral growth and understanding of divine things?
J.T. Why are you using the word 'royal'?
E.J.M. Well, it says, "And the king spoke unto Ashpenaz the chief of his eunuchs, that he should bring of the children of Israel, both of the royal seed and of the nobles, youths ..." I was thinking of the family of God, for instance, and what the young are in the sight of God in contrast to what is in the world.
J.T. Then you have the word 'royal' in your mind in a spiritual sense, and that would be that they are of royal lineage as born again, born of God.
L.E.S. This would be over against what is said in the end of 2 Chronicles in regard of Jehoiakim, who was carried away, and Jehoiachin. One was twenty-five when he began to reign and the other eighteen. These four youths would be over against the condition of corruption and compromise and being under the power of the enemy which is seen in those two kings. It says of Jehoiakim, "He reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and he did evil in the sight of Jehovah his God. Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon".
J.T. No royalty in him at all morally.
L.E.S. Exactly.
J.T. We want to look for royalty in a true sense, that which arises from the Spirit of God, born of the Spirit; unless anyone be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter the kingdom of God. First, he is born anew to see the kingdom; then by water and Spirit to enter into the kingdom. The idea of royalty is what the Spirit may have done with the brethren. Whether the idea of water and Spirit is applicable is,
{209}
I think an important thing to bring up, because these four young men of Judah were evidently pure in their outlook and feelings.
V.L. Would you think that Paul, even as Saul, would be a man preserved from moral damage so that he would fit into the testimony when God was ready for him?
J.T. I would think so. He was mentioned as one of those who held the clothes of Stephen, and then we are told the Lord said to him, "It is hard for thee to kick against goads". The conscience was not at work. There must be conscience at work.
V.L. There certainly should be. I was thinking of your reference to the word 'water'. Paul uses it a good deal in Hebrews, the washing and sanctifying.
J.T. "Washing of water by the word". There it connects water with the word. I think what you said is quite important in view of the youth among us, the word 'youth' including not only young men but sisters, too.
J.G.H. Would you say the thought of purity is brought out in that Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not pollute himself with the king's delicate food? He was evidently one who called on the Lord out of a pure heart.
J.T. Evidently the washing was there in its effect.
S.McC. Youthful lusts flee. Paul would have in mind that Timothy would be free from all that would damage him in view of being free for the testimony.
C.C.T. The apostle says in @2 Corinthians 7, "Purify ourselves from every pollution of flesh". Does that not enter into this?
J.T. "Perfecting holiness in God's fear". Excellent. I suppose you have something more to say in regard to your remark, Mr. McC.
S.McC. I was just thinking how Timothy would fit into these difficult times. Paul was concerned
{210}
that he should be free from that which would damage him in his part in the testimony.
J.T. That brings up the question of what people have to do themselves, to look after themselves, "Purify ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God's fear".
E.B.M. "Having purified your souls by obedience to the truth to unfeigned brotherly love".
J.T. Obedience to the truth, I would think is very important.
E.B.M. The affection side is there, too.
R.W.S. Mephibosheth was damaged when his nurse took him up and fled. He fell and became lame.
J.T. Showing the nursing was not too good.
R.W.S. While grace overcomes the damage, the damage is there.
J.T. How easily people become deformed spiritually and morally by bad nursing, poor nursing, maybe in their local meetings.
C.H.H. Would the spirit seen in Paul in view of recovery with Eutychus look out for that kind of thing so that the damage would not be permanent?
J.T. He is referred to as a boy, evidently one of the young. It says, "And they brought away the boy alive, and were no little comforted", showing they had care for him at this time. It was on the first day of the week it happened.
J.K. Is the royal line we have been speaking of seen in what Paul says in relation to Timothy? "Calling to mind the unfeigned faith which has been in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that in thee also".
J.T. Very good. The reference to the parent and the grandparent, just as we were noticing, would show that parents are the nurses, and would mean that in some sense the local meeting should seek to
{211}
have a care mutually so that the young may be saved from the world, which is a weapon of the devil to damage the youth.
R.W.S. Is nursing a function of the local assembly?
J.T. That is what I mean.
C.H.H. I would take it that there is a certain background to these young people seen in their names; the name of God comes into each one of their names.
J.T. They are remarkably treated as youths, young people. They are called children at one time. They had the severest test, Daniel excepted, in the fire in a later chapter.
C.C.T. As to what you were saying about nursing, would Hannah's bringing the new coat year by year come in?
J.T. Very good. She knew the growth of her child and she brought a little coat every year. She ministered to the service of God in doing that.
T.U. Have you any thought as to why these selected are of outstanding qualifications, "youths in whom was no blemish, and of goodly countenance, and skilful in all wisdom, and acquainted with knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace"?
J.T. They are selected, showing that the selection made is important. We should make selections.
T.U. They were selected on the basis of qualifications.
J.T. Quite so, but then they come in in connection with Daniel as companions. We have to make allowance for what Daniel was, especially for his influence as the writer of the book, the right influence. Daniel clearly had the lead in all this matter. That is another thing that has to be spoken of, the great thought of leadership among the brethren in local settings.
{212}
E.J.M. Is not the moral power of Daniel worth noticing? He held sway in spite of the conditions in which he lived until the day of recovery.
J.T. Very good, showing he is a man that goes through things and is successful and is viewed in that light from the very beginning to the end of that book. "Go thy way, Daniel", and so on. He takes care of himself in a certain sense.
E.J.M. And in a moral way he had sufficient influence with the government to bring his three companions into the position.
J.T. Very good. He took care of them, too.
Rem. They become models for all, as Paul did.
J.T. Yes, this is in mind, all that we are saying in the idea of care for others. They become models. The word 'model' is a very important word in Scripture. Paul says, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ".
J.McK. Does the idea of what is constitutional seen in John's epistle help? "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one".
J.T. Quite so. The little children too are in mind. There is more said to the little children than to any. There is very little said to the fathers, "Ye have known him that is from the beginning". Those of us who are older are saluted, as it were, but the younger and particularly the children are well cared for.
R.W.S. So there are to be no meetings where the young people in the truth are to be excluded.
J.T. That is right, I have seen it misused, they go as they wish to, but they should be brought into the afternoon reading instead of the children's meeting. The children's meetings are given up generally now.
R.W.S. What I meant was, at certain meetings where there have only been brothers, the sisters are
{213}
now brought in. And now the children and the young people are to be included in all assembly functions.
J.T. They come into the truth to some extent. There is some quality to indicate that the Spirit of God has begun to work in them.
R.W.S. I wondered if there are any meetings where children would be excluded, whether in London or any other kind of meetings?
J.T. They are not excluded in this country or Canada.
R.W.S. I thought it would be right to say the very best is for them as well as for others.
J.T. Why should it not be? They begin to understand. They are to behave in the meetings, too.
C.H.H. Is there not a grave responsibility on the part of the parents in connection with @Deuteronomy 6, "And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart; and thou shalt impress them on thy sons, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou goest on the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up". Parents are to impress their sons. They are to be taught.
J.T. Very good.
C.P. Do we not get an example of it in David, "We heard of it at Ephratah"?
J.T. "We found it in the fields of the wood". There was great purpose of heart with David.
E.B.M. We see that in Daniel himself, "Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not pollute himself with the king's delicate food".
J.T. Quite so. Showing that he was a leader. He purposes in his heart, he determined not to do it. The idea of saying no to what is wrong and yes to what is right, he purposed in his heart. He was supported.
{214}
S.McC. What you have said as to leadership is very important. We often speak of leadership; the moral side, keeping us free from defilement, is most important in our localities.
J.T. Perhaps you can give us some illustration in Detroit; not that I would make a personal remark, but I think it is a right thing to demand an illustration of it.
S.McC. If we should see a group of young people getting together to do a certain thing that would not promote spiritual progress, should not a lead be given, such as in Daniel, in regard to that?
J.T. Quite so, and not only locally, but in the gatherings where the young people come to the meetings, let the Spirit of God come in and help in such things.
C.C.T. Is that the thought in regard to verse 9? "And God granted Daniel favour and mercy before the prince of the eunuchs". Is that the outcome of leadership among us in the young?
J.T. So that we can do much that can be done. We see it, we begin to do it, and God comes in to help and God is ready to help at all times.
J.G.H. You were speaking of the importance of a model. Do you think that is to be found in each generation? Paul was a model, and tells Timothy he was to be a model.
J.T. Quite so, each generation. We should try to find out how that works in the history of the testimony. We have to come down from Paul, the earlier leader, leading the brethren, down to the Reformation; then God later comes in after long centuries and raises up one who brings in a revival; and it still stands and is going through to the end, and the young ones ought to be ready for it.
J.McK. In the fourth verse it says, "youths in whom was no blemish ...". And then there is the
{215}
matter in the New Testament of presenting our bodies a living sacrifice.
J.T. Good. We should get into that by looking through Daniel. It says of Daniel's three companions that they yielded their bodies. They did not save their bodies. If it was necessary they would offer their bodies for the sake of preserving the truth, but God saved their bodies.
V.L. Is the matter of saving worked out in Noah? God shut him in the ark. The idea of the Spirit being with him is seen in the dove perhaps. We have been shown to bring the Spirit into our households with the young in mind.
J.T. For the saving of his house. Nothing is said about any young ones in his house, not one mentioned. He "prepared an ark for the saving of his house". There were his wife and his sons and his sons¬ wives, eight persons saved, no children. It is to be noted too, that the ark was prepared for the saving of his house, but still there were no children. That is a thing to be noted and enquired into, as to why it was so because a very bad state of things had arisen. The sons of God came to the daughters of men and worked wickedness and that had to be met, and in Noah it was met, I am not sure that everybody will understand what I am saying, but I am sure there are those here who do. We have to see to it that right principles are preserved even if there are no children actually, and they must be extended to others, if they are not our own children.
E.B.M. You said just now God came in for Daniel, "God granted Daniel favour and mercy before the prince of the eunuchs".
J.T. God comes in to help. He ever does, in any way and any time in general, but at the same time He looks for the people involved to help too, and take the initiative. That is what God looks to see, and then He helps.
{216}
J.B. Do you get that in @2 Chronicles 34 where it speaks of Josiah? "And in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father; and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem", and so on.
J.T. So that his life is linked up together in groups. He did not live to be very old, but what happened in his life from his eighth year is grouped together, so that he is a model, I believe, and became the occasion of the revival in Israel. In Josiah we have one of them, there are several, but this is one of them. That is one thing to keep in mind, the idea of the growth of a youth from the time he is a boy; Josiah was a boy and grew up to be a young man and a middle-aged man, you might say, and it shows how growth, spiritual growth, develops in a christian and how he becomes useful.
T.U. Would verse 8 encourage us when things are right to follow our own convictions? "And Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not ...", and then in the next verse it seems God honours his having the courage of his convictions.
J.T. Quite so.
C.H.H. Reverting to leadership again, should that not be seen for every city among the elder sisters? It speaks of the elder women admonishing the younger women.
J.T. Very good. We have it in the case of Phoebe, and in Hannah certainly, and that sister mentioned in the book of Luke, the old sister Anna. She was a model. She spoke of the Lord to everyone who looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
W.H.C. I have been impressed by your remarks in connection with the sisters. Paul in speaking to Timothy speaks of the "unfeigned faith which has been in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice". He is carrying on.
{217}
J.T. I think that is to be particularly noted, coming down the line of ministry we are on, how sisters may be raised up of God. Here were three generations. The question has been raised generally as to the sisters and how the sisters ought to be with the brethren, and then we are also dealing with the children. How they come in for growth, beginning with eight years of age, and where they took away the boy alive and were not a little comforted. The boy evidently was looking out of the window. He was allowed to do it.
C.H.H. So the younger sisters among us would be greatly helped through the care of the elder sisters. The elder sisters would take that responsibility on and help the young ones.
J.T. I would say that fully. Look around and see what can be done in the right direction.
C.P. Do we not see it in Naomi? She says, "My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee ... ?"
J.T. Just so.
J.W. Daniel's words to the prince of the eunuchs emphasises the principle of leadership, and it extended ten days.
J.T. Ten days, the full test of responsibility. It is not twelve, it is ten, the full sense of responsibility.
J.W. They stand over against the other youths.
J.T. If it is administrative responsibility, it is twelve, but, if ten, it is responsibility by itself.
E.J.M. Speaking of sisters, in @Acts 12, Peter comes to the house of Mary, the mother of John, where a prayer meeting was going on, and a sister by the name of Rhoda told them that Peter was at the door and insisted upon it in spite of the opposition of others.
J.T. She recognised the voice of the ministry, not the voice of anyone, but the voice of Peter. We recognise the voice, it is important.
{218}
E.J.M. She evidently was at the prayer meeting.
J.T. The others, while they prayed, did not believe what they were praying for. Rhoda became a leader.
P.W. Speaking of sisters, Esther did things that were right. She said to Mordecai, it would be at the risk of her life to go in, but when she did she found favour from the king. God wants us to do things. I thought this might link up with what is in mind now.
J.T. She was ready to sacrifice her life.
P.W. Finally she went in and found favour with the king. She saved God's people.
J.T. There is another thing that might be added to that, no prayer to God is mentioned in Esther. In the book she did not have to pray; she did other things and, dear brethren, prayer is not enough, prayer is not everything. There are other things that have to be done and we must take account of it and see that they are done.
C.C.T. The young maiden in Naaman's time was able to speak about the prophet. Would that be something done by the Spirit?
J.T. Her master should be with the prophet in Samaria; he should go there. That was her thought, she had feelings about it, too, and he did go eventually.
J.P. Esther fasted.
J.T. It does not say she prayed, but she fasted. I do not know how much there is of it now. I do not see much of it.
J.P. Daniel denied himself.
J.T. The thing is to do the thing needed. If it is needed, see that it is done. You say I will go and pray about it. That is not all, there are other things to be done, and we must see that they are done.
J.K. Is it not with Daniel a definite committal? He purposed in his heart, and he followed it up, for
{219}
he said what should be given them to eat and to drink. Then he said, Look upon our countenances after ten days. Would it be right to say he followed up the exercise?
J.T. Quite so. We should see in the next chapter how things were done by Daniel with his companions. That will have to come in the next meeting.
C.H.H. Would this appeal to the prince of the eunuchs be a principle for us when it is necessary for the saints to appeal to the powers that be? I was thinking of Paul and his nephew. He appealed to the chiliarch for his protection. Then Esther appeals to the king and here they appeal. The prince of the eunuchs is set over these youths and they appealed to him as though they recognised and submitted to his position. Paul, also, recognised the position of the chiliarch. So, too, Mordecai recognised the rightness of appealing to the king. There is difficulty experienced in some quarters as to appealing to the Senators in connection with amending the law relative to the union matter.
J.T. Very good. It says in verse 16, "So the steward took away their delicate food, and the wine that they should drink; and gave them pulse. As for these four youths, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams", showing how God was working in all matters, "And at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring them in, the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar. And the king spoke with them; and among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: and they stood before the king. And in all matters of judicious wisdom, as to which the king enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the scribes and magicians that were in all his realm". And then it says, "And Daniel continued unto the
{220}
first year of king Cyrus". So we have a model before us and how it continues. It is a great matter to continue, helpful to the saints; and waiting on God about it too that He may allow it to continue.
C.P. Does the pulse speak of the word of God? The will of God set forth in the word of God and man living by the word of God.
J.T. It is the kind of food that would be despised as compared with the delicate food. It is a food that God can use despite its being despised by others.
N.B. Why is there no reference to the water? In verse 12 Daniel says prove thy servants and give us pulse to eat and water to drink, but in verse 16 there is no reference to water.
J.T. I suppose there is no need to mention it. I suppose the pulse did the work by itself, so to speak.
W.H.C. Is it not an important thing that we have purpose of heart? It was true of Daniel and Moses. When Moses became great, he refused to be called son of Pharaoh's daughter. I was desirous for the sake of the many children here today that we should seek to meet every exercise that comes up, with true purpose of heart.
J.T. What we have to say always is to bring God in. Is there any room for God to come in? The special thing is, is there room for God? I would say that is the point to come to. God is ready to come in if He is sought, if we want Him.
E.J.M. So that in reference to the way these four men stood, I was thinking of @1 Peter 3: 15, "But sanctify the Lord the Christ in your hearts, and be always prepared to give an answer to every one that asks you to give an account of the hope that is in you, but with meekness and fear; having a good conscience, that as to that in which they speak against you as evildoers, they may be ashamed who calumniate your good conversation in Christ".
{221}
J.T. Just so. That is to say, Peter comes in peculiarly, and Peter fits in fully with Paul. Now the thought of how God can be reckoned upon is seen, I think, in the idea of the twenty-four elders; instead of twelve, twenty-four. The idea of elders comes in and we should count on them.
V.L. Would it not be fair to say all the truth as to the Spirit, at the present time, would give particular help to any that are younger to bring God in by turning to the Spirit in a simple way? Would that be referred to in that they were ten times better?
J.T. The question arises now as to what God is graciously doing, extending back say fifty years. That is to say He, the Spirit, has brought in eternal life, the great question of the truth of the assembly, the service of God; and He has brought in the sonship of Christ too, and now He is bringing in something about Himself. Are we acquainted with it? Are the young people acquainted with what the Lord is saying to us in relation to the Spirit? He is down here really to do things for us. He dwells with you, the Lord says, and shall be in you. He is now available to us.
R.W.S. Is it time now to illustrate what we should ask the Spirit for and bring to the Spirit? Should it be in relation to spiritual things or may we address the Spirit in relation to the things concerning our ordinary life?
J.T. I would say in the case of ordinary affairs I would refer to the Father. There is one God and Father. "There are gods many, and lords many, yet to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him". The Spirit is not mentioned there, but we know He is mentioned elsewhere, and I would say the Spirit of God is here. The Spirit of God is sent from heaven and is here to be available to us and, therefore, I think
{222}
of Him now as to the service of God and all that pertains to it. He has not been brought forward very much, but now He is brought forward by Himself peculiarly. He is here to do things for us and He dwells with us and shall be in us. Every one should know about it and make use of Him, and bring Him into matters in relation to our families and other things too; that is the way I would look at it. I would see what related to the Father and to the Son and what relates to the Spirit, and know what They are usable for, speaking reverently.
C.H.H. Would that scripture in Corinthians help in that? "But there are distinctions of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are distinctions of services, and the same Lord; and there are distinctions of operations, but the same God who operates all things in all. But to each the manifestation of the Spirit is given for profit. For to one, by the Spirit, is given the word of wisdom; and to another the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit; and to a different one faith, in the power of the same Spirit; and to another gifts of healing in the power of the same Spirit; and to another operations of miracles; and to another prophecy; and to another discerning of spirits; and to a different one kinds of tongues; and to another interpretation of tongues. But all these things operates the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each in particular according as he pleases".
J.T. That is a good way to answer all this, and I wonder if we understand how these things work out, and how God is sometimes used as Father, for there is that side, what He does; and the Son, what He does; and the Spirit, what He does. We have to learn, speaking reverently, how to use the divine Persons, and according to knowledge.
J.P. Would @Romans 8 help? "But if, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye
{223}
shall live, for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God".
J.T. Very good. The Spirit will help you in regard to the flesh. The Spirit works against the flesh and the Spirit has to have room to operate and we can thus, by the Spirit, put to death the deeds of the body.
T.U. Is it proper to pray to the Holy Spirit?
J.T. I think it is proper to pray to the Holy Spirit. Look at @Acts 10, how divine Persons may be regarded and used, and whether the Spirit is not involved in all that.
N.B. Practically speaking, we need much help to speak about the Spirit. Many of the brethren are not yet at all free.
J.T. What are we not free about? The Spirit of God is God Himself and He is here to look after things, to give help, and to operate, so why should not we look into the fact and see whether He is ready to be used in a certain way? Why cannot we use Him now as in @Acts 10?
C.H.H. Are you referring to when the sheet was let down and there was a voice from heaven without saying who is speaking? And then it says, "The Spirit said to him".
J.T. Our brother asks, is it right to pray to Him? What does Peter say? He says something to Him. He answers the voice. And Peter said, "In no wise, Lord"; the Spirit is asking him something and he says something to Him. Peter said, "In no wise, Lord; for I have never eaten anything common or unclean. And there was a voice again the second time to him. What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common. And this took place thrice, and the vessel was straightway taken up into heaven". It is the Spirit's voice and Peter speaks to Him as if He were to be spoken to.
{224}
C.H.H. It was an angel that appeared to Cornelius. It says, "saw plainly in a vision, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming unto him". Those communications, would you say, were evidently not so close?
J.T. Yes, an angel, but I was speaking of the communications to Peter, what he says to the voice.
C.H.H. "The Spirit said to him, Behold three men seek thee; but rise up, go down, and go with them, nothing doubting, because *I* have sent them".
R.W.S. In @Ezekiel 2 the prophet converses with the Spirit. It says, "And the Spirit entered into me when he spoke unto me".
J.T. Quite so. These are important scriptures to have before us.
J.W. He went up on the house-top to pray, a direct allusion to the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so.
C.H.H. "*Ye* know how it is unlawful for a Jew to be joined or come to one of a strange race, and to *me* God has shewn to call no man common or unclean".
J.T. Showing how the divine Persons are available to us; from experience we know how we can speak to them. That is important in having experience with God.
C.H.H. And then Cornelius says, "Now therefore *we* are all present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God".
E.G.M. Chapter 11, verse 15, "And as I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell upon them", indicates that it was God, the Holy Spirit, acting.
J.T. We know He does that.
T.U. I was wondering if there would be the principle of prayer in regard to Rebecca, as ministering to the Spirit. She addresses the question to the servant. Would it be the principle of prayer in that she had a desire?
{225}
J.T. The actual types are just as important and instructive as the New Testament is in direct teaching as in Peter, James and John. You can use that scripture about the servant in Abraham's house as a type of the Holy Spirit.
J.K. Would the scripture in Luke come in? "Say to the master of the house".
J.T. Quite so. And, "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?"
A.B. It says in @Luke 2 in relation to Simeon, "It was divinely communicated to him by the Holy Spirit". And then later, "*He* received him into his arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to thy word, in peace". He is speaking to the Spirit, because it was the Spirit who communicated it to him.
J.T. Quite so.
J.P. So Daniel would be a model for us. He was in the good of current ministry. He understood from the books.
J.T. That is an important point, we shall come to that in chapter 9, God willing.
J.P. I was speaking of it as to whether we are familiar with the written ministry in regard to the Spirit now.
S.McC. I think what is in the minds of some is that in the notes of the Auckland meetings someone asked you if you would pray to the Spirit, and the reply was, 'I would not pray to the Spirit'.
J.T. At that time, I was not clear myself about it as I have been since. If you are not clear, it is right to make it clear that you are hesitant.
S.McC. I am sure what you say is helpful, I do not think we should abide by statements made years ago and hold fast to them, saying the truth is authoritative and hold to them. There may be adjustment.
{226}
J.T. I do not think Mr. Darby was as clear about that point as we are now. God has helped us and I know no one who would be more delighted than he were he here. He would be delighted, he would say, thank God.
E.J.M. I believe be said in one of his letters, 'I have no objection to call the Holy Ghost Lord as a general title in glory and Godhead'.
J.T. I think there was something like that.
R.W.S. Paul says, "Especially the parchments", would that be the latest ministry perhaps -- notes sent around before publishing? We should be on the *qui vive* to get the latest.
C.H.H. Mr. Raven said if we could regard the Spirit in an objective way He would be an object of worship, but he said we cannot do that. But since then we have been taught we can view Him objectively.
J.T. Quite so. We have a book on that point.
{227}
READINGS ON DANIEL (2)
@Daniel 2: 1 - 49
J.T. In accord with the proposal made for these readings, it is well to notice the moral side in Daniel and his three companions, the companions have to be noted in this chapter. It is most important that before he attempts to open up the interpretation to the king, Daniel goes to God Himself. He praises God first. God has to come first, and the children are to be brought up to give God His place. So it is said in verse 17, "Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions", (Notice he calls them by their proper names.) "That they would desire mercies of the God of the heavens concerning this secret; that Daniel and his companions should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of the heavens". This is what I am alluding to. He considered for God first, that He must have His portion. "Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever; For wisdom and might are his", and so on to the end of verse 23. This is the tribute that Daniel renders to God in the sense of service and praise.
E.G.M. You called our attention to the fact that Daniel called his companions by their original names rather than by the names given them in Babylon.
J.T. I think their names were probably from God. As we baptise our children to the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, they are baptised formally, and that requires that God is to have His place with the children.
E.G.M. It gives us a reason then for looking upon the brethren as we see them in the family as God gives them names. W e look upon them in that way.
{228}
J.T. So they are baptised in that name and are received or taken into the assembly, taken into fellowship in their own names and each is to shine in that name, and Daniel shines here and his three companions.
C.H.H. The principle of leadership is seen in Daniel as he takes these others into confidence. Paul in writing to the Philippians says, "You have us for a model". He uses the plural.
J.T. And so does Daniel here, he uses the plural.
T.U. Would there be any relation to leading in piety, not only for young men, but for all of us, leading in piety?
J.T. Just so.
C.C.T. Does it show that the leaders should have confidence in others to bring the question to them?
J.T. That is exactly how things should work out. We can see in the gospels how the Lord set out the principle of following. He said in the end of the gospel of John, for instance, "Follow thou me".
L.E.S. Would the Lord's words at the end of @Matthew 11 where He says "Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes", link on here?
J.T. Just so, very nicely. Does He not say, "I praise thee, Father"?
L.E.S. He would give God His rightful place.
J.T. Surely that would be the word for us in these democratic times when men claim everything; that He should begin with God. That is the way, bring God into everything.
C.H.M. Would you say that this is a secret? God allows us to know what there is; it adds to the greatness of God.
J.T. Now you are bringing up what means much to us as to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and how we are to speak to Them, and how we are to
{229}
serve Them, and what apprehension we have of Them. So John says, "No one has seen God at any time". Well, what a thought that is to get into our minds! "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". That is the point to be constantly in our minds and before us in every meeting, we might say, that brings in the assembly and the service of God, where is God, what is God, and what are the names that are proper to use, and what are we using? In @Revelation 1 it says, He has "made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father". All these things are to be considered, and they enter into every meeting we have, whether those on the first day of the week, or Bible readings, or prayer meetings; every meeting we have we must bring God into it. What do we understand about the Being we are now speaking to?
C.H.M. Would that account for the very dependent way in which Daniel approached this great matter in the secret of his soul with God?
J.T. You can see he had been with God before; he had been with God, I would say. The whole book would lead to that understanding on our part. Who is God and what name should be used as to Him? Where is He and so forth? Surely all these are questions that have to be considered and looked into, using whatever is available for us to make use of, such as books.
S.McC. Would intelligence be suggested in what is said here, he blessed the God of the heavens (verse 19), "Then Daniel blessed the God of the heavens"? The throne has been transferred from Jerusalem the earthly centre.
J.T. I think so, very much so indeed. And what comes down to us now, as to this country and all countries of the earth, is what part God has in these countries, and what reverence has to be yielded to
{230}
Him, and what terms used in our reference to Him. I think the matter before us now opens up a wonderful sphere of instruction for us, and what is available to us is to help us reach all of these things, to be intelligent as to them, and to know what to say to God, and when to say it, and what applies at a given time.
L.E.S. So it bears on the thought of "from eternity to eternity thou art God".
R.W.S. Does the order of the divine Persons in the economy bear upon the place these have in the service, I mean as to the service generally?
J.T. That is what I am trying to say. What are Their names, how to address Them, the circumstances in which the address is made, and so on. So that this chapter, and the whole book of Daniel indeed, opens up a wonderful vista of instruction to us, but we need to attend to it and to follow things up that are said in meetings like this, and written too, in the way of notes of readings, so that we should all be instructed and intelligent as to the whole service of God.
S.McC. Would the God of the heavens referred to here fit in with the Father as the governor of the universe? It says among other things in @Ephesians 4, "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". That is an allusion to Him as Governor of the universe.
J.T. Quite so. One God and Father over all -- universal. We have a peculiar place as being His house.
A.B. What the scribes and magicians say is actually so. They say, "There is not a man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter". And then again they say, "Except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh". So what we are saying now is to bring out the truth in relation to the God of the heavens.
{231}
J.T. And then what is there in the idea of the universe of God? Once there was a certain man in New York who said that the universe was bounded by God. I thought it was a prime expression. The universe is bounded by God. Well, the epistle to the Hebrews says that God made the worlds, not the world, by Christ. That is wonderful, I think, and we should look into it. We are in it. What account can we give of it as we bring it into our worship and service?
S.McC. And is the Spirit particularly with us to help us in regard to this knowledge of God as you are now referring to it?
J.T. That, I am sure, is the point. So that the Lord says in @John 14, "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you".
F.W. Is the point here the addressing of God known in a particular setting?
J.T. The point is God made known.
F.W. Daniel addresses Him as the God of the heavens. What came out brought that particular point into view, that God was the God of the heavens, and therefore he would address Him thus. Would that indicate to us that we are to address divine Persons intelligently in particular settings?
J.T. Quite so. I might say as to the creation we look to Moses, what he wrote, but we have to wait for the Lord Jesus to get a complete understanding of what is written. I mean to say the gospel of John has to be linked up with the book of Genesis because they are intimately connected. The creation is intimately connected with the revelation of God Himself, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. *He*
{232}
was in the beginning with God. All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being. In him was life, and the life was the light of men". That is the point, that men are in mind, not angels or any other beings, but men. We are the ones to get the revelation.
F.W. I can see that, but what I had in mind in referring to @Matthew 28 was how God is revealed in that particular setting, and, therefore, would we address divine Persons in that particular setting and not eliminate one of them at all?
J.T. Well, I suppose that is right.
F.W. The question was raised this morning as to the propriety of addressing the Holy Spirit, but, if we address divine Persons as revealed, God is revealed in three Persons. Therefore, we would be able to address Them all.
J.T. Quite so, that is good. Therefore, we have to reconcile Matthew with John, and then reconcile Genesis because Genesis tells us about the creation, whereas Matthew particularly has to do with the assembly, and John has to do with life in the assembly.
V.C.L. Is there not a suggestion when Daniel says in verse 23, "I thank thee, and I praise thee, O God of my fathers, Who hast given me wisdom and might", that he was taking account of all that God had before done and that there was an addition now in connection with what God was prepared to be with him? I was thinking of what God had been to his fathers and then what he was to Daniel. Are we not warranted in seeing that in this day of the Spirit we are perhaps getting additional thoughts of what God is, if we are alert as to what is coming out in the power of the Spirit? You said once or twice that it was clear that they had the full light of worshipping the Spirit in the early days, and should
{233}
we not be encouraged today that God is giving us a special touch at the end of the dispensation, if our ears are alert to hear it?
J.T. I was thinking of the basic things that have come out in the last fifty years, eternal life in 1889, the sonship of Christ, that He became Son, the only begotten He is called, and then now what has come to us as to the Spirit. The question is whether we are all following these lines of truth, dear brethren. If we are not, we are defective as to the whole basis of truth which is brought down to us.
R.W.S. You were speaking the other night of three outstanding features of the truth, the sonship of Christ, the service of God, and the Holy Spirit. Are you adding eternal life?
J.T. It is more basic, to work into what we have already mentioned.
C.H.H. Would you say that the Holy Spirit was keeping Himself in the background until God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ had Their proper places? He is only mentioned once in Colossians, but the glories of Christ are enlarged upon. When we come to Ephesians, we get the Holy Spirit in every chapter.
J.T. That is what we have had lately. Ephesians is the book we should look to for the full development of what has come to light recently and, I believe, what has come to light is the Spirit and the place He has. The brethren in the early days rather thought the Spirit should be left out in the sense of serving and speaking to Him, but in the Old Testament, @Numbers 21, we have, "Rise up, well! sing unto it". The elders of Israel were to sing unto it. That is warrant for what we are talking about, that the Spirit is to be spoken to and addressed in that sense.
J.W. Paul says, "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!". Then there is the passage in @Revelation 4 where the twenty-four elders
{234}
fall down in acknowledgement of the greatness of God and say, "Thou art worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were, and they have been created". Would it help us to work out the ways of God in this connection?
J.T. You are speaking of @Revelation 4. The assemblies were addressed in the earlier chapters, and we come in chapter 4 to where John is summoned up to heaven and he sees there a throne established and twenty-four elders there and four living creatures. We see how the services were carried on in the Lord's own thoughts towards the assemblies, while chapter 4 brings out the thought of going up into heaven, and the four-and-twenty elders, the four living creatures, the throne established, and then that all things were created by Him and for Him, "for thy will they were, and they have been created". I think all that is very beautifully linked up in the book of Revelation and, therefore, a great link is established with the book of Daniel. Can we not get something out of this wonderful chapter before us, this tribute by Daniel, "Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever" -- the name of God!
E.B.M. Do we not get light as to My Father and your Father, My God and your God? What do you understand as to God dwelling in "unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see"?
J.T. Well, it is a wonderful thing to think of, showing how John comes in to reinforce the truth in Matthew as to the assembly and the truth in Mark as to the service of God and the truth in Luke as to the gospel. That is all I would say about that at this time. But there is so much in this chapter that is open to us in this reading and it is a question whether we can just take it up and in patience ponder it before we finish this reading.
{235}
E.B.M. Would the God of the heavens take in the three Persons? It says they sought mercies of the God of the heavens. Would that take in the three Persons?
J.T. You mean that we should assume that it should take in the three Persons? There is the name of the Father, and the Son and the Holy Spirit. I think that is the way intelligently to speak. They are definite Persons and each is addressed according to His own name according to how He functions, speaking reverently -- the Father and the Son and the Spirit.
S.McC. Does it not help in relation to that, what light we have in our minds and what we say? We may speak to one divine Person, but there is light in our minds as to the whole Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Spirit.
J.T. Very good, because God has given us different faculties and, therefore, if He has done that, they are to be used and we begin with Himself in using them. I am thankful for what you have said. It is a question of the light you have when you say, Father, Son or Spirit, because we are in the realm of light, and in Him was life and the life was the light of men. The light is for men.
A.B. So there is something here in verses 18 and 19; it was the God of the heavens, but the phrase I am calling attention to now is, "Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever". That is the renown of God as Daniel knew Him.
J.T. Just so. As Daniel knew Him.
J.W. So in the dream given to the monarch about the great image. Daniel calls attention to the greatness of God; that would be filling his soul.
J.T. Just so. Go thy way, Daniel. He is a man that can be trusted. We are led to think of the transfer from the light that was in Israel when there
{236}
were wonderful terms used, from Moses downwards, but you are led to think of what God had in His mind in taking up Nebuchadnezzar and making him the greatest of all kings up to then, a king of kings, the title that really belongs to Christ, transferred to Nebuchadnezzar in this book. One is wondering about it and hoping that all the dear brethren would come to wonder about it. There is something for us in the book of Daniel, the ordering of the earth, the kingdoms, and the political side of things that we all have to do with, so that we may know how to address God, the Father and the Son and the Spirit and give Them Their place as Scripture presents it. We do not know what the conditions were before the economy, but we know God was there in the beginning. God created the heavens and the earth and that is all we can say, as it were, but "let us make man in our image, after our likeness". That was plural and indicates that there was more than one Person. So that the question now is how are we to bring that out and keep ourselves right in regard to political aspects and all that, so that we please God in relation to the present situation, the cities, the great commercial centres; how we comport ourselves and carry on the service of God at the same time.
S.McC. Does that word that you referred to, the economy, not touch our hearts? It is a scriptural word, showing how God, infinitely great as He is, has come into a range of things in which in our finite capacity we can know Him.
J.T. Very touching, in our finite capacity God is pleased to come in, and you have realised it and it is very important in your mind, and God comes in and meets us just where we are. He is such a God as that, very touching.
F.W. I was seeking to enquire in regard to statements that have been made in various meetings as to the necessity of our being intelligent in our
{237}
addressing divine Persons. Do we not do that in a discriminating way in regard to this matter spoken of as to the powers that be, as to what is going on in the world, and how we would turn to God about it? In this, what light is there to direct us as to whom to address?
J.T. Well, now suppose you go over the ground as to your occupation. You have been a long time on the earth and you are in business in Australia and you know what is going on in England and America and you know what each one of us has to do, what would you say? You have to go to your business on Monday morning. How do you address and think of God?
F.W. Well, if you ask me as to myself, I think of the Father, but is that consistent with the truth?
J.T. I think it would be, I think of the passage quoted a moment ago, "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". It is universal. You have to do with the God and Father of all. To bring it down to us, on Monday night you have to think of that because of the few brethren you meet with to pray. But in the morning to whom do you turn as you are going to transact business, make a sale, or the like of that?
F.W. In my own mind I address God as Father.
J.T. Why not God Himself?
F.W. I do, I say God, but should I address God in the sense of God or as Father?
J.T. Then the Son, of course, is God too. He is called God according to @1 John 5, "He is the true God and eternal life". And you turn away from ordinary business affairs on Monday morning and you think of what your own portion is. Then when you come down to the evening you have the prayer meeting and you think of the few brethren that you are walking with and you have to be separate from all the rest in that position.
{238}
R.W.S. In @Acts 4, "And having been let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them. And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God, and said, Lord, *thou* art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them", and so forth.
J.T. That helps us, I am trying to link on with what has been said, really involving that, to try to bring out what each of us has to do in our business in America and on the continent. Our brother knows what it is to have to do with men and how he addresses God. I refer to him because he has a great deal of experience and it is for him to say all he can to help the brethren.
C.H.M. As to addressing the Father as to our business at the beginning of the week, would that be as children addressing a heavenly Father?
J.T. The fact of the matter is I ought to have begun with the Lord's day, because that is the first day of the week and that should govern all the other days of the week as found in christianity. It is, therefore, a question of the first day of the week and we should take our bearings from the first day of the week and follow through the whole week and see how you address God.
C.H.M. In that way we would be starting with the exalted thoughts of God the first day of the week.
J.T. The day in which He raised the Lord Jesus from the dead. He was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. That is the first day of the week and that should surely illuminate all the other days.
C.H.H. Would you regard God differently in your occupation than you would in your service? I was thinking of the distinction. The Lord says, My Father, your Father, My God, your God. It comes within our range though inscrutable. I was noticing in the first book of the Psalms the expression, "My
{239}
God", is used thirty-three times in different connections as though it is in the sphere in which God has come within the range of the writer.
J.T. I want to get Mr. W, to work the thing out, what titles he uses in relation to God.
F.W. You mean the first day of the week?
J.T. I should begin with the Lord's day, the first day of the week.
F.W. I was thinking of these remarks of yours in connection with Israel on the special occasions of the sabbath day, the instructions given there besides that which they were to do every day, as if there would be on the Lord's day something additional to that which we do every day. Would there not be our own personal address to God at the beginning of the day and then as we go on we come to the special features of the Lord's day?
J.T. Speaking of the Lord's day, the first day of the week, the place that the Lord Himself has on that day, and then carry that through to the Monday and the Tuesday. I think it is very important as we are dealing with young people here coming on to take the place of the elders, I should add too, that I have not death in mind, but the Lord's coming and His appearing, and am not thinking of dying at all. I am speaking of that parenthetically, trying to bring you into the whole matter involving the Lord's day as well as the first day of the week. The Lord's day is the first day and the day in which Christ was raised by the glory of the Father. We must have the greatest thoughts of light on that day especially, and then Mondays and Tuesdays, and so on, trying to get the different features of the economy and the service of God so that the young people will know what to say and do and when they are to be said.
F.W. Would you help us in the difference between our individual addressing of God and the address in the assembly?
{240}
J.T. You have your reading in the morning before you get up, or after, and then your official reading of the Scriptures in your house and, of course, you would address God as Father because He is Father and cares for us in every respect. That is how I would work it out day after day. If we do that we shall be more illuminated in the terms to use in addressing divine Persons and when we are to use them and how we are to use them. And when we come to the prayer meeting, we ask God for things; and on Tuesday, an address maybe; and the week passes and the other meetings, and we have what we call the city reading and we would include all the brethren.
R.W.S. Would Monday be the Father, and Tuesday the ministry meeting, the Spirit, the peculiar place the Spirit has in prophetic ministry?
J.T. Well, it would.
J.P. In regard to your practical affairs, we cannot bring out all our practical affairs, but we might ask the Lord to help us in our spirits. The Holy Spirit helps us in what we say.
J.T. Quite so; He helps us in all these things. We began on the thought of the young people here and they are coming forward and they should know how to speak and when to speak and where to speak so that they regulate things accordingly; the household is brought into that and all else.
E.J.M. In the passage in James it says, "Go to now, ye who say, Today or tomorrow will we go into such a city and spend a year there, and traffic and make gain". That does not bring the Lord in in helping us in our affairs of the day.
J.T. Quite so. We cannot say we cannot bring all the divine Persons in or any one of Them in connection with the same circumstances.
S.McC. It is very interesting that a small epistle like James refers in various ways to the Father of
{241}
lights, the Lord of glory, and the Spirit who has taken up His abode within us.
J.T. Beautiful, I have thought of that a lot. I would be glad if you would mention about others. These small epistles are very like the minor prophets of the Old Testament, every one of them has a speciality.
N.B. In regard again to our everyday life, we have in Colossians, "And everything, whatever ye may do in word or in deed, do all things in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him". And then a little further, "Whatsoever ye do, labour at it heartily, as doing it to the Lord".
J.T. So that the thought comes to you in the division of the weeks and the days that we have available to us, the thought comes to us as to how varied they are and how unlimited we are. We are not tied up to the Old Testament, to mere religious terms; we become accustomed to addressing divine Persons and we become broader in our thoughts and more affectionate, and love enters into everything, and we can turn as James does to the Lord of glory. The apostles were formed in love; love is the basis of everything.
V.C.L. Would you not, therefore, urge upon us that we should all come to speaking terms with each of the divine Persons personally and be free to address Them in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so.
J.G.H. Do you think the Spirit who "searches all things, even the depths of God", searches our own hearts too? @Psalm 139 says, "Jehovah, thou hast searched me, and known me". Would that be the Spirit there?
J.T. Quite so, "The Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God".
J.McK. Jude gives us a beautiful reference, "Building yourselves up on your most holy faith,
{242}
praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life".
J.T. Quite so, that is one of the smaller epistles. That is like one of the minor prophets.
T.U. Do we get the blending of names, "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and *I* will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty"?
J.T. "Ye shall be to me for sons and daughters".
F.L.M. I would like to know whether the Lord would come in in my daily occupation. I would do it as unto the Lord. Would not those relations in my business come under the thought of Lord?
J.T. I think so, and so on the first day of the week, the whole week has that character. You may have to do things of that kind on the first day of the week, may have to travel, for instance, and the variety is so great. You can bring each one of the divine Persons into any feature of the truth that comes out.
E.J.M. So if we have to do with the Lord on the Lord's day, you do not have that cease when Monday morning comes. The Lord carries through the week.
J.T. You use any of the titles of the divine Persons in any given circumstances. It is a question of the circumstances, the light that you have. We, having the fullest light, know the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. The light we have enables us to use any One in any given circumstance.
F.W. Is there help in this relation that whether it be the Father or the Son or the Holy Spirit, you can see each of Them as God?
{243}
J.T. That is very good, it is a right thing that you are not merely using them for your own convenience.
C.P. Can each of Them be called Lord, the Father and the Son and the Spirit?
J.T. I think so, only the Lord Jesus is said to be made both Lord and Christ. Any one of the divine Persons can be spoken of as Lord.
T.U. There was one mother wanting her two sons placed one on the right hand and one on the left, but the Lord said it is not Mine to give, it is the Father's.
J.T. The Lord regulated the whole position by that answer. At the same time you can speak to the Lord as God as well. We are dealing with inscrutable things and we cannot get around them and you have to bow your head and say, I do not know. We are dealing with inscrutable things in the Father and Son and Spirit.
J.W. You would advise the young to read the ministry, "The Lord is faithful, who shall establish you".
J.T. I think we have to come down to that, and to get back to Mr. W.¬s remark. I am endeavouring to get Mr. W, to say how he gets along in addressing divine Persons in his life, because he has a great deal to do with business, and a great deal to do with the assembly.
E.B.M. Would you say there is a difference between now and Daniel's day? Revelation has come in and the three divine Persons have been revealed. He addressed the God of the heavens, I was thinking about the unions today. We pray much about that and having to face the authorities. Would we not get help in that?
J.T. Certainly, I think very much so, because it is so prominent and enters into everything in our business affairs, so we get help peculiarly in the knowledge we have of God and anyone having experience could be reckoned on to say what is right.
{244}
E.J.M. Would I be permitted to ask Mr. W, to whom they pray in Australia as to the difficulties of the union, to the Father, God, or the Lord?
F.W. I do not know whether I could answer that in an intelligent way. We are all seeking to get help as to which one of the divine Persons to address in regard to specific matters. I think it would be right to say the brethren turn to God; we have the Father in mind and we address Him through the Lord Jesus and by the Holy Spirit and we endeavour to do it in an intelligent way.
J.T. I think that is right. This is a long chapter, forty-nine verses, and ends with this: "Then the king made Daniel great, and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon. And Daniel requested of the king, and he appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego over the administration of the province of Babylon. And Daniel was in the gate of the king". So the whole matter is finished up that someone is at the gate of the king and others are appointed by his suggestion.
J.McK. I would like to ask, going back to verse 16, which says, "Daniel went in, and requested of the king that he would give him time". Then he goes to his house and makes the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah that they would desire mercies of the God of the heavens concerning this secret. What I had in mind was that in any matter relating to the union or such like where the situation is rigorous, we should go in and ask for time to make the matter known and ask for mercies.
J.T. I think that is very practical. So the secret came to Daniel. We are christians, we who have the Spirit of God are in the place where we can get the secret. We can do that which Daniel could not do,
{245}
we can enter the holiest at any time. Any individual of us is at liberty to enter the holiest.
V.C.L. Is it worthy of note that not only does Daniel speak to God before he goes in to the king, but he also, when he comes into the king's presence, confesses boldly to the king before he sets out the matter of the dream? Is that not an important matter in dealing with the world or the powers that be that we set out God boldly before we attempt to go further?
J.T. So that Daniel is qualifying for the remarkable service coming into his hand, and he can speak to the king about matters that refer to him too. So the gentiles are come into the position of rule in the world, for it was taken out of the hands of the Jews. They have the secrets. Washington has certain secrets that are being maintained in this country and I think that it is very important that we should all have this before us, especially the young people growing up in the midst of these things, knowing what to do and say and how to say it.
R.W.S. There is so much said about the fourth kingdom and so little said about the others. We are in the days of this kingdom and yet, despite its power, we can go on with these wonderful things that are engaging us now. The stone cut out of the mountain without hands fills the earth and we can go on with spiritual things.
J.T. Well, I think we are living in a day of iron, there is more of this kind in our day than ever before and yet we can go on with the holy things of God. We can transfer authority to the Lord Jesus who is now in our midst.
C.C.T. Is the reason we can go on, as you are saying, that we are connected with the kingdom that cannot be destroyed?
J.T. We have to do with these things. We should understand these things. Authority, the head of gold,
{246}
which he says Nebuchadnezzar was, is all transferred to Christ. Christ is going to take up the whole matter in the sense of government. In the meantime, He is willing to go along with the two or three that gather unto His name; He is in the midst of them, and all the secrets are there. We say quietly to ourselves, all that is going to be ours presently. That is just what we do say. We are to wait and learn to wait and be patient in waiting.
J.W. Is the principle of revelation what is seen here? "God has revealed to us by his Spirit".
J.T. I am sure, that is just what we heard a minute ago, "The Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God". We have the Lord Jesus and the Father; it is wonderful and it should affect every one of us that we have all these things in our very midst. The question, therefore, is, Are we patient in the midst of all that is around us and yet going on with God?
J.W. "Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh ..."
J.T. We will come to that on Lord's day afternoon, I hope.
C.H.M. You were referring to the two or three. It impresses you inasmuch as it comes in the gospel of Matthew.
J.T. Suitably in the gospel of Matthew.
C.H.M. I was struck with your remark, in that way it runs parallel with the kingdom of the heavens.
C.H.H. Is it not wonderful that God in every case responds where there is a request? Daniel prays to the God of the heavens and He makes the king favourable to them.
J.T. I think it is a great thing for the young people, as we said, to think of this little affair we have, but which is morally very, very great, what we are going on with, greater than any kingdom or empire. We have the secret and we have access to the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by the new and
{247}
living way which He has dedicated for us through the veil, that is His flesh.
J.B. Would verse 28 of @Hebrews 12 help us? -- "Wherefore let us, receiving a kingdom not to be shaken, have grace, by which let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear".
J.T. That is just right, just exactly what we have here.
J.P. Would Daniel and his companions rise to a type of the assembly?
J.T. Just so. They suffer by themselves. You know on the next occasion they are the ones cast into the burning fiery furnace, and the Son of God comes in with them, the Son of God.
A.B. Would the reference to "without hands", encourage our hearts in regard to inscrutability?
J.T. Just so. "Cut out without hands". Very beautiful.
F.W. Would you say the very last sentence shows the position of the saints when they are with God?
J.T. We go to the assembly, that is where we get our strength. Many times we have spoken of it.
F.W. I had in mind Daniel was in the gate of the king, in the place of influence and government.
J.T. It is because we are with the true Governor of the world, and He is content to be with us for the little moment. Are we content to be with Him and not with the great things of this world?
E.J.M. Does the word, "that which restrains", refer to the assembly, indicating the great things to which we are united? We are identified with that which has a restraining influence on the evil current in the world.
J.T. I think, too, we said at Chicago that the powers that be restrain too. That is augmentary to the assembly, but the real power is with the assembly. So we can be thankful, for we can pray for the brethren and we can pray for the kings and
{248}
such as are in authority because they augment what we are doing; and, in the meantime, we say to ourselves secretly, all the power belongs to us, all the great things that men have, if they be creatures of God, belong to us.
E.J.M. And the secrets.
A.B. The kings and the presidents and the like would take advantage unless there was such a character of people in the kingdom.
J.T. They do, too. If they would tell the truth they would say that such and such a one is the one I can rely upon, especially in the wars that have taken place.
A.B. I was thinking of your reference, to appearing before the king this morning. What a sight before his eyes, "Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth".
{249}
READINGS ON DANIEL (3)
@Daniel 9: 1 - 19
J.T. We should be reminded that the object of looking into this book of Daniel is not exactly to deal with the prophetic subjects that are treated in it, but rather with the moral side that is presented. In no part of it is this seen more than in chapter 9, which gives us the personal exercises of the prophet, a model to us all, especially those of us who seek to serve the Lord in truth. So it is thought to read this chapter because of the context, that is to say the duration of the captivity, the scattering of Israel because of their sins, and Daniel's prayer entering into this chapter peculiarly. He tells us the date, the time, and other details; then he proceeds to judge himself and to judge the people, and it is hoped that this will come home to us at this reading, those of us who are in any sense taking on the service, and to all of us, brothers and sisters and children, because of the great importance of holiness that appears in this section of the chapter. The next section, of course, begins with verse 20 and then the final reading will be on the last chapter. The book will, therefore, afford us instruction not only as to the prophecy of Daniel, but also as to the moral features that enter into it as appearing in the prophet and his companions, models to us all.
S.McC. In relation to this personal side that you have been referring to, is it of note to take account of Daniel as a man that looked into things? There is a lot extant among us in the way of ministry and we need to look into things, do we not? He "understood by the books".
J.T. That is exactly part of the burden entering into this reading. It is really what leads up to this part of the chapter being read.
{250}
S.McC. One feels in regard to oneself, and it applies to all of us, the need to apply oneself more to looking into things. Ignorance of the truth is not excusable in our day because there is so much extant in the ministry.
J.T. There are fifty large volumes of the ministry of Mr. Darby, yet how many of us have read them? Then there is the ministry that has appeared during the last fifty years bearing on such subjects as eternal life, the ministry of Mr. Raven particularly, and the ministry as to the Lord's Person, the sonship of Christ, and the service of God, in general affording instruction for every one of us as we have part in the Lord's service. Finally, what is current, the ministry which the Holy Spirit has been pleased to open up in connection with Himself, whether that is understood.
J.G.H. Is it important that Paul in his word to Timothy puts the matter of reading ahead of exhortation and teaching?
J.T. Just so, very good. That had been in mind. It is a very real question as to whether the brethren generally, especially the sisters, look into the matter of reading for our instruction that we might enjoy things and serve God rightly.
L.E.S. Would not the sorrows of the soul of Daniel underlie all this? I am wondering if there are spiritual feelings with most of us as to the circumstances in which the testimony of God is set out in our day?
J.T. What more affects our feelings than our heads, our intelligence?
L.E.S. Yes, and the sorrows of the soul of Daniel as he weighed over before God His judicial dealings with His people.
J.T. No doubt Daniel should be read, therefore, in the light of the gospel. What feelings the Lord
{251}
had in moving about in the holy land! What feelings He must have had!
C.C.T. So we find Daniel in this chapter as a man who prays with fasting and in sackcloth and ashes, a man with feeling.
J.T. Just so, in contrast to Esther. There is no prayer mentioned in Esther, but that is not to say, Esther and Mordecai were not praying people, undoubtedly they were.
C.H.H. You see the same feelings coming out in Nehemiah and Ezra and in the apostle Paul.
J.T. In no one, next to the Lord, are the thoughts of the Lord Himself seen more clearly than in Paul. He is a model in that sense. He presents himself to the saints as a follower of Christ and begs them to follow him as he follows Christ.
S.McC. And how often he speaks of his tears. They are mentioned quite a few times in the Pauline epistles.
J.T. He speaks to Timothy regarding tears.
R.W.S. In @Luke 24 the Lord said, "All that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled". I wondered if the fact that we are looking into Daniel now would show how the Spirit is prepared to help us in relation to prophecy and all the prophets?
J.T. I think that is very applicable. Some of us in the East have been looking into the prophets a bit and these things came before us, I do not believe they have come before me any more than they have since I have been here. What an example David is for us. The Spirit of God is not slow in referring to the prophets. Peter especially speaks of them, all the prophets, he says.
C.H.H. @Psalm 42, "My tears have been my bread day and night".
J.T. Just so.
{252}
L.E.S. Referring to Paul again, he answered, "What do ye, weeping and breaking my heart? for *I* am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus". Would that not suggest the feelings of his soul?
J.T. And then the account he gives of his works in 2 Corinthians is most touching: "Besides those things that are without, the crowd of cares pressing on me daily, the burden of all the assemblies". No one of us could ever say that of himself, the cares of all the assemblies.
F.T. Would you say Daniel's actions here would show that he is a true priest and prophet, too?
J.T. We might remark that it does not *say* he is a priest. It is said of Ezekiel that he is a priest.
F.T. Would you not say these are qualifications for a priest?
J.T. Fully, he is a remarkable foreshadowing of the Lord Himself and of what becomes us in the service of God.
Rem. Jeremiah is affected by the desolations of Jerusalem. In his Lamentations he says, "Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, whom Jehovah hath afflicted in the day of his fierce anger".
J.T. So Jeremiah is rightly called the weeping prophet. Doubtless Daniel was, but it is not said of him. Jeremiah is a feeling and weeping man. It is a wonderful thing that is said of Jesus, a separate sentence: "Jesus wept". Those two words are found in the gospel of John by themselves.
S.McC. And it is interesting that that appears in regard to a locality where certain conditions were present. Does that not show what feelings the Lord has in regard to the local positions and what has been worked out in them?
J.T. He wept because of others, Lazarus, Mary and Martha. Mary is mentioned by Luke especially.
{253}
Could you enlarge upon the idea of locality and how much John makes of it? You thought the idea of locality involves the circumstances associated with localities.
S.McC. I wondered if it would be right to think of the tears of Christ in relation to Jerusalem as bearing upon the general conditions and the refusal of light from God, whereas Bethany would represent more the inward side bearing upon ourselves and our exercises.
A.B. There is an excellent footnote in regard to Jesus being moved; @John 11: 38. 'Here it was inward feeling (in spirit) produced by the deep pain caused by seeing the power of death over the human spirit. There was so far indignation that there was deep antagonism to the power of evil and Satan in death. It may be'groaned'is the best word'.
J.T. There is no other passage that touches us more than this.
A.B. And you are impressed in regard to what has been said as to leadership. If it were more taken on by us how much spiritual prosperity there might be in our localities!
J.T. Yes, that is very good. You just wonder about localities in this country and Canada. Take a place called Buffalo, where I saw one or two in a meeting nearby, the only ones I know of in that locality. From New York to Buffalo or Rochester there are hardly any in fellowship. The question comes home as to localities: Why is it there is not more work done?
W.McK. Of Ephesus Paul said, "Night and day, I ceased not admonishing each one of you with tears". Those features entered into his service in the local company.
J.T. Ephesus was a company which bore very much fruit. Ephesians has the greatest place of all the epistles of the New Testament.
{254}
C.C.T. Do you think that so few in fellowship between New York and here is why the local exercise is coming forward as to preaching the gospel on the street?
J.T. That came up when I was in Australia some time back.
F.W. What you said there stirred up the brethren everywhere.
J.T. We should be stirred up by it. They are preaching on the street there now.
C.H.H. Do you think we should feel out to see if there is street preaching in other localities? When the Lord sent them out in Luke to the different cities. He said, "Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace to this house. And if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it". If a son of peace was found they would stay there, I was wondering whether even now there might not be a revival of that kind of thing. Those who are capable of preaching might try out different towns where there are such as may be designated sons of peace.
J.T. Very good, I need scarcely ask you what is being done in the Boston area.
C.H.H. We can thank God that we are very much encouraged in the street preaching. The brethren are very active.
J.T. Very cheering to hear that.
V.L. Does not Daniel have all in mind when he speaks to God in his prayer of the men of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and all Israel as though starting with the men of Judah in grace he extends his thoughts to all Israel, none left out?
J.T. Quite so. The question arises as to whether the first preaching of the gospel according to @Acts 2 was not in the open air, I believe it was.
S.McC. I understand it to be that, in the open air. The way it reads would seem to confirm that.
{255}
C.H.H. Would not the numbers who were there prove that it would be?
J.T. There would be no hall large enough.
A.B. You have referred to a city on this continent where thousands were gathered together to hear open air preaching by Whitfield.
E.B.M. The Lord told the man in @Mark 5, "Go to thine home to thine own people, and tell them how great things the Lord has done for thee, and has had mercy on thee. And he went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him and all wondered".
J.T. There were ten cities in Decapolis.
R.W.S. The Lord in @Luke 12 says, "Ye know how to judge of the appearance of the earth and of the heaven; how is it then that ye do not discern this time?". Daniel begins to add up and discovers in his time that they are coming to the end of the seventy years. Is that not a voice to us in our times?
J.T. So that we habitually orient ourselves to the ministry of our time and move accordingly and in accord with the ministry of the last hundred and fifty years. We know the ministry of a hundred and fifty years ago and what results there have been in this country and elsewhere in zeal, and the work of God proceeds in that sense, and it is to be seen in certain localities and in relation to certain persons whose names have been given.
F.W. Does verse 3 emphasise the exercise that should be upon us in relation to what you have been speaking of?
J.T. "And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth". Wonderful, and added to that, ashes. "And I prayed unto Jehovah my God, and made my confession, and said, Alas Lord! the great and terrible God, keeping covenant and loving-kindness
{256}
with them that love him, and that keep his commandments". Then we proceed, "We have sinned, and have committed iniquity". I suppose that would be one passage that would point to what we are speaking about.
F.W. I was wondering whether these sorrowful things he had to confess were not only matters of emotion, but exercises. The emotion is brought about by the sorrowful results present, but the exercises would lead him to seek Jehovah's face in regard to matters being adjusted.
J.T. And the beautiful way in which he speaks to Jehovah Himself, "Alas, Lord! the great and terrible God, keeping covenant and loving-kindness with them that love him, and that keep his commandments". And then he adds, "We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even turning aside from thy commandments and from thine ordinances. And we have not hearkened unto thy servants the prophets". So that the prophets are brought in, the past prophets as well as the local current ones.
C.H.H. Would the fact of loving God be the basis for these proper feelings being extended to God's people? The sackcloth and ashes and reduction are like Abraham when he is interceding for Sodom and Gomorrah as though he had been reduced himself. Would not the fact that Daniel puts God and His covenants in the first place be a parallel thought with what you are calling attention to?
J.T. He has the qualities of a priest.
C.H.M. Is it not remarkable in that way in the epistle to the Romans Paul brings God in first? "First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ".
J.T. A good enquiry to look into. Take @Hebrews 11 for example, it bears much on what we have been saying. It deals with persons who have faith,
{257}
they have qualities that commend themselves to God. By faith Abel, for instance, and by faith so and so, and so on right down the whole line of Scripture. The qualities are there that commend them to God. Without faith it says no one shall please God.
C.H.M. So that, whilst I would not say anything against what is called popular gospel preaching, the weakness of it is that man's need is made more prominent than God's honour and greatness.
J.T. Quite so.
T.C. Would you say all these exercises are pleasing to God? Later in the chapter it says Daniel is one greatly beloved, I do not know that it says that of any other.
J.T. In @Hebrews 11 Daniel is not mentioned, and Deborah is not mentioned either, though mentioned much in her own time. We have to note why persons are not mentioned and why they are.
L.E.S. Would not this chapter afford help in regard to what we were speaking of yesterday afternoon as to addressing divine Persons? Their names come into this chapter in various circumstances in a spiritual way in the soul of Daniel, "My God", then "Jehovah our God", "Alas, Lord!" and "Lord God".
E.G.M. Would you say Daniel is eating the sin offering in this passage?
J.T. Very good, I would say that.
E.G.M. And he said, "I prayed unto Jehovah my God, and made my confession". His prayer grows in intensity, does it not, until in verse 19 he is urgent with God? "Lord, hearken and do! defer not, for thine own sake, O my God! for thy city and thy people are called by thy name". Then God answers him, sending Gabriel. I was thinking of your urging us to take on the ministry, particularly the sisters and the young people, for this prayer seems to be the result of prophetic utterances. He
{258}
says, "I set my face", because he is to take on the state of things before God in the greatest spiritual intensity.
J.T. Quite so.
C.H.H. It seems to emphasise particularly that they had not hearkened to the prophets or listened to the word of God. Would you say that is the defect today? "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge".
J.T. Well, that ought to give rise to the thought of lack of prophecy. We have meetings for prophetic ministry, but that means not simply that it treats of prophetic subjects, but of moral subjects such as we find in this book, the first chapter. It is the idea of prophecy, "but rather that ye may prophesy".
S.McC. Does not Daniel refer to that in verse 6? He has already referred to the books, to the written ministry, but now he says, "And we have not hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, who spoke in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land". That would be prophetic ministry such as you are alluding to.
J.T. Quite so. They spoke to the kings; the prophet spoke to David on moral lines. And David himself was a prophet, showing that the prophets can convict each other.
C.C.T. Is it not worthy of note that in verse 6, "We have not hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, who spoke in thy name"? The prophets spoke in power in the name of God.
J.T. Quite so, these special meetings such as we have are meetings of prophets, brethren that can minister come together in special meetings, for the best of these meetings are the three-day meetings. We get variety to open up things.
V.L. While you get more able servants together in these three-day meetings, do you not think it
{259}
should encourage us in our localities to see what one man with God can do?
J.T. Yes, what one man can do. So it was with Mr. Darby. His father told him to see what one man can do. We all know what one man can do.
V.L. Would not that be the burden you would lay upon us? One sister or one brother can do much with God.
J.T. One man or one woman can do much in a given place. Look at this city, there are many serving God and the prophets speak to the prophets, hence David was spoken to by a prophet.
R.W.S. There are twenty-four or twenty-five three-day meetings in this country and Canada. They really provide practical salvation for the saints, especially for those in the small meetings.
J.T. I have many times before spoken of that. There are not many persons who can move about in service; we have only a very few in this country. Some have to do a lot of travelling because of business and the like and are able to get around.
E.G.M. I was wondering whether the exhortations, in connection with attending these three-day meetings, "Quench not the Spirit; do not lightly esteem prophecies", is important. By going to the three-day meetings, I come to where the Spirit is moving and prophecy is coming out.
J.T. Just so; so there may be not much gift, but they are not to be despised if there is prophecy.
C.H.H. The Lord said in Luke, "It is written", but He also said, "It is said". In connection with what is going on now, people are listening to what is said.
J.T. But there is what is written. We have to carry that which is said in our minds. We can carry in our minds what is said at any given time.
S.McC. In regard to what you have said of the three-day meetings which mean so much to us in
{260}
this country, it is important that we should see to it that, in so far as we can, we should be intent to get the gain of them, the saints enquiring into the truth?
C.C.T. Laying ourselves out for these three-day meetings would help us as to the things coming out by the Spirit.
J.T. Another thing that should be taken to heart by all of us is that what is said has to be carried in our minds, what is written can be carried in our pockets.
C.C.T. Are you suggesting it would be better for us to have these things in our minds instead of in a book?
J.T. You have to make the book yours. We are to have it in the mind, "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law"
J.W. Would that be better understood by these three-day meetings?
J.T. Usually they are taken up in this country. Saturday is very largely used as a holiday, making more opportunity for week-ends and Friday, Saturday and Sunday. We should encourage one another and so much more as we see the day approaching.
C.H.H. Would you encourage the week-end meetings, too?
J.T. Quite so. It is not always convenient to have more. Certainly I would encourage them. The three-day meetings help us to open up a full line of thought.
C.H.H. That is the extent we can bear, as the three days with David.
Chas.T. In regard to what you were saying, I was thinking of that scripture, the Holy Spirit "will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you".
J.T. The things the Lord said to them, pointing out what the Lord has given you to use, that is
{261}
your memory. The memory can be used peculiarly.
W.McK. The man Gabriel came to make Daniel skilful of understanding.
J.T. Now that brings up the whole question of angelic service to us which may be touched on for a moment. Why should it be that angels were created before men? We should enquire as to whether God had His own reasons for the creating of man. Angels were created long before, how long we do not know, but it has to be thought of.
S.McC. What is your own impression as to the deferring of the creation of man? You raised the question in Chicago and some of us have thought a lot about it. You said a little more as to it in New York.
J.T. I do not know if I can answer it very conclusively. It is really a very great subject. The angels have no sex attached to them, but men have. God had in mind to have them earlier than men. Another question that comes up is that His beloved Son did not become an angel. He became a Man; and He becomes more endeared than ever to us because He became a Man, not an angel.
F.W. "When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son".
J.G.H. Do you think the creation of angels prior to man has in mind the thought of worship? "When he brings in the firstborn into the habitable world, he says, And let all God's angels worship him". That would not have been possible unless the angels were there; it makes way for it.
J.T. It makes way for the idea of worship, the worship of God in man. I am sure that is in mind and has to be considered because the angels are seen as subject servants to that Man. He is greater than angels. God would not put the world to come under angels; the world to come is under man.
{262}
F.W. I was thinking of the wisdom of God in connection with it. In His wisdom He created angels first.
J.T. But man was the final thought, the abiding thought.
C.H.M. Would you think the question God raises with Job as to "When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy", bearing on the creation of angels, would show what God had in His mind?
J.T. Yes, because they are called sons of God. They are called sons of God in @Genesis 6, in a detrimental sense, and we have to think of all that and of the idea of the position of the angels as made subject servants to God's mind. All His thoughts were centred in Christ, in the Son. As to the Son He said, "And let all God's angels worship him". Then further the scripture says, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?"
A.S.C. In chapter 8 Daniel sought to understand the vision and the voice of a man "called and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand", "And when he came, I was afraid, and fell on my face; and he said unto me, Understand, son of man; for the vision is for the time of the end". So Gabriel comes into activity in relation to that great matter.
J.P. This angel seemed to know about the prophetic ministry. The angel communicated to Daniel the prophetic line of things. But the Spirit would communicate a higher line of truth in the time that we are now in.
J.T. Quite so. God gave gifts to men, not to angels.
V.L. Were angels subservient to men prior to the incoming of Christ? It says, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account
{263}
of those who shall inherit salvation?". Does that refer to the second Man and all that are His?
J.T. It is the heirs of salvation; that is ourselves. They are subservient to us in that sense.
V.L. I want to enquire as to the status of angels and men before Christ.
J.T. Well, in a certain sense angels had the superiority, but we want what is clearly set out in the mind of God, for the Son of God became a Man and it is the final thought of God. Man is the final thought of God.
E.G.M. Is that what is set forth in @Hebrews 2? "For he does not indeed take hold of angels by the hand, but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham".
J.T. Just so, I was thinking of that.
N.B. Peter speaks of angels desiring to look into things.
J.T. They desired to learn, to look into things.
C.H.M. Would you say they are not able to communicate any light as to the assembly, but learn from the assembly?
J.T. Yes.
W.McK. Would you say the angels have to do with the minds of men as well as with their bodies? It says, "I am now come forth to make thee skilful of understanding". That has to do with his mind as well as his body.
J.T. A schoolmaster can help your mind to read the Bible, but the ordinary schoolmaster could not bring out the truth of Christ and the assembly.
A.P. So the Lord shows the value of the prophets. He says to those two going to Emmaus, "O senseless and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!".
J.T. That was a reproof. He goes on to correct that, to instruct them. He is ready to do it.
R.W.S. Why should angels be introduced in @1 Corinthians 11? "Therefore, ought the woman to
{264}
have authority on her head, on account of the angels".
J.T. I suppose it is on the line we are talking about, looking on great persons in the eyes of God. They belong to these families called sons of God, but at the same time they are subservient to men, especially those who form the assembly.
F.W. Does the reference in Ephesians help? "Who has created all things, in order that now to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God".
J.T. The manifold wisdom of God is seen in the assembly.
J.P. You made a very helpful remark in New York which the brethren might like to know, referring to "For he has not subjected to angels the habitable world which is to come, of which we speak; but one has testified somewhere, saying, What is man, that thou rememberest him, or son of man that thou visitest him?". Christ and the assembly is included in that word 'man' in the world to come.
C.P. Angels are necessary in view of incarnation, in having everything right for His coming.
J.T. Man was the idea. God Himself became a Man. Christ is God. We cannot give up that at all. We must hold to it tenaciously: He is God Himself. It is mysterious, inscrutable, but it is there. Scripture is full of it.
C.P. It is necessary to have wise prophetic ministry in view of the place the assembly has.
J.T. Quite so, how they are looking on, the angels! One angel was able to destroy a large number of persons at one time, showing the power they have.
S.McC. Would not man as you have been referring to him, include the assembly, the feminine
{265}
side? You were referring to the lack of sex among the angels. The assembly has such a place, the greatest place of all the families in the thoughts of God.
J.T. That would raise another question. There will be no males or females in the assembly; we will all be on the feminine side, I mean all the angels are spoken of as male. But Christ is the masculine and the assembly the feminine.
F.W. Does that give the clue as to the idea of sonship with the angels, but we are brought into it in connection with the assembly?
J.T. So Christ had a mother, but what would she become? She will become, undoubtedly, part of the assembly and be feminine as all the rest of us who form the assembly will be of the feminine thought and Christ the masculine thought.
J.G.H. It is important that the image of God is connected with man, presented in @Genesis 1 as a sexed being, "In the image of God created he him; male and female created he them".
J.T. Quite so, "Male and female created he them". The female is ultimately the assembly, the feminine idea entirely, in relation to Christ.
E.B.M. God is going to tabernacle with men. Would that be masculine?
J.T. Surely, viewed as such.
S.McC. Will the feminine side as you have been alluding to it in a spiritual way only be retained in the family known as the assembly?
J.T. Quite so, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ". The feminine thought.
S.McC. Israel is referred to in a feminine way in the Scriptures. Does that cease with the millennium?
J.T. I would think so. Great things will happen on the seventh day, so to speak, but the ultimate thing is Christ and the assembly.
{266}
S.McC. We have often had allusion to the earthly bride, but that does not go beyond the millennium?
J.T. I do not think so. They are ordinary persons, men as we are now. So that this becomes an immense thought for us to consider as to Christ and the assembly. I speak, the apostle Paul says, of Christ and the assembly, one great thought.
C.H.H. There are many families, but only one bride.
J.T. "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". That refers to ourselves.
S.McC. Would it be right to think of the intense interest of the Spirit in the assembly, as related to all that we have been saying, because of her peculiar feminine relation to Christ, the Spirit being the power of union?
J.T. Quite so. The more we can get of that the better for all of us because Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". That is the theme of the great epistle to the Ephesians, Christ and the assembly. Let the sisters all take account of that. They belong to that, they will be sons, we are all made sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. The assembly is a feminine thought. Am I making that clear?
S.McC. You are clarifying what has been before us in this regard. Might I ask in regard to what we had in Chicago, as to the assembly of the first-born ones, does that allude to the assembly on the masculine side?
J.T. I think so. It is a precious thought; in @Hebrews 12 it is one of the things we have come to. We have come to that. Who are they? They are the assembly, the supreme thought of God, they are registered in heaven.
{267}
S.McC. The first-born there does not allude to Christ, it is the first-born ones, the assembly?
J.T. Exactly.
C.H.H. Would you say the personnel individually are sons on the masculine side, but collectively we are feminine?
J.T. That is the idea. So God loves the idea of sonship. His beloved Son became a Man, but we have to distinguish there, for He is God.
C.H.H. But those who form the assembly as we view them collectively are feminine, but in an individual sense are sons.
J.T. Of course, "What we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is". So that everything takes character from Christ.
J.G.H. Does @Luke 20 confirm what you say as to our individual status? "But they who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection from among the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage; for neither can they die any more, for they are equal to angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection".
J.T. Quite so, being sons of the resurrection.
F.W. The masculine thought does not necessarily include the thought of sex.
J.T. Not necessarily.
J.McK. Will you give us a word of help on the thought of @2 Corinthians 5? "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". Is that a collective idea?
J.T. I think so, the house would be a collective idea. We have a house not made with hands. It is what we shall be, in our eternal condition.
J.McK. Would that be in @Revelation 21, God tabernacling with men?
J.T. Very likely.
{268}
C.H.M. When we are referring to men as in @John 17, it would never do to put the word 'male' there instead of men. We are looking at manhood apart from sex.
J.T. When we come to the new creation, it is one idea, just man.
C.H.H. In @Revelation 12 where the woman brings forth a male son, would that be Christ?
J.T. Just so.
W.McK. Would you help us as to @Genesis 6 which speaks of the sons of God taking wives of the daughters of men? I am trying to get clear what you have said about the sexlessness of angels.
J.T. It is mysterious, one could not say more than that. There it is, a distinct statement.
C.H.H. The angels left their first estate and God allowed it to happen.
J.T. The Lord allowed that to happen. They left their first estate, they are lost angels, lost beings. A terrible thing, and one reason for God bringing in the flood.
{269}
READINGS ON DANIEL (4)
@Daniel 9: 20 - 27; @Isaiah 11: 1 - 16
J.T. It is thought well to add the passage from Isaiah so as to bring out the recovery and glory of the millennial day, to show how Daniel links up with Isaiah, and how the prophets can be used at the present time. The book of Daniel furnishes the truth, and the setting out of the truth on the moral line, Daniel being marked by godliness throughout. Then Isaiah in his inimitable language sets out the glory of the coming day, the millennium. It is hoped that we shall all be able to follow. The Spirit of God which indwells us has more ability than Isaiah or Daniel, therefore, we have more intelligence and ability to enjoy these things.
L.E.S. Would it culminate in the last verse of chapter 12? "Cry out and shout, thou inhabitress of Zion; for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee".
J.T. In fact, I had thought of proposing the whole of chapter 12, but I thought it well to confine ourselves to what we have, but it certainly fits in beautifully and you cannot but feel the peculiar stimulation that marks Isaiah in all these tributes. And I thought it well, therefore, to link on what we have from the book of Isaiah so as to show that what Daniel asks for is fully set out in Isaiah.
S.McC. Do you mean that what we have in verse 19 of our chapter in Daniel, "Lord, hear! Lord, forgive! Lord, hearken and do! defer not, for thine own sake, O my God! for thy city and thy people are called by thy name", has an answer in the glory recorded in Isaiah?
J.T. I thought so. Daniel did not go the full length. Isaiah seems to have the full divine thought more than any of the prophets; in fact, more than all of them together.
{270}
S.McC. So that Isaiah includes the new heavens and the new earth, which in his view would link with the millennium, not quite as far as Peter's view.
J.T. Well, just so. Peter says,"According to his promise, we wait for new heavens and a new earth". It is really what is our portion.
S.McC. I was thinking of what Isaiah says as to the new heaven and the new earth in the end of his book, as to whether it goes as far as what we have in @Revelation 21 as to the eternal state, or whether it links more with the millennial day and its glory?
J.T. I think Isaiah would link with the latter. I think the Spirit of God would bring out exactly what exists at the present time. We get wonderful statements in the passage we read, that refer to the millennial day, whereas, in the New Testament, in Peter, it is linked up with what we call the new heavens and new earth. I mean to say the Spirit of God is entitled to use these terms, and we ought to be able to follow them according to the way He uses them, whether in Isaiah or in the New Testament.
S.McC. I think that helps in relation to Isaiah's ministry.
R.W.S. Isaiah is not at all downcast because only a remnant return. He is more buoyant than all the other prophets.
J.T. He makes more reference than all of them to the word as applied to Israel, not the assembly. We do not exactly form a remnant, we represent the whole idea or nothing. Here this afternoon we represent the whole idea of the assembly; we are a part of it.
S.McC. That is what Philadelphia sets out; it is not a remnant; the whole idea in the Lord's mind is the assembly.
{271}
A.B. Is there something in the prophet's reference to things as Isaiah refers to them? "The Spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah". Would that not enter into our day?
J.T. Good. So that when we come to @Isaiah 11, the present characteristics of Christ appear to us. It is very wonderful that God comes down to us in this sense to bring out to us the present characteristics of Christ, not the assembly glory, but the millennial glory.
V.L. Is it not wonderful that Daniel refers to terms that bear on the Lord Jesus? It is like the Father opening the heavens and saying, "*This* is my beloved Son".
J.T. Beautiful, I think we should be enamoured with these wonderful scriptures because they are so marvellous; so much is said in Isaiah's wild measure, compared with John's simple page; it is not wild, but perfectly set out.
L.E.S. Very good. I was thinking too of @Isaiah 11, the root of Jesse, and then the breaking through of the blessed Spirit of God in relation to the consummation of His own work.
J.T. We thank God for the idea of the remnant of Israel coming into the assembly with us; we have one or two Jewish brothers and sisters known to us. I love to think the Lord has something of Israel in the assembly even now here in America.
S.McC. Is the thought of @Daniel 9, in the part we read, that we are to be affected by the moral side if we are to understand and appreciate rightly the glory connected with the millennial side?
J.T. I thought so.
C.H.H. Do you get the moral side, too, in @Isaiah 6; the moral process that Isaiah goes through, the acknowledgement that he is a man of unclean lips,
{272}
and his lips are touched with the live coal preparing him for his ministry?
J.T. That is preparatory for the language he uses. I suppose there is no prophet read more than Isaiah.
J.G.H. Is it not important too, in view of the fact that Isaiah develops the glory side that he above any of the other prophets develops also the sufferings of Christ?
J.T. Just so. He is quoted in the New Testament for that purpose.
J.B. Would this part of this chapter show to us how Daniel can speak in relation, so to speak, to the assembly as he refers to "thy city", "thy holy mountain", and "thy people"?
J.T. Yes, but you have to regard these statements literally to get the truth. The direct word is not to the assembly, it is to Israel. The recovery of Israel is in mind, all these terms referred to her primarily.
Dr.C.P. The word 'holy' is used in relation to the city and the mountain.
J.T. Quite so. He is really a priest, as we said this morning. Daniel is a priest really, just as Ezekiel was a priest; it is unto God. At the same time we are called priests too, properly speaking, "a kingly priesthood, a holy nation", so that we might carry on the service of God. We might as well keep to the meaning of the terms whatever passage is read, keep to its meaning, and then, if needed, apply it in a spiritual way because "every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching", and can be used, only we have to use them rightly.
J.P. Where will the assembly be during the millennium?
J.T. It will be in heaven. We are made to sit down together in the heavenlies.
{273}
A.B. Is there the idea in the millennium of the celestial city and the terrestrial city, that is the city on the earth that is in mind in Isaiah and Daniel, but in Revelation it is the celestial city, the new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God?
J.T. Just so; and that city is ourselves, we are that city. At least, we are of it and it is a wonderful thing that it is so and we are in the light of that city in every meeting we have, especially on the first day of the week.
E.J.M. Why does Gabriel appear to Daniel about the time of the evening oblation?
J.T. I was struck with that when it was read, that we have even the time of day, the time of day is mentioned, the evening oblation.
E.J.M. Would you say it is a time favourable in God's sight?
J.T. I would say so, it is the time of day, it is the evening. We are to go through the exercise of the night before we are to come to the light of Christ in heaven.
E.J.M. I was going to ask further if the evening oblation would indicate that in Daniel's mind there is a restful state, so he is able to take in the instructions from the angel.
J.T. Quite so. The angel could not give him as much instruction as we could, but the angel could give Daniel instruction.
N.B. Is the speed mentioned here worthy of note? Daniel repeats it. Verse 20, "whilst I was speaking" and in verse 21, "flying swiftly". I am thinking of Peter in @Acts 10. "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word".
J.T. Very beautiful. So there is the idea of speed, flying swiftly, indicating something of the actual material conditions of the millennial day.
{274}
What conditions they will be. We talk about the speed of the plane and train, but there is nothing to be compared with the speed of things in Scripture, and it is not out of the way to call attention to that because we are dealing with God's matters in these scriptures.
N.B. The living creatures in Ezekiel as a flash of lightning.
J.T. Yes.
Dr.C.P. The twinkling of an eye.
J.T. Just so.
C.C.T. Is there something in the thought that Daniel was ready to receive instruction, and Gabriel talked to him? I am thinking of what you said in Rochester, we are to have the knowledge of the voices of divine Persons. All that enters into this case here.
J.T. I think so. "Is this thy voice, my son David?". The idea of the impression the voice makes. What a voice David must have had! is this thy voice? So there is the voice of the prophets, the voice of Jesus, the voice of the Lord.
E.J.M. Is there anything in the fact that this angel was Gabriel rather than Michael? I was thinking of Gabriel announcing to Zacharias and Mary, but Michael is brought in in chapter 10. He is on the military side.
J.T. I think Gabriel is the priestly side. In Luke it is that side.
T.U. Would there be a suggestion in verse 20 as to the qualifications for the visitation of the angel? He was praying and confessing his sins and the sins of his people, and while he was yet speaking there was the visitation of the angel. I was wondering if that would indicate that he qualified morally and spiritually for the visitation.
J.T. I think that is quite right. It was as he was speaking. He is in a priestly state, you might say,
{275}
in the way he is doing it, the words he uses and the manner.
C.H.M. Would you say in the desire we have to recognise divine voices that our attitude should be one of going in and speaking to Him? Is it an attitude that would be consistent with our hearing a voice?
J.T. The voice promotes or induces it.
C.H.M. I was wondering if that well-known verse in Numbers would apply, "And when Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with Him, then he heard the voice speaking to him from off the mercy-seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubim; and he spoke to Him".
J.T. So that you might say, whosoever the voice was it anticipated Moses. Moses intended to speak; but he is anticipated by the voice that came to him.
F.W. Why is it the *man* Gabriel that touched him and informed him?
J.T. I suppose he is, speaking reverently, using a word that is convenient, a question of man; although he is an angel, it is a question of man. I suppose the angels must be formed like men because they often are spoken of as men, as in Abraham's case.
F.W. Is it to set Daniel at ease as bringing him into a holy intimacy with so great a person as Gabriel? He touched him and then informed him. Would that not set Daniel very much at ease?
J.T. Very good. We have often spoken of being on good terms with persons, and there is such a thing as being on good terms with God and instrumentalities like angels. We are set at ease in dealing with God.
F.W. So that there would be such a thing as true, holy spiritual intimacy.
J.T. I would think that is perfectly right.
L.E.S. Would the thought of Daniel addressing
{276}
God as "my God" -- "the holy mountain of my God" -- involve this matter of intimacy?
J.T. Oh, I think all these terms would. At the same time I think they have to be taken literally to get the right meaning first, and then, if we are free, to use them in the spiritual sense, but I think it is right to begin with the primary meaning of the terms and the circumstances involved -- Israelitish terms in themselves.
C.H.H. Referring to the evening oblation, it says in @Psalm 141, "Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, the lifting up of my hands as the evening oblation". I was wondering whether the exercise is to notice the pleasure that is given to God.
J.T. Quite so. Only they were properly Old Testament terms and the circumstances are given in order to get the full meaning of them. We use the word 'oblation' now, but we would only use it in a spiritual sense of offering something to God.
J.P. Will these terms come into use again in the millennium?
J.T. I think they will. We have the highest form of everything. We are to be caught up to heaven; it says that in @1 Thessalonians 4 about the saints not having any fear as to those who have fallen asleep, and so the word is, "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven". The trump of God. The Lord Himself has that. He is entitled to have that and to use it if He wants it, the authoritative voice. "And the dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up". We will hear that voice, too.
R.W.S. According to Ezekiel they will sacrifice.
J.T. We come down now in these scriptures to Israelitish terms which is quite right. We leave the assembly for a moment, but if we want to minister
{277}
in the assembly and to the assembly we can use them; but what we have here are Old Testament terms, but every scripture is good and profitable. We have that in mind all the time. It is a question of how we use them.
R.W.S. These terms are elevated to fit into assembly service.
J.T. They are brought up to us, not we down to them. It is a question of divine Persons, doing what They please.
J.K. This morning we had, "I Daniel understood by the books", and here the angel speaks and says, "To make thee skilful of understanding". Is that something further?
J.T. I think so. The books would refer to what Jeremiah wrote. They are referred to. Now the angel is giving more understanding of these matters. So we get all that in this section we read today.
C.C.T. I was just noticing the reason he is given this understanding is because he is greatly beloved. Is not that worth while noting, in verse 23, "For thou art one greatly beloved"?
J.T. That was his place with God.
R.Q. Would it be right to note the service of Gabriel in connection with the service of Daniel? Would it be analogous to the service of the Spirit in our day?
J.T. It is analogous, I would say that.
S.McC. It is important in dealing with the Scriptures as you refer to them to see the proper bearing. Mr. Grant tried to bring the Old Testament saints to the New Testament level. We have to understand the distinctive place the assembly has in the truth.
J.T. Quite so. I would just add to what you say for the sake of the brethren here, the man you mention, and also Stuart, were heretics. Grant was a man who lived in Plainfield and Stuart a man who
{278}
lived in England; both were heretics. They did not rightly place the truth in the Scriptures.
S.McC. Mr. Grant said eternal life went back to the Old Testament saints, which was error.
C.A.M. The use of the word 'heretic' is the same word as forming a sect, and that is what came about as a result of that fault. I am saying that because of the remarkable way in which you have stressed that if we stand for anything we stand for the whole assembly.
J.T. True; therefore the word 'sect' is evil. The word refers to evil and we ought to regard ourselves as delivered from all these things. We are not sectarian. The disciples were first called christians in Antioch. We have a spiritual name. It is derived from Christ, not from Grant or anyone like that.
E.B.M. Would you say, therefore, "Consider the word, and have understanding in the vision", said to Daniel greatly beloved, brings in the responsible side?
J.T. Just so, "Consider the word, and have understanding in the vision".
C.H.H. It says in chapter 10: 1, "He understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision", as though the word was effectual.
J.T. "And the thing was true", "Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the thing is true, but the appointed time of trial is long; and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision". It is well to take notice of that.
V.L. In view of what you have been saying as to the moral side, is not that summed up in the fact that it says, "At the beginning of thy supplications the word went forth"? The man was heard because of what he was, not just because of what he said.
J.T. Very good, "At the beginning of thy supplications the word went forth"; showing it was not his supplication as such, but such a man as he.
{279}
J.W. Would it appear that things were measured because of his supplication for "thy city"? Would it encourage us to get on the line of measure?
J.T. In Ezekiel, there is a great deal about measurement. The idea begins properly with the book of Ezekiel as to the sanctuary and all that relates to it.
J.G.H. Do you think we would be justified in linking Daniel with John in relation to the matter of being beloved? I was thinking of John as the disciple Jesus loved. Would you think the disclosures of truth that are coming to us in our own times would come to us finding us conscious of divine love?
J.T. Just so.
J.McK. How far would vision go in the present economy? I was thinking of Peter going up to the house-top to pray, becoming in an ecstasy, and the vision of the sheet given to him which he failed to understand.
J.T. But he got to understand it, and explained it fully himself in chapter 11.
J.McK. But I was wondering how far your thought of a vision would go today.
J.T. It would be a spiritual impression. I do not know of anyone in modern times who has had a vision at all, but what we have is spiritual vision, spiritual understanding, "The Lord will give thee understanding". It is not got in a vision or dream or the like. We do not hear of that any more. Of course, in Peter's time it was used.
R.W.S. Things proceed in verse 25, "The street and the moat shall be built again, even in troublous times". Can we bring that up to our day and what is being built in difficult times, I mean in the assembly? What is being built in the assembly, the ministry of the Spirit and all that has happened in the
{280}
last fifty years, wonderful things coming out you might say, in troublous times?
J.T. You are making good use and proper use of the scripture. It is to be used! it is good and profitable!
F.C.T. Would you say what answers to the vision? Is it the prophetic word? Without a vision we would perish.
J.T. That is in a figurative way. We do not get visions now.
J.McK. It is rather more connected with what you say as to Daniel. I was thinking of Peter's word in @Acts 2 in relation to prophecy, "Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your elders shall dream with dreams".
J.T. That came to pass in those days. But was it not a quotation from the Old Testament that Peter was making use of in the then present time, which was quite intelligible? They had the same thing that we have, the Old Testament at the beginning of christianity.
C.H.H. Would the thought of revelation be applicable to the assembly today?
J.T. "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord, I know a man in Christ". Well, Paul had that. They had the same things in the Old Testament.
C.H.M. Would it not be right to say that in the beginning of the church there were certain spectacular occurrences which were in order, but today it is a more inward matter?
J.T. I think the whole thing comes back to the fact that the assembly will be taken away and the millennial conditions will begin. It is touched on in Revelation, but they are more touched on in Isaiah.
J.McK. Perhaps you would help us on the verse in @Acts 16, "And when he had seen the vision,
{281}
immediately we sought to go forth to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to announce to them the glad tidings".
J.T. Well, he followed the line of what happened in the Old Testament; that is allowed and it may be allowed continuously in the assembly's history, but I do not know of it in modern times and I do not think it exists.
F.W. Would you use the word 'vision' in a spiritual sense? Take what there was in Mr. Darby's day, an apprehension before his soul, an apprehension of the assembly in a certain sense. Would it be right to say he got a vision of the whole thought?
J.T. I suppose he did, but I do not suppose he got a vision in the sense that Paul got it. I do not think anyone gets visions now, I do not know of anyone. We have the Spirit, which is greater than any vision, and we know what that is, in these meetings. It is greater than any vision.
E.J.M. Did not Mr. Darby condemn the statement that certain of the sisters had seen visions?
J.T. I would be afraid of it if I heard any had them now, would not you?
E.J.M. Yes, I would.
A.B. "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son".
J.T. That is the way the speaking comes, not that there were not visions too at the beginning of christianity, I believe there were, but at the same time we cannot say there is any such thing now.
C.C.T. It says in @John 16, "And he will announce to you what is coming".
J.T. That is on the higher level. The Spirit of God is the greatest instrumentality to convey what is of God.
{282}
C.C.T. Would it be wrong to say if we did have visions it would be setting aside the Spirit?
J.T. We do better to proceed in the way we know God is working, we should not be looking for visions.
J.W. Would not the scripture be the final authority?
J.T. First, we look for impressions. The impressions come from the Spirit of God and that is a greater thing than a vision.
C.H.H. The apostle says, "The spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him, being enlightened in the eyes of your heart".
J.T. Very good, beautiful!
N.B. What would you say about the meeting for ministry when there might be a revelation?
J.T. Of course, that was at the beginning of things, as we say, but I would say it applies now; you have an impression of the Spirit at the meeting, like we will have tonight. We might get impressions to search out some scripture that fits in with what you have in mind.
Rem. Paul says, "For ye can all prophesy one by one, that all may learn and all be encouraged". I believe that covers it.
J.T. It does, that covers things.
E.J.M. You made an important remark when you said that we were speaking of Jewish words and settings, bringing in the difference between interpretation and application.
J.T. I would say that fully.
R.W.S. Paul speaks of the world to come of which we speak. We do not speak much about the world to come; we speak more about what is our proper inheritance than the world to come.
J.T. In F.E.R.¬s time we used that word very much, the world to come of which we speak. All
{283}
that is in the assembly, as is the truth we are speaking of now as to the Old Testament things.
C.H.H. Did you say it covers the assembly?
J.T. The world to come certainly covers the assembly; it will be over the earth, not on the earth, but over it.
R.W.S. Then you are linking the assembly with the world to come, I was thinking of it down here, the terrestrial side.
J.T. I think the world to come involves the assembly and all that attaches to it.
S.McC. Would it be right to say the service of God will be seen in a dual way in the world to come, on the material side on the earth in connection with the sacrifices and the spiritual side in the heavenly city?
J.T. Just so. You can hardly visualise in your own mind the idea of the world to come of which we speak without the assembly. It is a christian expression. Paul would use that and in F.E.R.¬s time it was greatly used, and in my time, too, when he was here. The world to come of which we speak. It is spoken of in Hebrews.
J.W. Would the expression 'Lord Jesus' indicate the Lord Jesus as in His personal ministry in @Luke 4? "Today this scripture is fulfilled in your ears".
J.T. That is very simple, it is christianity, the Lord exhibited it. The book was handed to Him and He read from it and closed it and sat down. The Lord's own actions are mentioned and it is beautiful; it becomes increasingly attractive in the way Luke presents it.
J.W. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor; he has sent me to preach to captives deliverance, and to the blind sight, to send forth the crushed delivered, to preach the acceptable year of
{284}
the Lord". I suppose its actual fulfilment is in the world to come.
J.T. I think it is alluding to what we have now, to what we are going on with. Read it again, please.
J.W. "And the book of the prophet Esaias was given to him; and having unrolled the book he found the place where it was written".
J.T. Notice that, "He found the place". Found, literally, by the Lord Himself as He would do in anyone's house. He would just do what they did. He found the passage. Read on.
J.W. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor; he has sent me to preach to captives deliverance, and to the blind sight, to send forth the crushed delivered, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord".
J.T. Then what? What does it say about the people, what they think of it?
J.W. "And having rolled up the book, when he had delivered it up to the attendant, he sat down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed upon him".
J.T. That is the idea, what you would expect of Luke.
C.H.H. He closes the book in the middle of the verse, discriminating as to what applies.
J.T. If you are speaking, close your speech; do not say any more when you have finished.
S.McC. In regard to the seventy weeks, there remains one week to run its course, but you regard the first half of that week as being fulfilled in the gospels in the ministry of Christ?
J.T. I would say that fully. Then I think we ought to turn to Isaiah, to see how Christ is seen there in chapter 11. Will you read that again starting at verse 1?
{285}
N.B. "And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots shall be fruitful; and the Spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah. And his delight will be in the fear of Jehovah; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears; but with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his reins, and faithfulness the girdle of his loins. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and the fatted beast together, and a little child shall lead them".
J.T. So the passage takes us to millennial days. It is not exactly indicating christian ministry, the Lord working in this or that one, giving gifts to set out the truth, but the passage we read refers to what will take place in the millennium.
J.P. Would that refer to what the Lord was as here already?
J.T. It is the spirit of the passage; it really refers to the millennial day. That is what I have in mind in the chapter.
V.L. Will there be anything to be understood in the millennium that is not available to us to understand now?
J.T. I think not. The Spirit of God is here to bring out what is suitable to our times, to bring out the service of God, and to maintain the service of God. If we use any scripture that fits our time, the Spirit of God would help us, but, if we are dealing with what is strictly millennial, then we want to see how the Lord acts in the millennium.
{286}
R.Q. "The Spirit searches all things".
J.T. All things.
E.B.M. It speaks of the various animals lying down together and enjoying things on the earth. Would that be the world to come?
J.T. In "the world to come, whereof we speak", I think the more spiritual things would be in mind, the things the apostle Paul mentions. He was speaking about the heavenly things. He was a heavenly man, he had the truth of the assembly given to him. He was the minister of the assembly, and would deal with heavenly things.
N.B. I was wondering if there was not something very beautiful in the end of @Ephesians 1, already referred to. We have it here in @Isaiah 11, the spirit of wisdom in the apostle's prayer, "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him". This would be given to the saints and then following on to the place that has been given to Christ at God's right hand in the heavenlies "above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come". I thought it would fit in with what you are saying.
J.T. Exactly, that would be what Paul was speaking about; that is the way I would take that passage. We are speaking of other things now; we are speaking of them with a view to help in a general way from the prophet Isaiah. We are to learn from the prophets.
C.H.H. Would we be justified at all in using, in the gospel, the scripture about the wolf? One has heard the idea of the wolf and the lamb applied to the apostle Paul and Ananias. Is that kind of thing justified in the gospel, as though these conditions would be brought about mutually among the saints?
J.T. Well, I think so; you might do that. It is a question of change, the great word we should keep
{287}
before us. Take the Lord Himself; He takes on a change; you see Him in different ways.
T.U. As to the moral side, it speaks of the apostle Paul, as concerning zeal, persecuting the church. That is what he was as Saul and his zeal, as Paul, had been changed to concern for the truth.
J.T. Quite so, a changed man. You read in @Acts 9 of a changed man and the Lord appeared to him. He is a changed man.
S.McC. As to the thought of the change in the millennial day, these scriptures in @Isaiah 11 seem to speak of restfulness. Do you think the judgments as depicted in the Revelation prior to the, millennial day will mean the overthrow of the great systems of modern transportation?
J.T. I think so. We were speaking about the age of iron. That will not mark the millennial day.
S.McC. I did not catch your thought. Do you mean in actual sense there is a lot of iron today as well as in a moral sense? That is very interesting.
J.T. Quite so.
C.H.H. Would it be the idea of Hebron being seven years before Zoan in Egypt?
J.T. I think so, the town is given.
J.W. There are two ways the Lord Jesus is presented here, "There shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse", and then as a banner.
J.T. This is all millennial. The question is now can you use it in ministry for the assembly, and I think you can. It is a question of the spirit of Christ and how it is developed.
R.W.S. I want to ask a question about the means of transportation being altered. We have earlier about the angel flying in mid-heaven. You linked that up with aeroplanes, I want to be clear as to this.
J.T. I do not think we should take these things up as of any consequence, because the world to come
{288}
of which we speak is of God, what God will have in the millennium; and it includes what is on the heavenly side as over the earth, the whole scene of things in heaven and things on the earth. The whole thing is to be understood for Paul is a minister of what belongs to heaven. We are to understand how it is to be seen now, and how it is to be worked out too in the assembly.
A.B. So should we understand that what you have in mind in relation to the setting out of the truth of the world to come whereof we speak is that we actually shall exist in relation to the celestial city, the heavenly city influencing the earth. Lunar time enters into it as to the earth, years, months, and days, but in relation to the city there is no need of the sun. The city is a great governing influence in the world to come.
J.T. Very good. All very instructive and I hope we all take it in. The world to come whereof we speak characteristically. We should not speak of our business; we may have to earn our living, but that will not be characteristic of us in heaven. We are dealing now with the world to come whereof we speak.
L.E.S. We were referring to the young people yesterday and they are here brought into this great matter, are they not? It should affect what they are saying.
J.T. And, therefore, the question is what the young people are saying. We are here now and seeking to speak of heavenly things to one another. When we go out and go home tonight, what are we talking about? Are we speaking about these heavenly things?
S.McC. Eternal life would be one of them. We speak a lot of eternal life; that, in principle, involves the world to come.
J.T. Very good.
{289}
C.H.H. In the millennium, the nations will be walking in the light of the city. Would that light be diffused by personal intercourse with, and instruction by, the assembly or will those of the assembly be able to impart it to the earth in some other way?
J.T. I am not sure; it is very likely that there will be some contact. I think it is right to be clear and we are likely to get down to the material things. There is some contact in some sense. I think there is some contact, but I do not know how much, and I do not know whether you do. We are changed into different bodies. We shall be like Him for we shall see Him as He is.
C.H.H. I think you have said years ago that @Matthew 5 relates to the world to come. Would you think it is the Jewish idea?
J.T. I cannot be sure of what I said about it, but I do say there is light shed down on the earth; how, I cannot say, but I think there will be light in the sense that the Old Testament will be used down here and maybe what we have now will be used.
C.H.H. The book of Ezekiel sets forth the priesthood then. Will it be actually as it is described?
J.T. I do not know at all, I would not like to say much on that point, although I have a very distinct impression, but I think that there will be a distinct contact between the heavens and the earth. I think there will be some.
R.W.S. What you have said is illuminating. I have never seen that in just that way.
J.T. What is worthy and suitable to it, and we are speaking of things profitable to ourselves.
W.McK. Would it be right to say the Lord would employ angels? There are twelve gates and, at the gates twelve angels, and it mentions the tribes of Israel as though the earthly side is in view.
J.T. That is very good. So if we converse after this meeting now, what are we going to talk about?
{290}
what will we talk about in a general way? That is a test to us that we ought to pay attention to and become heavenly in our thoughts. The Old Testament saints spoke often one to another. What did they say? They were talking about things connected with Israel. Now what are we talking about? We are talking about the heavenly city and what is in it. We are going to be there. The new heavens and the new earth wherein dwells righteousness.
S.McC. That was one of the themes of F.E.R. when he was here in America, the principles and elements of the world to come. You probably know better than any of us here. But it was not the literal earthly side he was referring to, but such things as eternal life and other things.
J.T. You get that in the printed ministry. It would indicate what we should talk about. We are separated from the world now. Therefore, we do not speak of worldly things now, but we speak of heavenly things; we speak of them to one another.
E.J.M. Did you link up @Isaiah 11 with Daniel to show the change effected?
J.T. Very good.
F.W. It speaks of the spirit of wisdom and understanding, and the spirit of counsel and might; it is a question of the spirit of things. Of course, that is not the Spirit. It is the result.
J.T. It is the result worked out in Israel in a day to come and in ourselves morally now. And there is the little child, the sucking child playing on the hole of the adder, and the weaned child. The children are there and are brought up properly and the old people as well are mentioned sitting there on the street.
R.Q. Would the thought of the little child leading them go back to the counsels of God in Genesis, in our image, after our likeness?
{291}
J.T. You cannot very well bring that in there. The children in the millennial day will be characterised by that spirit, and I think that is a thing to keep before us. A little child shall lead them, the little child is not intelligent.
E.J.M. They shall not hurt in all my holy mountain.
J.T. No violence, no hurt in the millennial day compared with what we have in the world.
C.H.H. Would @Matthew 18 apply? "Unless ye ... become as little children".
J.T. Very good.
{292}
READINGS ON DANIEL (5)
@Daniel 12: 1 - 13
J.T. This chapter is very full, and full of great things. Perhaps no part of the book is so full of great things. No doubt the brethren will be looking up that the Lord might, from moment to moment as we are engaged in the chapter, help us that we may get the general outline of the chapter and then the details. First, there is the great fact of the intervention of the angel Michael, standing up, as it says, for the children of Daniel's people, and then, the terrible thought of the suffering, the affliction that is about to come. "There shall be", as it says, "a time of distress, such as never was since there was a nation until that time". And then the first thing is, "And at that time thy people shall be delivered". That is to say the definite hope is held out for the deliverance of Daniel's people, which are the Jews, the children of Israel, and, then, further in verse 2, a very striking matter that no doubt will require more attention than most of the things mentioned, or any of them, and that is "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, to everlasting contempt". Now, without going further, I think we should perhaps come on to this matter of eternal life. Other things, of course, will be touched in their place, but it seems to me that this is a matter that requires great attention by all of us, for the subject of eternal life is only very vaguely apprehended, especially as it is seen in the Old Testament and in this chapter. It is presented in a most striking way in this chapter. It says further, I should mention, before that, "At that time thy people shall be delivered", and it says, "Every one that is found written in the book", without mentioning what the book is, but clearly it is the book of the remnant of Israel in
{293}
the account of God. That is to say, the purpose of God must come into all of this. And as I have already mentioned, "many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, to everlasting contempt". Now as I was remarking as to eternal life, it is one of the most important subjects and has had great place within the last fifty years. It was the particular thing that arose at the time of the so-called Bexhill division, late in the last century, and the Lord gave great help on it and, no doubt, He would give further help about the question if we are interested enough and intelligent enough, as having gone into matters that are already known, so that we can analyse the facts that may come out presently; that is to say, the position of eternal life, as seen in this passage, is related to the earth, and that many slept in the dust of the earth, which is not exactly burial, although it might seem so; it is simply they are lost already in their histories, but now they are coming to life, awaking to the truth and especially to the great fact of eternal life. Some will go into eternal life; others will not, they will awake to shame and everlasting contempt.
R.W.S. Does the end of @Matthew 25 correspond? In verse 46 the Lord said, "And these shall go away into eternal punishment, and the righteous into life eternal".
J.T. Very fully, I would say. Matthew corresponds more with the Old Testament than any of the gospels. Matthew, under the Spirit of God, carries through the prophets in certain relations and the subject of eternal life; although we shall see presently that John takes it up differently, not as a thing here, as in this chapter, or in the Old Testament, but more in relation to the assembly, or rather to those who belong to this present dispensation.
{294}
S.McC. I have wondered, in following you in the three-day meetings in recent years, because of your constant allusion to eternal life and the way you have brought the Spirit forward, if there is not a link between the two. John's ministry makes much of them.
J.T. He does. This is not John's line, it is more the Old Testament and Matthew -- not John, but Matthew. And I think the Lord would help us to see what the peculiar presentation of the great subject of eternal life is in John's gospel. He makes the most of it and enters into the great subject of it in his gospel.
S.McC. You mean John gives us more the heavenly bearing of eternal life?
J.T. Yes. That is, it is connected with the Spirit, the Spirit is the power of it. So that it shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life. Another thing we have to see in John is that there is much said as to the Lord coming down, not only to individuals, but to the world. We have to see what that may mean.
S.McC. At Washington you remarked that the bearing of eternal life in @John 6 is in relation to the earth; it is the Lord coming down.
J.T. We have to see that it is an immense subject we cannot fully touch. We have only, we may say, an hour together over it. And I think we might as well begin with this chapter, and see the bearing of it and what else is said in the Old Testament as to it.
F.R.A. Is there a difference between life and eternal life?
J.T. There is a difference, of course, but not so very great as it might appear, "I am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly". That would surely be eternal life. So that there would not be so much difference in regard to life and eternal life. We will come to that in detail.
{295}
J.P. Is your thought that eternal life in chapter 12 is future?
J.T. Yes, it is a prophetic thought as we said, "Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, to everlasting contempt". Well, I would say the Psalms say much about it, and it is hinted at in many parts of the scriptures, but it says, in @Psalm 133, "There hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore". It is a command, it is mentioned. It is hinted at many times in the book of the Psalms.
L.E.S. Would the prophet Hosea fit in? In chapter 6 he says, "After two days will he revive us; on the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live before his face; and we shall know -- we shall follow on to know Jehovah, his going forth is assured as the morning dawn; and he will come unto us as the rain, as the latter rain which watereth the earth".
J.T. Very good. All that enters into what we say. It is a great subject, eternal life in the Old Testament, just prophetically viewed in the prophets and in the Psalms.
E.J.M. It says, "At that time". Keeping in mind the thought of what is moral going through, would they expect deliverance in the sovereignty of God at the same time as there is this distress?
J.T. What God will enable them to go through! We shall find hints as to it in the Old Testament and the way of escape for the remnant of the Jews.
L.E.S. We have another remarkable scripture in @Isaiah 4. "And it shall come to pass that he who remaineth in Zion, and he that is left in Jerusalem, shall be called holy -- every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem; when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have scoured out the blood of Jerusalem
{296}
from its midst, by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning".
J.T. Quite so. These are all most helpful, bearing on what we say, but now to come down to the thing actually, we ought to see that eternal life is a matter of the earth. It is intended for the earth, and the Old Testament saints who sleep in the dust of the earth awake to it; and what they are awaking to is something continuous on the earth. Therefore, the millennium has to be taken account of as a period. The millennium is an age of great blessing on the earth and the principle of blessing in it is eternal life.
J.McK. Is eternal life here a feature of the kingdom at that time? In relation to this deliverance that comes in at that time, "thy people shall be delivered, every one that is found written in the book", I was wondering if eternal life then is connected with the kingdom, the features of it seen in those people. You connected it with Matthew, and we have the kingdom there.
J.T. Quite so, and the kingdom and the King Himself, too, are spoken of in Matthew.
C.H.H. Does eternal life have any actual fulfilment in the Old Testament? You quoted @Psalm 133. If those conditions existed, they would be in the enjoyment of eternal life in anticipation?
J.T. I do not think it ever took form in the Old Testament because it requires certain conditions; it remains a prophetic idea that they have to wait for. So that we have to seek to calculate what the millennium will be, a time of unprecedented blessing on the earth. People will be living, death you might say a foreign thing, a rare thing. The people on the earth in the millennial day will be said to be living; they will have entered into eternal life and that requires a great deal of care as to what is said about it, but in result. God would bring about things when men are on the earth enjoying eternal life. We shall
{297}
have to see that they will have to merge into the final condition, that is the heavenly condition, for flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God. The kingdom that our brother alludes to is a millennial kingdom, but, even if it refers to us, flesh and blood does not inherit it. There must be a change to bring about the eternal conditions and, therefore, men are viewed as in eternal life. They will have to merge into conditions fit for eternity so as to make it really eternal.
J.McK. Does @Ezekiel 37 fit in? When he prophesied to the wind the "breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army". "Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O my people, and bring you into the land of Israel". And in verse 14, "And I will put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I will place you in your own land, and ye shall know that I Jehovah have spoken, and have done it, saith Jehovah".
J.T. In a very real way that enters into it.
C.A.M. I would like to ask a question about the dust of the earth. Will a change come in our present bodies?
J.T. I do not think the allusion is to that.
C.A.M. I was wondering if eternal life is connected with another order as to our bodies?
J.T. I do not know what order you mean, what we are now is in mind.
C.A.M. Yes, I see.
J.T. As entering into it, the immense army is seen; and there they are standing alive, but it is just in a figurative sense, a great army.
R.W.S. Chapter 37 brings in the Spirit. Does that open the way for the Spirit's activities in the millennium and in the change which will come in in view of the eternal conditions?
{298}
J.T. Quite so. He is bound to have part in it and, in fact, what Peter quotes from Joel indicates what the sons and daughters would come into.
C.H.H. Would you say that in eternal life people will eventually emerge into what we enjoy, on the same platform that we now anticipate?
J.T. I am saying that more from my own point of view, because flesh and blood does not inherit the kingdom, because it is a spiritual idea and it involves the eternal condition into which we are now come.
C.H.H. You mean that would involve eventually every family named in heaven and on earth?
J.T. I think so.
E.B.M. Would it involve the church?
J.T. Oh, yes. The church comes into everything. The assembly is the first family and comes into everything. It is the great leading family.
E.B.M. I was thinking of the scripture, "And this is the eternal life, that they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent".
J.T. That does not go the full length as to what is heavenly. It is not a thing that, in a characteristic way, enters into heaven at all; it is here on the earth. You cannot avoid seeing that if you see how the truth is definite in the Old Testament and then according to Matthew. Then if we are wont to come to John, of course, we have to touch what belongs to ourselves. We must deal with the Old Testament and see what the divine thought was, and how it has worked out in the prophets and then how it comes into Matthew. We have to see that the world to come of which we speak, as we were saying yesterday, includes the idea of eternal life on the earth, to which men awake. It is to be seen by itself; what all that means. Then we have to understand what John means and what the Spirit of God would teach us in the gospel of John.
{299}
S.McC. So will the seventh period you have alluded to show what God can do in flesh and blood conditions?
J.T. That is the idea, what God can do. We make a great deal, of course, of the gospels and what the gospels speak of as to eternal life, but we must not forget there is a millennial day, the seventh day. All the period of time from Adam has to be finished, and it will be finished, and that is what is meant, I believe, in the millennial day.
S.McC. So that in the very scene into which death has entered -- by one man sin entered into the world and death by sin -- God will display his triumph in an age marked by this blessing.
J.T. That is what I understand exactly.
A.S.C. Am I right that faith enters into this?
J.T. It will not be the time of faith, but the time of sight will be the millennium. Men will see and believe. Blessed he that has not seen and has believed. But men will see and believe in the millennium. It is not exactly what is of faith, in the sense that we have it, but what is to be seen, and what they enter into as here on the earth. Of course, the Spirit of God would be working and coming upon them rather than dwelling in them, so that we are dealing really with another dispensation now in what we are speaking of.
C.H.H. Could eternal life in its earthly aspect be in consciousness of association with divine Persons?
J.T. I think so. I think God would be wonderfully near to men and would influence what is below; we will influence what is below ourselves.
C.H.H. We speak of it as an out-of-the-world heavenly condition. That is ours.
J.T. Out-of-the-world in a moral sense, but He has the world to finish yet. The Lord speaks of coming down and giving life to the world; that is
{300}
the world in which the millennium will be and eternal life will be.
J.P. Does @Isaiah 11 depict that?
J.T. Pretty well. That will be a wonderful time as we think of what will be on the earth. The question is, are we going to get at it and see how things are going to be in the millennial day, because the millennial day is going to succeed our day and we shall be transferred to heaven.
S.McC. Ezekiel would help us to see, on the earthly side, the nearness of God; the name of the city is "Jehovah is there" (@Ezekiel 48: 35). Would that not show, on the earthly side, how near God is?
J.T. Very good.
C.C.T. So we find in this chapter, in the day to come, those who are wise, "The wise shall understand". Is that the thought of being near divine Persons in that day that you are speaking about?
J.T. This chapter greatly helps us. Read it again, Mr. B., from the fourth verse on, to refresh our memories.
N.B. "And thou, Daniel, close the words, and seal the book, till the time of the end. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. And I Daniel looked, and behold, there stood other two, the one on this side, on the bank of the river, and the other on that side, on the bank of the river. And he said to the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, How long is it to the end of these wonders? And I heard the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, and he held up his right hand and his left hand unto the heavens, and swore by him that liveth for ever that it is for a time, times, and a half; and when the scattering of the power of the holy people shall be accomplished, all these things shall be finished".
J.T. So all this is going to happen on the earth.
{301}
N.B. "And I heard, but I understood not. And I said, My Lord, what shall be the end of these things? And he said, Go thy way, Daniel; for these words are closed and sealed till the time of the end".
J.T. Notice the personal touch here in the communications with Daniel, "Go thy way, Daniel". Think of it, showing what men will be on the earth, what favour they will come into from God in the coming dispensation because all this is prophetic. It has not come yet, "These words are closed and sealed till the time of the end". Put off, as it were, "Many shall be purified, and be made white". Some were speaking about what will be going on. These are the things; men purified, made white, and the wicked shall do wickedly, but there are those purified, made white and refined.
N.B. "Many shall be purified, and be made white, and be refined; but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand. And from the time that the continual sacrifice is taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand, two hundred, and ninety days. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days! But do thou go thy way until the end; and thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days".
J.T. We see men purified, made white and refined; that gives you the idea of what is going to be on the earth presently in what we call the millennial day. In what we have been saying as to the times, three years and a half, so much is yet to be fulfilled.
Dr.C.P. The Lord sits as a refiner of silver.
J.T. The question is what is meant in the Old Testament. It is so full of these things in connection with the kingdom, the earthly side of it. We are on the threshold of all this. We cannot continue very long now with the great subject of eternal life. We
{302}
shall have to consider how John presents it; we cannot go into that today, we have not time, but we all see how much there is to go into.
W.H.C. Amos had this in mind: "They shall no more be plucked up out of their land which I have given them, saith Jehovah thy God".
J.T. An immense amount of instruction is in the Old Testament as to what I am talking about; the coming glorious kingdom called the millennium, what God is going to do with men and women. God is going to do wonderful things, but Satan will be bound before this happens and the power of evil will be broken. God will have His own world to work in and men will be in it in blessing, wonderful blessing.
S.McC. Might I ask if the introduction of the expanse in this chapter suggests that the power of evil is broken, evil having invaded the expanse? "And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse".
J.T. That will bring up another point. The expanse was on the second day in @Genesis 1; an enlargement for God to operate in and, alas! Satan got into it. That has to be kept in mind. Satan will be cast out, he will not be allowed to stay there. Michael will interpose on behalf of Daniel's people.
S.McC. That is very interesting. You mean Michael will have something to do with the clearing of the expanse.
J.T. Oh, I think so. As you know, there will be the great battle when the devil is cast out of heaven. God is not talking about unreal things, they are all real and almost at our door.
S.McC. Then you see a link between this and @Revelation 12?
J.T. @Revelation 12 indicates that which Michael has to do with.
R.W.S. I was wondering if God's thought is shown victorious in the expanse before He does
{303}
away entirely with it in view of the new heavens and the new earth.
J.T. We have not touched that point, we will have to wait for that. The millennium does not contemplate the new heavens and new earth. That is a new thing. It is what is here on the earth now that is contemplated in the millennium, what God can do with what is on the earth now.
F.W. Do you mean to say the millennial period will be the display of eternal life?
J.T. It is in a sense. We are speaking of it, but then we consider certain statements in John as, "Whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal". We have to think of that, we have to look into that, but we have not time to look into it now, we only have time to indicate that it is a very real thing and will happen almost immediately.
E.J.M. Does @Isaiah 65 give a description of eternal life? "And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more thenceforth an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not completed his days; for the youth shall die a hundred years old, and the sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed".
J.T. That is all eternal life, just indicating what eternal life is. The prophets are really full of it and I believe we have been neglecting the prophets.
E.J.M. I was thinking of it; it is a marvellous thing. "Before they call, I will answer; while they are yet speaking, I will hear".
F.W. Would you say something further about what you said concerning merging?
J.T. Only to clarify the whole position and show what is coming in. The idea of merging is to show what there *must* be. I use that word because the scripture requires it. Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom. The condition we are in now
{304}
shall not inherit the kingdom of God and so there must be the merging.
S.McC. It says in @Luke 20: 35, "But they who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection from among the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage; for neither can they die any more, for they are equal to angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection".
J.T. That is what I am trying to get at; that is what I mean by merging. We will have to come to that because human conditions as we know them will not last. They will not do for God eternally, but they will do for God in the thousand years. Old men and women will be seen there and young children. We had that yesterday, what the conditions will be, old people and young people.
W.McK. Paul's word in @1 Corinthians 15, "For this corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality", would bear on the change in the condition of the millennial saints in view of eternity.
J.T. Just so. We cannot go into it now; the thing must be there because the conditions we are in now cannot go beyond flesh and blood, beyond what we call the millennial condition, men and women, as we are now, made to live here on the earth. Satan being bound and sin being broken. So that you can see what a different condition it will be and that condition of things is called eternal life.
J.McK. I was wondering if this would fit in: "And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: and they shall walk in mine ordinances, and keep my statutes, and do them ... . And I will make a covenant of peace with them, it shall be an everlasting covenant with them, and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for ever", @Ezekiel 37: 24, 26.
{305}
J.T. That is just what we are talking about, the millennial condition that is in mind. That is not proposed in relation to the assembly because we go up into heaven. Will someone read that well-known passage? That means in their tombs, not in the dust of the earth.
C.H.H. @1 Thessalonians 4: 14 - 16: "For if we believe that Jesus has died and has risen again, so also God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep through Jesus. For this we say to you in the word of the Lord, that *we*, the living, who remain to the coming of the Lord, are in no way to anticipate those who have fallen asleep; for the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first".
J.T. That is not the dead here in the dust of the earth, that is the dead in their tombs. Some came out and appeared to many in the holy city; that sort of thing.
C.H.H. "Then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord".
J.T. That is the heavenly side; in the air, not on the earth. That is not a question of eternal life at all; that is what we are to be, those of us who belong to the assembly.
C.H.H. Would the understanding of this blessed condition fill our hearts with admiration to God, worshipfully, so that we will love His (Christ's) appearing, to see it all brought about?
J.T. That is the very word used, those who love His appearing. That is the heavenly side of things that we are going into. I beg you to read the passage.
C.H.H. @2 Timothy 4: 8: "Henceforth the crown of righteousness is laid up for me, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will render to me in that day;
{306}
but not only to me, but also to all who love his appearing".
J.T. I only bring that forward to show what the general picture is. Now we should confine ourselves to this one thing, eternal life in the millennial condition, a wonderful world that is shortly to come. Men will be alive, some will live a thousand years, and then they have to merge with eternal conditions. God can do that too, but He can do the other; and it is a wonderful thing that He can do the other in our times.
E.J.M. I was wondering if the dust of the earth is in contrast to the tomb.
J.T. I was using it as a figure of certain Jewish people who had gone out of sight; they come into evidence, not actually dead, just coming into evidence. They are shrouded somewhere in Asia.
V.L. Is not this, therefore, a wonderful triumph of God, for even in the antediluvian day no man lived a thousand years? The whole thing waited to the blossoming out in that wonderful period, the millennium.
J.T. God would say to us, in effect, what He can do with men and women as they are on this earth. Now that is what He can do, and the millennium is when He will do it. Then Satan and his angels will all have to be cast into the lake of fire. God will bring a world into existence and it will be called a new world. He will not have all the conditions that are in the world at the present time. He will have a world of His own.
S.McC. Daniel uses a word here which bears on what you have been saying. In the end of verse 6, "How long is it to the end of these wonders?". Interesting that he uses that word.
J.T. Yes, wonderful, I have used it several times.
R.W.S. "The kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ". His world, not this world.
{307}
L.E.S. I was wondering in reference to your remark, whether the Songs of Degrees would help us if we understood them more.
J.T. I think they would. There is progress in them. I do not know them very well; you mention them.
L.E.S. Flowing out of the 119th Psalm, they start at the 120th and run through to the 134th. You quoted the 133rd.
J.T. Even life for evermore. That comes in there.
R.W.S. Do these two periods, a thousand, two hundred and ninety days; and then the forty-five days, making a thousand, three hundred and thirty-five days bring in the millennium?
J.T. "Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days!". That is the utmost limit. That is to say, if we are patient, we will come to it. What our brother has been remarking, "And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse".
R.W.S. Why are the forty-five days added?
J.T. I think to induce patience at this particular juncture. We ought to learn patience. Daniel had to learn patience. "Do thou go thy way until the end". Daniel had to learn patience "and stand in thy lot at the end of the days". "Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days". No doubt Daniel would come to that.
C.H.H. In verse 9, "These words are closed and sealed till the time of the end". Would there be any bearing on us in that? We anticipate the meaning of that in the book of the Revelation.
J.T. I think so. What we quoted from @1 Corinthians 15, as to being raised in incorruptibility, then cometh the end, the Son shall be subjected, and God shall be all in all, is the idea.
{308}
C.H.H. But, as to Israel, it is hid for the time. We come into the light of it.
J.T. I think so. We know all things, even little children know everything.
J.P. Are we to understand there is only one eternal life, and the millennial aspect is given in what we have had?
J.T. There is one kind in quality and character. It is there and has to be taken account of. It is eternal life; it is upon the earth.
C.H.H. Has it not been said that eternal life is on different platforms?
J.T. Yes, I think, so, "Lay hold of eternal life". You or I have to do it. That is a different thing from what we are talking about, that is not the millennium.
C.H.H. Would the epistle of John help as to the individual understanding? "No murderer has eternal life abiding in him".
J.T. It says, "He is the true God and eternal life". That is a blessed thing. The Lord is said to be that personally. "He is the true God and eternal life".
J.G.H. Would you say that eternal life always assumes moral conditions, which you have been stressing in these meetings?
J.T. It does, but what we are dealing with now is not exactly moral conditions, but physical conditions. We have to have physical conditions in men to live a thousand years; not simply moral, but something physical. It is even greater than what they had in the days of Noah.
R.W.S. The moral side is not stressed so much in Revelation.
J.T. So that it is more physical, though I do not ignore the moral altogether. God has to change conditions physically in men. We cannot live that length of time, but God can make us live. It is what God can do, the victory of God, which Satan
{309}
would like to deny. God has said it can be done in the millennial dispensation. Certain things will be done that never were done before. It is the victory of God.
J.McK. "The sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed".
J.T. The general thought is that men will live on and, if they are the subjects of the work of God, they live on eternally. Their condition will be changed to make them suitable for eternity.
C.H.H. There will be a vast number that will not experience that change, but will be susceptible to the wiles of Satan who will be loosed for a season.
J.T. Not for very long.
C.H.H. Will these who are ensnared ever have enjoyed eternal life?
J.T. Oh, no. They are amenable to Satan's temptations, but that will be only for a moment. Fire will come down, showing what He can do; and it is for us to believe what He can do and believe in the scripture.
C.C.T. Does verse 10 show us what God can do? "Many shall be purified, and be made white, and be refined".
J.T. Just so.
J.K. It goes so far in Ezekiel as to say, "And ye shall know that I am Jehovah, when I have opened your graves, and have caused you to come up out of your graves, O my people. And I will put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live", showing what God can do.
J.T. That is just a figure of what God can do in a nation, even in Israel. It is for us to believe that He can do it.
C.H.H. There will be need of a change in the physical, but there will be the need for the moral too.
J.T. The Spirit of God will be operating in us. He is now.
{310}
E.J.M. Would it be right for us to say despite death and sin coming into the world, death by sin, that God coming in, men live beyond any expectation?
J.T. Beyond any expectation, in fact, they live, and live, and live, and really will be changed to make them live eternally.
R.W.S. Will that be Jews or men generally?
J.T. Men generally; it contemplates the nations too.
C.H.H. Revelation tells us out of every tribe, and tongue and nation.
J.T. Quite so. "Go thy way until the end; and thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days". Jerusalem above, that is the heavenly side. It is remarkable that rest continually is found. It is a question of rest; thou shalt rest.
Dr.C.P. The seventh period is characterised by rest.
J.T. Yes, rest.
R.Q. "They that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse". And then, "Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased".
J.T. That is all detail, there is hardly time to go into it. I was going to continue the thought of rest, what God is going to bring in for men, the conditions in the millennial day, there remaineth a rest for the people of God. Joshua did not give men that; it is Christ that does that for them. It remaineth for us, and I believe it reaches out to the millennium.
N.B. Why does the thought of rest precede the thought of standing?
J.T. Just that. He stands as he would desire to have a part in the whole matter and be a witness to it. He is going to be a witness to all this. Daniel is going to be a witness of all these things. He is going to be honoured and blessed. "Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days!".
{311}
Dr.C.P. Is Noah's sacrifice in view of the rest?
J.T. I think so. That is what it means, that he should bring rest in after the flood.
C.H.H. In @Hebrews 4, "Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left of entering into his rest, any one of you might seem to have failed of it". That would be a Jewish thought and later on anticipated by the assembly.
J.T. The assembly is changed. We shall be like Him. John says when we see Him we shall be like Him. Then there is a question of the earthly people.
C.H.H. We have entered into this rest, those who believe. It is a higher level.
J.T. Nevertheless, it is a Jewish position in mind in Hebrews.
C.H.H. Will not that rest be especially glorious in view of the sorrow they passed through?
J.T. I think we must close. I believe we have been helped to bring out what is really in mind. It is for us to go over. It is at our door. This generation will in no wise pass away until these things have come to pass, it says.
R.W.S. Daniel is to rest.
J.T. Daniel is a man to be noted, "Go thy way, Daniel". "And thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days". He is left free. Loose him and let him go, the Lord said of Lazarus.
R.W.S. He that is righteous let him be righteous still.
J.T. It is found here and in the book of Revelation.
{312}
THE SERVICE OF ELIJAH (1)
@1 Kings 17: 1 - 24
J.T. The subject now before us in Elijah is chosen because certain features attach to the prophet, and perhaps will be instructive to us as we look over them. It will be known by those who know the New Testament that Elijah is frequently noticed in it, and in the Old Testament too. For instance in the last chapter of the Old Testament Jehovah said, "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet". It is hoped in considering the matter that the truth will come into remembrance in the New Testament as well as in the Old, because Elijah is an extraordinary person. He is received up into heaven without dying. He has come. He had come, but now Jehovah promises that he is to come before certain things are to happen. Elijah restores certain things, which ought to be considered too. They are to be restored and Elijah is to do it. It will help us to speak about it.
S.McC. Would the fact that the element of mystery enters into the introduction of Elijah and also his being taken into heaven fit with the present time? He is introduced suddenly without any reference to his parents or anything else.
J.T. There are many items that we shall have to consider as we proceed. It is remarkable that he is introduced suddenly. We are not told who he is at first. "And Elijah the Tishbite, of the inhabitants of Gilead, said to Ahab, As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by my word". That is remarkable. He is a mysterious man, he appears suddenly and speaks as he is divinely appointed to do; he stands before Jehovah and there is to be no dew or rain without him -- remarkable!
{313}
L.E.S. His name, 'Whose God is Jehovah', has a mysterious touch to it. The light of that, the wealth of that in his soul would bear upon his ministry.
J.T. Just so. We hope the ministry will flow out in our ears, the ministry that the Spirit of God will give us, that it will be clear to us as we proceed. I suppose we could say there is hardly anyone more familiar to us than Elijah.
C.C.T. His position is right, is it not? He says he stands before Jehovah.
J.T. He says, "As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand". Very good.
J.McK. Do you think James's reference to Elijah stands related to what you have in mind? "Elias was a man of like passions to us, and he prayed with prayer that it should not rain; and it did not rain upon the earth three years and six months; and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth caused its fruit to spring forth". The prayer of a righteous man availeth much.
J.T. Quite so. He prayed twice.
J.McK. I was wondering how our righteousness comes in, in your mind. James says, "The fervent supplication of the righteous man has much power. Elias was a man of like passions to us".
J.T. He is assuming it. So that James comes in there, you might say, an instructor for us. Elias was a man of like passions -- a brother near to us. He was a natural sort of man, shall we say.
A.D.S. In verse 1 of the chapter it seems to be Elijah speaking, but from then on up to verse 10, the record is by the Holy Spirit. Elijah is referred to in the third person as he and him. Is that significant?
J.T. Very good. He is the subject of the chapter, "And the word of Jehovah came to him saying, Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan.
{314}
And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the torrent; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there". So that these are very important items that we have before us. Now the first thing to notice is, "the word of Jehovah came to him saying, Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward". Why should he turn eastward? Geography comes into the Scriptures. These things are history, history enters into all these things. What happened fifty years ago is important and has a bearing on things now.
J.L.F. Is it true that sometimes God intends the ministry of a servant to be characterised by the time of the ministry?
J.T. Quite so. Mr. Stoney's books have been republished. I think we should look into, and understand, his ministry.
S.McC. I am thankful for what you say, because there has been a great lack of reading Mr. Stoney's ministry. Some think that it is all embodied in F.E.R.¬s ministry, but Mr. Stoney had his own distinctive line.
J.T. Quite so. His ministry preceded F.E.R.
S.McC. Exactly, and has its own distinctive touch.
J.T. F.E.R.¬s is largely eternal life; Mr. Stoney's, union with Christ.
A.H. You were referring a few days ago to the greatness of certain persons brought before us in Scripture, I wondered whether the greatness of this man shines out in verse 1 of this chapter, the Spirit of God recording it so that we should as a result pay great attention to his ministry.
J.T. That is what is before me.
A.H. I referred to it not to enlarge on it now, but to lay emphasis in our souls as to the importance of his ministry.
J.T. I quite go with what you say.
J.L.F. The Lord emphasises that in Luke. He speaks of the days of Elijah and the time of Elisha,
{315}
as though these servants give character to the day in which they live. In what a forceful way Elijah speaks here, an absolute word from God!
J.T. It is authoritative, "As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by my word". Most remarkable!
J.L.F. I was just wondering if there should not be an exercise with us to regard the authoritative side of the ministry, and to be engaged with what the Spirit brings before us in our own day. The character of the ministry would correspond with the time in which we are living. It speaks of the time of Elijah and the day of Elias, that amounted to more than anything else that may have happened at that time.
-- .S. Will you say something further in relation to Elijah's turning eastward?
J.T. The points of the compass come in. He was to turn eastward. The east would be exhilarating, it would be an encouraging feature. The points of the compass are often spoken of in relation to the tabernacle in the book of Numbers. East, west, north and south -- the points of the compass are important and the Spirit of God uses them. We should notice them too and understand what they mean.
S.McC. Would the epistle to the Romans help us in regard to the question of the eastward side? Paul says, "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom we have also access by faith into this favour in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God". I thought that would link with the Pauline side.
J.T. Just so. So we see further he was to turn eastward, "and hide thyself by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan". We are told where the torrent is. Then we are told further, "Thou shalt
{316}
drink of the torrent; and" (notice this remark) "I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there. And he went and did according to the word of Jehovah; he went and abode by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan. And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the torrent". That is what he did. He did what he was told, "And it came to pass after a while that the torrent dried up, for there had been no rain in the land. And the word of Jehovah came to him saying, Arise, go to Zarephath, which is by Zidon, and abide there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". An important word, there is instruction in all this for us, "And he arose and went to Zarephath; and when he came to the entrance of the city, behold, a widow woman was there gathering sticks. And he called to her and said, Fetch me I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink. And she went to fetch it". Please read on from verse 11.
W.C. "And he called to her and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand. And she said, As Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son".
J.T. Now notice this, how exquisite his words are, "a little water in a vessel". Notice that. Not only a little water, but it is in a vessel, a vessel in which it is contained. The Holy Spirit has a vessel down here.
A.D.S. Is it not impressive that the word of Jehovah comes to him and he is obedient to the word that comes to him; then the woman is obedient to the word of Elijah?
J.T. Just so. The hearers are to have their ears open to hear and be obedient.
{317}
Rem. She was a vessel ready, I was thinking of Lydia in the Acts, "Whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul".
J.T. She listened to the words spoken by Paul.
C.C.T. She was a widow woman, not just a woman.
J.T. Scripture is full of such references, "Let thy widows trust in me", @Jeremiah 49: 11. God will help them. They can count on God helping them.
R.W.S. Is the hand in the end of verse 11 worthy of further comment? "Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink. And she went to fetch it, and he called to her and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand". Would the hand be the thought of a member, just a detail such as the vessel?
J.T. The hand, that was the vessel used.
S.McC. Would we have the manhood of Christ and the Spirit in the type of the meal and the oil in the vessel? I was thinking of these two types, Christ's manhood here and the Spirit here in the assembly. These are two outstanding features of the dispensation.
J.T. Now what did you say about the Spirit?
S.McC. It says in verse 12, "And she said, As Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse". I thought the meal in the barrel would suggest the manhood of Christ, and the oil in the cruse the great thought of the Spirit in the assembly.
J.T. I would go with that.
J.L.F. Is it significant that the oil and the water are each contained in a vessel?
-- .S. The prophet refers to a vessel. She speaks of what she has and it is in suitable vessels, nothing is lost.
J.T. Now look at this. She says "Behold, I am gathering two sticks" -- the futility of that, gathering two sticks to prepare something to die with
{318}
instead of live with. We ought to notice that, "Behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die". Think of that! The principle of eating is to live, "And Elijah said to her, Fear not; go, do as thou hast said; but ..." notice the 'but'; "... make me thereof a little cake first; and bring it to me and afterwards make for thee and for thy son". That is to say she and her son will be taken care of; but do not forget the servant, whoever the servant is, let us not forget him, and see to it that what he says is done and done right, because he is serving God and doing what is right in the eyes of God.
A.H. Are you suggesting that the word of God coming to us, indicates that what we have and are holding in a clean way will sustain us in life?
J.T. Very good. And we eat to live, not to die.
A.H. I was thinking of the brethren walking together in truth through grace, holding the truth in clean vessels, and when that is made use of it will sustain us in life.
J.T. Elijah will do what is right in the eyes of God and she would be looked after in due time as we will see in a moment. So Elijah says, "Fear not; go, do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first; and bring it to me; and afterwards make for thee and for thy son". Now that is an important thing to notice because he is making himself felt. Of course, the servant of God is to be served, but much more important is his service. Verse 14, "For thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: The meal in the barrel shall not waste" (notice this) "neither shall the oil in the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the face of the earth! And she went and did according to the word of Elijah". She is obedient, she did not quarrel with the word of Elijah, not the word of God, but the word of Elijah, the servant of God. "And she, and
{319}
he, and her house" (notice this wording) "her house". She has a house -- it is not her son that is mentioned -- "ate a whole year. The meal in the barrel did not waste, neither did the oil in the cruse fail, according to the word of Jehovah which he had spoken through Elijah". So that is a remarkable thing and we should all take to heart what God provides for us, and make the servant of God first, and God will provide for us. We may be sure of it.
A.D.S. One is impressed with your remark in connection with the thought of the woman, she was going to eat and die, that was her outlook, but we do not want to have that before us, those of us who are advanced in years.
J.T. There are several of us like that here and that is a good word for us.
A.D.S. But the ministry of Elijah to her served to change her outlook, so to speak, practically; our outlook is not engaged with death, but beyond that.
J.T. I do not think we should be occupied with death coming, but the coming of the Lord should be before us. The Lord will come for us.
W.C. What did you have in mind when you remarked about maintenance? You said that was a big word -- maintain thee.
J.T. Care for us, not only the detail of your food and clothing, but maintain -- a big word, we thank God for it. He will maintain us.
J.W.D. Is there any sense in which these matters are linked on with the service today? Is there any sense in which the governmental thought is connected with the service of God today? He had power in prayer, and I was questioning if that came within the range of service today in connection with public events in this world. It says, "As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by my word". There is a great deal in the world today that is
{320}
current and I was wondering if we have a share in this kind of service.
E.J.M. Mr. D, is asking if these things have a bearing on us in the present day. You are not bringing out ministry bearing on Elijah's day, but applying to us today.
J.W.D. Yes, that is what I thought.
J.T. I certainly think so. We have twenty-five or thirty three-day meetings of this kind in this country a year and these things are having a great effect on the saints of God all over the world, I believe that is so.
R.W.S. The service of God is to go on however terrible the conditions themselves become. The service of God proceeds despite conditions and will proceed until the day in which Jehovah sendeth rain. Verse 14, "The meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the oil in the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the face of the earth!". Will not our meetings and the service of God proceed right to the end?
J.T. I believe that is right, I go with that fully, and we should not forget to look for the Lord to come. The dispensation is about to end and we ought to love His appearing, not only the Lord's coming, but His appearing in glory.
J.K. We see Elijah as being cared for; do we not see the servants of God being cared for in our day?
J.T. Quite so. We hope that there is something of that in this very hall today, that we will be protected. We are being protected and helped.
J.K. So that there are always those who are vessels in which the Spirit is dwelling who minister to the servants.
J.T. Just so. So that they may be properly maintained in every sense, not only as to clothes and food, but in travel and all we have to do in serving the Lord.
{321}
C.C.T. So on the other side we have in this hall those who receive the word and do it as we have in verse 15. She went and did according to the word of Elijah. So that we should expect a result from the ministry in this hall, an answer in our hearts.
J.T. Just so. So we have the assurance, "The meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the oil in the cruse ..." (notice, not just the oil, but) "the oil in the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the face of the earth! And she went and did according to the word of Elijah and she, and he, and her house, ate a whole year". They ate for a whole year instead of a day or two and then dying. For a whole year she, and he, and her house ate; the dignity of the place is mentioned.
C.C.T. The exercise is not so much her son, but she and he and her house.
J.T. Just so.
S.McC. Would these references in verse 14 to the vessel and also to the house set out in type the dignity of the assembly in a locality? The Lord is helping us as to that, is He not?
J.T. Just so, days of recovery.
J.K. Is the way he calls attention to the mighty source also good, "Jehovah sendeth rain" (verse 14)?
J.T. Just so, Jehovah does it. That we can count on, God will do anything that we need, there will be nothing missing.
E.J.M. I am wondering why the woman comes first at the end of verse 15 rather than Elijah: "And she went and did according to the word of Elijah; and she, and he, and her house, ate a whole year"? Is that consideration important to the one who is acting upon the ministry?
J.T. Quite so, I would say that.
A.H. And do you think she might represent the activity of the local company?
J.T. Quite so.
{322}
C.C.T. The object of these meetings, and the ministry given is to see that the service of God is carried through.
E.J.M. What is the thought of the new test that comes to this woman and her house? Is it deeper establishment in her soul in regard to the word of God? Her son becomes ill and eventually dies. She has taken on the truth in verse 16, and proved the word of God to be faithful and in the next verse there is a new test. "It came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. And she said to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to me to call mine iniquity to remembrance, and to slay my son? And he said to her, Give me thy son". Is this to establish the work of God in our souls?
J.T. Quite so. She says, "What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to call mine iniquity to remembrance, and to slay my son? And he said to her, Give me thy son. And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the upper chamber". Notice that, he takes him away from her, away from mere nature.
E.J.M. He does not speak about her iniquity; she speaks about her iniquity. And he brings in the power of God in resurrection.
J.T. Quite so. In verse 19 it says he took him, that is her son, "out of her bosom, and carried him up into the upper chamber where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed. And he cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? And he stretched himself upon the child three times". I want you to notice what I am saying. He is taking the son out of the woman's bosom, that is where nature is. He is dying there.
{323}
He takes him up to the upper chamber and stretches himself upon him. And he says, "Jehovah, my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? And he stretched himself upon the child three times". Now that is a wonderful thing and we should notice it -- the actual stretching of the prophet on the boy. And then what happens? It says, "And Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into him again, and he lived". Now that is a wonderful statement, how life is brought in where there was death.
E.J.M. You remarked earlier in the meeting that we should expect some profit to come from these meetings locally. And it seems to me the exercise in your mind is represented here in the exercise of Elijah. He stretched himself three times and cried to God, and the result of that is life revived in a local assembly.
J.T. Very good.
E.J.M. Is your idea that we might have exercise before God that life might be produced here?
J.T. Is life colouring the meeting or is death colouring it, conditions causing death morally among the brethren? That is the question.
E.J.M. Do you emphasise the distinction of the upper chamber as against the bosom?
J.T. Her bosom represents nature, but he is a man of God. He takes him out from her influence and has him under his own influence. And see what he does. First of all it says, "He stretched himself upon the child three times" (verse 21), "and cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again! And Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into him again, and he lived. And Elijah took the child, and brought him down from the upper chamber into the house, and delivered
{324}
him to his mother; and Elijah said, See, thy son lives". It is a different house now, life is in the house instead of death. A beautiful thing, "See thy son lives". Beautiful! Is there any death in Chicago? -- life should take the place of it.
E.J.M. I think that is wonderful, and so the end of the exercise is, "And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth". What I had in my mind is that this passage is exceedingly exercising to all those here who represent local assemblies.
J.T. So he is called the man of God and had great influence. And the great question is now, are there any men of God in Chicago? where are the men of God? The men of God are great persons.
S.McC. In verse 24, "the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God". Is it only by life in operation in our cities, that we are confirmed in the authority of the ministry and what represents God?
J.T. That is true. Can we be called men of God? a wonderful title -- men of God! Elijah was one, but there are very few called men of God.
R.W.S. "In thy mouth is truth". Is that the gain of this kind of meetings, positive impressions that we get here that we would not get in the written ministry? In thy mouth, the gain of being here.
J.T. By God's mouth.
R.W.S. We get more by being here than by the written ministry. The idea being if you can be here, be here, where the word comes from the mouth.
J.T. That is really important. The woman recognised the word of Jehovah.
-- .S. Would not the stretching of himself upon the child be how our local exercises are to be met, the power of God operating today? Elijah feels
{325}
things himself and comes into close contact with the condition there.
J.T. So this chapter is most interesting and powerful because it involves Christ operating. So the main thing at the present time is that He is operating on the principle of life, not on the principle of death.
J.L.F. Do you think this exercise is carried forward into the Acts in connection with Eutychus?
J.T. Paul went down and fell upon him, an important assembly chapter. In that chapter we have the breaking of bread on the first day of the week.
A.H. Would you say that the fruit of this exercise of the woman would represent the local assembly making use of the upper chamber?
J.T. I think so. Great instruction came to the woman because he brought in life, you know, life to her son and brought him down from the upper chamber and into the house. He is in the house now. A great change comes about through these exercises.
A.H. Do you think the woman might say, I will live in that upper chamber?
J.T. I think so. She probably drew the attention of others, too, who came to see her, and told them about Elijah and what had happened to her son.
C.C.T. Would you say that the man of God in a locality would keep the saints in the upper room level all the time?
J.T. That is a word for us. That word is used in the Acts.
W.McK. The prophet refers to the soul of the child. I was wondering if the soul suggested the matter of right spiritual feelings, holy inward feelings that come into evidence.
J.T. The word 'soul' is very much used in Scripture. The soul is inward. A surgeon could open up a man, and go a way down, and never find
{326}
his soul. The word is very effectively used in Scripture and we have to understand what it means -- every living soul; it brings us back to @Genesis 1.
W.McK. You were referring to the Acts. Holy spiritual feelings are coming into evidence now.
J.T. Just so. Now I was saying, and it is just as well to go back, that you cannot find a man's soul physically, it is a spiritual matter. We should understand what Scripture says and be able to talk about it.
A.H. The importance of influence on the spiritual part of a man is seen in that he stretched himself three times on the child.
J.T. He has influence on him spiritually and physically. He comes in touch with his body, his body has heat in it, it is warm. Paul says of the youth, His life is in him -- he has warmth in him, that affects life in the body.
R.H. These things involve patience -- a work of this kind.
J.T. Quite so. Where you get two it is the idea of testimony, but three is more than testimony; it is power, it is a subjective idea. Seven is a word used and twelve. We should notice how numerals are used in Scripture and use them properly.
C.C.T. Should not the son develop into a man of God like the prophet?
J.T. Just so.
J.K. Could we not also give the application of this to the present dispensation? The prophet stretches himself three times, indicating the exercise of soul through which he himself goes.
J.T. You tell us how these exercises work out in Council Bluffs.
J.K. I think the Lord is helping us.
L.T. Life, the testimony of life. I am going there and I would be very thankful to testify to life.
J.K. I was thinking the Lord helps us in dealing with these things and making them our own, entering
{327}
into them. He comes in and brings in life, and life is restored, is that not so?
J.T. Just so.
W.C. Say a word in closing as to the power seen in the man of God. I notice in your ministry that you have said we should watch closely every scripture, and understand the working of the Holy Spirit. I wondered if we should see that in this chapter.
J.T. I think it is not only noticed but greatly proved, and we should thank God for that.
{328}
THE SERVICE OF ELIJAH (2)
@1 Kings 18: 1 - 46
J.T. We might say this is one of the greatest chapters recorded, furnishing us with the details of Elijah's exploits, and affording much for us. As we had this morning, Elijah was to be maintained; that is a word that we do well to notice, that the servants of God are maintained, and we have to regard them accordingly. They are servants of God. He calls, we might say, on this brother, Obadiah, a faithful man, who feared Jehovah greatly, as it says in verse 3. He is characterised by care for the Lord's servants, and it says, "And it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of Jehovah, that Obadiah took a hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and maintained them". I think we have often noticed this numeral fifty as a measure of a local meeting, fifty is enough to form a meeting and afford all that is necessary. Obadiah is a very good testimony to us, affording protection for the prophets of Jehovah. And another thing that is to be noticed especially is the presence of Jezebel here. Her name will come up presently and will link on with Revelation. We know how serious and solemn the declarations of a certain system are in deceiving people. We do well to take account of it especially because of the certain doctrine promulgated at a certain time, the Roman Catholic system propagating this terrible doctrine that the virgin Mary was caught up into heaven without dying. Mary the mother of the Lord -- a terrible blasphemy. We do well to take account of the terrible times we are in. We have this terrible thing called trade unionism; that is another feature that the enemy is using strongly against the Lord's people, and we have to be sympathetic with the Lord's people who have to do with it. They need our prayers that the saints may
{329}
be preserved in the midst of antagonism and apostasy.
S.McC. You referred to Jezebel and the apostasy, would you go over that?
J.T. I think it is a dual apostasy that exists. Trade unionism is one of the worst features, pointing to Russia, and then there is the Romish system. We might as well speak the truth. That is what we have to deal with just now.
R.W.S. One is political and the other religious.
J.T. Very good, I would say that fully. It is a most serious situation and the brethren should have it in their hearts at all times, especially at the prayer meetings. God answers prayers and the answers to our prayers should come on Tuesday morning if we watch for them.
H.B. They both seek world domination; is that the end in view?
J.T. Quite so. Rome has sought for this for fourteen centuries.
S.McC. Your reference to the dual apostasy is interesting. Is there not a dual thought in the Revelation, chapter 13 in relation to the first and second beasts?
J.T. I should be glad to hear you on that -- the first and second beasts. The political beast shall hate the harlot and make her desolate and eat her flesh, a remarkable thing, the flesh of Rome. The evidence of that could be seen in the French Revolution. The French Revolution was characterised by that sort of thing.
S.McC. The second beast embodies a good deal of the first, does he not?
J.T. It is a subordinate idea and we have to understand what that subordinate feature means. Satan himself has to do with all of that. You know he is the agent of the whole matter.
{330}
S.McC. I thought it was interesting that we should have the development of Romanism in its subtle power, and over against that the development of the assembly. You have the development of principles of evil over against the revelation of God. Is there not something for us in that?
J.T. It brings up the whole question of the four monarchies. The last one is Rome, the Roman empire, that is to come up yet; it was, and is not and shall be present.
R.H. Do you consider these recent doctrines, promulgated by Rome in relation to the fictitious ascension of Mary, an attack on the truth of the rapture, when the assembly will go up?
J.T. There is something that we have spiritually that they have satanically.
R.H. There would be a link in Elijah's being taken up.
J.T. Elijah is a counterpart of all that, and enters into the book of Revelation. We were speaking about Elijah the prophet mentioned so frequently in the Scripture; in the last chapter of Malachi he is mentioned. "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and terrible day of Jehovah. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers". This is before the revival and recovery on the earth, because the earth belongs to the Lord, and there must be something for God coming out of the earth. The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof. The fulness is the fulness of the gentiles that will come and is about to come in.
R.W.S. I do not quite follow what you said as to the scripture you referred to in Malachi. You said the earth is the Lord's.
J.T. Elijah is to prepare the way and restore all things. How it is to come about remains to be seen.
J.A.B. Does that refer to John the baptist?
{331}
J.T. That is what we were saying this morning. John the baptist covers several things and Elijah covers several things. The Lord says, "This is Elias who is to come". John the baptist represented that, that is to come, yet to come.
S.McC. As regards this word in verse 2 of chapter 18, "Elijah went to show himself to Ahab", would that not help in regard to the present issue of appearing in relation to the truth? A great many have difficulty about this matter of approaching the government.
J.T. Elijah will show himself to Ahab. It is remarkable, it would mean Ahab is more or less recognised in the empire. Presently we see how God has dealt with Ahab.
R.W.S. I am not clear about Elijah personally.
J.T. It is how God will bring things out mystically, that is the idea. It says many of the saints arose and appeared to many when the Lord Jesus died. What has become of them? What has become of Elijah and Enoch? We have to search out to see if we understand these things from the actual scriptures. I think the answer is the mystical power in the operations of God -- things in mystery. God is not obliged to tell us everything. There is a great deal He tells us, but He is not obliged to tell us everything. He holds things in mystery. No one has seen God at any time. We have to accept that. On the other hand we find in the Old Testament and in the New Testament that God is to be seen in some sense, and we have to understand how He is to be seen. Am I speaking what is intelligible to you?
R.W.S. It is a challenge to us as to our spirituality, as to whether we understand.
J.T. Just so. What do you think, Mr. McC. ?
S.McC. I think what you are saying is very important as to inquiring into all these matters as to Elijah -- where he is and how God operates.
{332}
J.T. Then the inquiry as to the beast that was, and is not, and is about to come. How is that to appear? That is the last monarchy beginning with Babylon, and it exists today. The laws of Rome, we might say, have come to this country even; they are used because God allows it. We have to follow all these things and be intelligent about them.
S.McC. Do you not feel how we need the help of the Spirit in these matters? The world does not understand these things.
J.T. Take any of our readings ordinarily -- we know more than the politicians. They do not know nearly as much as we do, and these matters have to be understood by us. He says he "was, and is not, and shall be present". There are seven heads to the monarchy and that is to come up yet, a most solemn thing to speak of; are we prepared for it? It is for the brethren to answer, whoever has liberty to answer for the benefit of all of us.
W.McK. Do the two witnesses in @Revelation 11 connect with what you remarked as to Elijah appearing mystically at the time of restoring all things?
J.T. That is another phase we must pay attention to -- the two witnesses. They were taken up to heaven. Do we understand that? They had power to withhold rain; God had given them that power.
-- S. Is there something for us in Obadiah's recognition that the Spirit of God might catch away Elijah? It was a matter of the operations of the Spirit, whether he is hidden or showed himself. This time God would have him show himself. There is the mystical side of the testimony, is there not?
J.T. He says to Elijah, "The Spirit of Jehovah shall carry thee whither I know not". That is the truth, it could happen at any moment and in a mysterious way. Elijah enters into all of that. He is a mystical man.
{333}
-- S. I was thinking of the importance of recognising all that, and this was the time that God would have him to show himself.
J.T. These things you are speaking of are mystical in themselves. The enemy has power but God's power is greater. He that is in you is greater than he that is in them. We do not deny that the enemy has power. He can do things. We see that in Egypt; they did the things Moses and Aaron did, except for the gnats. Solemn thing, but it actually happened.
R.W.S. Why are you viewing Obadiah in such a favourable light?
J.T. It is plainly stated. It says in verse 3, "Now Obadiah feared Jehovah greatly". That is a statement of the Spirit of God. It further states that he "took a hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and maintained them". That is recorded of him. It is clear he is a remarkably good man, and you thank God there was such a man and are such men now in our relations with the world.
C.C.T. He not only hid them, but was able to maintain them. Is that what we find in our localities in regard to the man of God, as we had this morning in regard to maintenance?
J.T. The idea of being hidden is in Colossians. "Your life is hid with the Christ in God". A remarkable thing.
J.L.F. Would you say Obadiah was also prepared to give scope to the truth in a remarkable way? He says the Spirit of God will catch you up.
J.T. That is what the Spirit of God would do, showing the power He had.
J.L.F. I thought that added to the thought of what was mystical.
J.T. It is miraculous really, a better word in that sense; and then he brings up later on in the chapter the idea of the cloud and the pour of rain. God in a miraculous way causes it to come to pass. He is a
{334}
man of like passions with ourselves and he prayed again and the rain came, a very great volume of water, too.
S.McC. Would it be right to say (this morning you were stressing the testimony line) that in this chapter we have the testimony to power?
J.T. The testimony to power, quite true.
S.McC. It is needed in our minds and souls, the idea of power over against what obtains, the power of God to effect things.
J.T. God is greater than all around us. That is what came out in the history of Elijah, the great power that came out in this chapter, eight hundred and fifty prophets of Baal and the Asherah destroyed. That comes in at the end of the chapter. It is the great point in the chapter. The great thing that God gave to His people is the destruction of the prophets of Baal. They were actually able to do it, the people themselves. God did not do it miraculously, but the people themselves do it, I do not know if you follow.
S.McC. I do, and one has often thought of your word at Glasgow that we should arise in the morning with the sense that God's glory is all around us. We need that, do we not?
J.T. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world". The Spirit of God is greater than he that is in the world -- the wickedness of the world, the Spirit of God is greater than that. That is very comforting in view of what has been brought out of late in regard to the Spirit of God, the great place He is acquiring among the saints of God. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world".
E.J.M. I was wondering if Obadiah would represent one who had a secret with God throughout, representing a system of reality. He is working with Elijah and the whole people is affected.
{335}
J.T. We come on to that in this meeting, the power that there is with God is wonderful, and we can prove it; it is for us to learn to realise how great it is. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world".
E.J.M. Then are you offering us encouragement that in the day of small things, we stand for what we know to be of God? There were only two men at one time, but the result is the victory of God publicly and the establishment of it in the power of God.
J.T. You take up Matthew to deal with all of this. The Lord says, "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens". It is a question of two of the assembly -- what power they have!
E.J.M. I think that is wonderful. It is not only an encouragement to one personally, but it is an encouragement to what may appear to be a weak testimony in the local assembly.
J.T. Two or three, we have it, gathered "unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". It is a remarkable thing.
E.J.M. If there are two or three standing in a local setting, the situation will be saved.
J.T. That is our charter that we have, so to speak.
A.H. Does the real sense of that power in our souls put us among the ruling class?
J.T. The ruling class as in @Genesis 1 -- the sun and the moon and the stars. The sun rules the day and the moon the night and the stars. We are the stars.
A.H. That enlarges what I had in mind, it puts us among the luminaries. I am glad to hear what you say in the matter of two or three. We are so apt to think because the position numerically is small that weakness must attach to it.
{336}
J.T. There is the numeral five, a man has five fingers and five toes. The superman has six fingers and six toes, that is the antichrist. Instead of five he has six, that is the antichrist coming in. Even now, John says, there are many antichrists.
A.D.S. Our brother spoke of the luminaries. It says "Among whom ye shine as lights in the world".
J.T. "Among whom ye appear as lights in the world". When we see Him we shall be like Him. There is nothing to overcome there. We must proceed further in the wonderful matter of the prophets of Baal being destroyed. It says in verse 19, Elijah said, "Gather to me all Israel". Then in verse 30, "Draw near to me. And all the people drew near to him. And he repaired the altar of Jehovah". It is to be noted that there is a lot to be repaired now, a great deal among the brethren. Note Elijah took "twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob". And another thing, Paul says, "Our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night". Where are they that belong to our dispensation?
A.H. Would you be impressed with the matter of twelve as referring to the whole?
J.T. It comes out later in the passage. It is not a remnant in our times; it is the whole twelve tribes. There is just one assembly and the whole of it is in mind, and that comes in in the Lord's supper. It involves the assembly, that is to say the whole idea of the one loaf. We are one loaf, the body of Christ. And the cup of the Lord is a "cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ?".
E.J.M. It says that Elijah took twelve stones, and with the stones he built an altar in the name of Jehovah. Why did he build an altar of stones instead of an altar of earth?
{337}
J.T. I think it is the durability of the stones. Perhaps you would enlarge on the idea of one body in @1 Corinthians 10, "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?". That makes it so dignified as entering into the reality of the Lord's supper and the truth of christianity.
R.W.S. The expression in our hymn, 'That we, the church, to glory brought, should with the Son be blessed' (`92:1). Are we the church?
J.T. That is the liberty that we have, that we can speak of the whole church; that is the idea.
A.H. Would you say the position in which we stand through grace is the church position?
J.T. That is the ground we take. There is one body (one assembly), one Spirit, even as one Lord, one baptism, one God and Father. Do you follow that?
A.H. I think that helps.
J.McK. The matter of twelve in administration is the thought of the whole; it is one idea.
J.T. Further to the idea of twelve, the word 'twelve' is used in @Revelation 21. Please read that.
J.McK. "And there came one of the seven angels which had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues, and spoke with me, saying, Come here, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife. And he carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a great and high mountain, and shewed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God. Her shining was like a most precious stone, as a crystal-like jasper stone; having a great and high wall having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. On the east three gates; and on the north three gates and on the south three gates; and on the west
{338}
three gates. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb".
J.T. That is the whole idea of the assembly in that sense. It is the twelve apostles of the Lamb. Paul is the greatest of the apostles, though not of the twelve, it would help us to get that into our souls. In the matter of administration we should have the full thought of God before us. It is a great principle with God.
J.McK. So that one was added to the eleven to take Judas's place.
J.T. In these latter days we have a broken number too, but the Spirit of God makes up that number.
E.J.M. In full power, according to @Acts 2. At the first gospel address, Peter stood up with the eleven, the twelve complete.
Rem. So when the matter of ministration came up, it says, "And the twelve, having called the multitude of the disciples to them", @Acts 6: 2.
J.T. Just so, showing how divine thoughts are for good, you can count on them.
S.McC. It is of note that verse 31 refers to the change made in Jacob's name, in that remarkable way, "of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of Jehovah came saying, Israel shall be thy name".
J.T. Reminding those in his hearing of the names.
S.McC. The change from Jacob to Israel, princely dignity!
J.T. I suppose Jacob has a peculiar place.
R.H. Do you have something in mind in verse 30? Elijah says, "Draw near to me. And all the people drew near to him".
J.T. He would recover them; they were all with Baal. That is the idea that we come to, we want all the people, not only certain ones in fellowship, but we want all that belong to Him. The Lord knows those that are His. What a word!
{339}
R.H. I wondered if that would correspond to the idea of twelve abstractly; we expect to get all the people.
J.T. That is a great word, and it is well to keep them all in mind, the whole of the saints are in our minds, every one of them known to Him. That is the ground of our gathering.
R.H. He makes them do the things, does he not?
J.T. Just so, and they did it. They destroyed the prophets of Baal. "Elijah said to them, Seize the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape! And they seized them; and Elijah brought them down to the torrent of Kishon, and slaughtered them there", and so forth. That is a wonderful victory, the sort of victory we count on.
C.C.T. Is it the outcome of ministry that there is a seizing?
J.T. If the brethren do not want to walk in the truth and rebel, we have to withdraw from them, and we do.
J.McK. What does the torrent of Kishon represent?
J.T. We had a torrent this morning. Torrents, I suppose, represent the power of water at a certain given time.
J.McK. In the power of the Spirit?
R.H. The torrent of Kishon is spoken of in @Judges 5, "From heaven was the fight; the stars from their courses fought with Sisera. The torrent of Kishon swept them away, that ancient torrent, the torrent Kishon. My soul, thou hast trodden down strength!".
J.T. Deborah comes in there. The power of the torrent is present today. We could find these torrents in Palestine, we could see these things, but we have to wait for God to let us see them. We would dislike to be found sightseeing in Palestine, ashamed to be occupied with it. But we have them in the
{340}
Spirit of God here to make them available to us in relation to the assembly.
S.McC. In connection with the testimony to life we have the stretching three times and now we have the pouring of the water on three times.
J.T. The first, second and third time, showing the place the numerals have in the spiritual realm.
S.McC. I wondered if there was not there a suggestion, not that you would put too much into it, that the thing is met by spiritual power.
J.T. The people were employed for the destruction of these prophets, and they are used in this too. It is a remarkable thing, Elijah said to them, "Seize the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape!". The victory was complete.
C.C.T. Could we connect in any way the thought of leadership with Elijah? He certainly was a leader, was he not?
J.T. He certainly was, he stood before Jehovah and things were done according to his word.
C.C.T. In relation to what you were speaking about, the power of water, it says that the torrent was dried up. There is great power with water, but greater power with God.
J.T. Great power comes out of heaven. The Lord refers to the water as a type of the Spirit -- "the water that I shall give him".
R.W.S. The prophet is very patient with Ahab, he is not slain with the prophets. Elijah says to Ahab "There is a sound of an abundance of rain". Elijah was victorious and he is in an official position, "Elijah said to Ahab, Go up, eat and drink; for there is a sound of abundance of rain. And Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he bowed down on the earth, and put his face between his knees". Paul said, "I bow my knees". "And he said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea. And he went up
{341}
and looked, and said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times. And it came to pass at the seventh time that he said, Behold, there is a cloud, small as a man's hand, arising out of the sea. And he said, Go up, say to Ahab, Harness and go down, that the pour of rain stop thee not". It is a remarkable victory God gives His people, even using a man like Ahab for the moment as we shall see later.
E.J.M. What is the significance of the sea?
J.T. I think it is generally the idea of what the sea means: there is power in the sea; the ships and the commerce of the world are being carried on it.
E.J.M. I think in Revelation the sea is never favourably mentioned.
J.T. That has been said in some recent ministry. The book of Revelation makes much of it in that sense.
R.H. What is the point of the personal exploit of Elijah in running before Ahab?
J.T. I think it is the power that is in him. He actually did it; he had the power to run, and it looks as if God qualified him for such an exploit, to bring out the power on behalf of His people, God honouring His servant. He loves to do it.
S.McC. James alludes to this in regard to prayer and what may be effected through prayer, bringing it down to our day.
C.C.T. What place has the servant in verse 43 as a young man in the service of Elijah? "Elijah went up to the top of Carmel and he bowed down on the earth, and put his face between his knees. And he said to his servant". There is a reference in the note to a young man.
J.T. He said to his servant, "Look toward the sea". He is ready to serve in any small way. The youths were sent to offer sacrifices instead of the priests. What a young man ought to do is be ready
{342}
to do anything he is directed. He is not mature, and has no mature dignity about him. Let them do the things that have to be done.
A.H. Would this encourage the young to look for things? He does not seem to be impressed by what he sees.
J.T. The young men should be willing to do anything. The time will come for greater service, but we have to wait for it.
C.C.T. Would it be on the line of the old and the young working together?
J.T. What we are dealing with is the younger brethren. They should be willing to do anything. It says he was a servant.
L.E.S. Would the word in the prophet Hosea help: "For great is the day of Jizreel"? The prophet refers to the name of the child as being Jizreel. I was referring to the greatness of the operations of God resulting in triumph and victory in power. I was wondering if it is in evidence in this chapter. It says, "And the children of Judah and the children of Israel shall be gathered together, and they shall appoint themselves one head, and shall go up out of the land: for great is the day of Jizreel".
J.T. The prophet Hosea has a great place in the Scriptures, I am glad you brought it up.
{343}
THE SERVICE OF ELIJAH (3)
@1 Kings 19: 1 - 21
J.T. We should all be reminded of what we have had already, beginning with chapter 17 of this book. The history of christendom enters into it, and we have to consider here what is about to be, we might say, set aside. A servant known to us in this country fifty years ago, Mr. Revell, a man whom God used much, referred to this incident, saying that Elijah went to Horeb and resigned his commission. A remarkable thing that that should be said of a great servant of Jehovah. That is what we see in this chapter. So, "Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and in detail how he had slain all the prophets with the sword. And Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah saying, So do the gods to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time! And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life". That is a very humbling thing to have to read of a great servant, that he fled for his life -- fled from the threat of a woman, Jezebel. It seems to me that Jezebel represents an evil element. It needs to be considered by us, in view of the perusal of this book, what we have to contend with in the service of God in these times, that a woman should become the head of a movement of the enemy to overcome the servant of the Lord. Any one of us who has a little service to do must see to it that he does it, and does it well. We have to look at this chapter and we see how Elijah fled for his life. God had power; but Elijah flees for his life. He was afraid he would lose his life. So it says, "Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah saying, So do the gods to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time! And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life". Why should he be
{344}
afraid of a woman? but he was. That is a word for all of us who have any little thing to do for the Lord. We must not be afraid, "Be strong and very courageous". We have to say that he fled; he was afraid at this time. It says "he went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba". Beer-sheba should have reminded him of the faithfulness of God. So it says, "which belongs to Judah". That ought to remind him that things are stable, but he fled for his life nevertheless. It says, "and left his servant there. And he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a certain broom-bush, and requested for himself that he might die". He loses courage, which is a matter to be seen to by every one of us, that we do not give up our courage. He said, "It is enough, now, Jehovah, take my life; for I am not better than my fathers". That was not much. "And he lay down and slept under the broom-bush. And behold, an angel touched him, and said to him, Arise, eat! And he looked, and behold, at his head was a cake, baked on hot stones, and a cruse of water. And he ate and drank, and lay down again. And the angel of Jehovah came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise, eat; for the journey is too great for thee". Very touching, how God is thinking of his servant! He thinks of His servants in their weakness and their failures. He is thinking of us, those of us who serve, "And he arose, and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb the mount of God". He is brought directly in touch with God Himself now. It says, "And there he went into a cave, and lodged there". He had time to reflect on what had been going on, what he had been doing. God is sure to challenge us if we are unfaithful in the least degree. He loves us too much to give us up.
{345}
J.McK. "The word is faithful and worthy of all acceptation; for, for this we labour and suffer reproach, because we hope in a living God, who is preserver of all men, specially of those that believe".
J.T. A beautiful passage. Then there is that other passage, He does not allow you "to be tempted above what ye are able to bear". A very comforting thought.
H.B. Paul says in @Acts 20, "I make no account of my life as dear to myself, so that I finish my course".
J.T. "I make no account of my life". He was not like Elijah.
C.C.T. The message is to Joshua to be strong.
J.T. That is very important, read it.
C.C.T. "None shall be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life". And then, "Only be strong and very courageous, that thou mayest take heed to do according to all the law that Moses my servant commanded thee", @Joshua 1: 5, 7.
J.T. The thing has to be done; let it be done and done well; that is a word for us.
R.W.S. What does that correspond with in our day?
J.T. It is for those of us who in any way are able to serve, that we would not give up but go on. We have already quoted the saying from one of the Lord's servants, 'Go on, go on, go on'. That is the word in service, Go on. Elijah gave up. He fled for his life. Why should he flee for his life? The Lord Jesus laid down His life for His enemies.
A.P. "For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice".
H.K. "Should such a man as I flee?", @Nehemiah 6: 11.
J.T. Just so, very good.
C.C.T. Would it bring out the perfection of the Lord Jesus Christ in His service?
{346}
-- .S. There is a great contrast between Elijah's prayer in chapter 18 and here. There it was a question of God and the glory of God, and here it is a request for himself. In one he had God before him, and here himself.
J.T. There are many here today who are able to serve, and go forward in *courage* in the service, not only having ability. The word is, Go on in service, do not give up.
A.B. The word to Paul in relation to Corinth in @Acts 18 was, "And the Lord said by vision in the night to Paul, Fear not, but speak and be not silent; because *I* am with thee, and no one shall set upon thee to injure thee". There is not only the value of the life of Paul to divine Persons, but its value to the saints according to @Romans 16, where he says, "Who for my life staked their own neck".
J.T. Very good, I wanted to get that in. It is one of the most striking passages confirming what we have been saying.
A.B. Would this be maintenance in divine service?
J.T. The word 'maintenance' we have in chapter 17. The Lord promised maintenance for Elijah. A certain widow woman was to maintain him there.
W.C. "I have stood firm unto this day".
J.T. Very good.
J.K. In the scripture in Samuel in connection with David at the time of Ziklag, it says he strengthened himself in God. Is it a question of the knowledge of God Himself that carries us through?
J.T. Of course, we had David last night, as well as Abraham and Paul as illustrative. They, of course, are not equal to Christ; they are not divine Persons.
J.K. If we all knew God in a greater way we would move in life in a greater way.
{347}
J.T. I think Paul is given to us as a peculiar illustration. "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ". It is most stimulating.
R.W.S. Are you viewing Jezebel as the great system of christendom, how it might intimidate the saints?
J.T. She illustrates evil in our times, Jezebel. She will change your mind. She represents both the Romish and communistic elements. They are both evil and supported by the devil. I am saying that as quite conscious that one might be spoken to about it, but it is quite right.
A.H. She calls herself a queen and says, "I am not a widow".
J.T. Will you be kind enough to read that. That is the thing that we have to deal with in this country.
W.C. "Because she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and I am not a widow; and I shall in no wise see grief, for this reason in one day shall her plagues come, death and grief and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God who has judged her. And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication, and lived luxuriously with her".
J.T. Pardon me. It was recalled yesterday that the church in that day was all but destroyed and we ought to keep that in mind, what has come through that system. Now Russia has become the counterpart of it. She is pursuing the idea of communism. That is the great danger at the present time, what she is advocating.
W.C. "... shall weep and wail over her, when they see the smoke of her burning, standing afar off, through fear of her torment, saying, Woe, woe, the great city, Babylon, the strong city! for in one hour thy judgment is come. And the merchants of the earth weep and grieve over her, because no one buys
{348}
their lading any more; lading of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and pearl, and fine linen".
J.T. Finery involved in all this.
W.C. "... and purple and silk, and scarlet dye, and all thyine wood, and every article in ivory, and every article in most precious wood, and in brass, and in iron, and in marble, and cinnamon, and amomum, and incense, ... and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and cattle, and sheep, and of horses, and of chariots, and of bodies, and souls of men".
J.T. "Bodies, and souls of men"!
W.C. "... And the ripe fruits which were the lust of thy soul have departed from thee, and all fair and splendid things have perished from thee, and they shall not find them any more at all. The merchants of these things, who had been enriched through her, shall stand afar off through fear of her torment, weeping and grieving, saying, Woe, woe, the great city, which was clothed with fine linen and purple and scarlet, and had ornaments of gold and precious stones and pearls! for in one hour so great riches has been made desolate. And every steersman, and every one who sailed to any place, and sailors, and all who exercise their calling on the sea, stood afar off, and cried, seeing the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like to the great city? and cast dust upon their heads, and cried, weeping and grieving, saying, Woe, woe, the great city in which all that had ships in the sea were enriched through her costliness! for in one hour she has been made desolate. Rejoice over her, heaven, and ye saints and apostles and prophets; for God has judged your judgment upon her. And a strong angel took up a stone as a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall Babylon the great city be cast down, and shall be found no more at all; and voice of harp-singers and musicians and flute-players and
{349}
trumpeters shall not be heard any more at all in thee, and no artificer of any art shall be found any more at all in thee, and voice of millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee, and light of lamp shall shine no more at all in thee, and voice of bridegroom and bride shall be heard no more at all in thee; for thy merchants were the great ones of the earth; for by thy sorcery have all the nations been deceived. And in her was found the blood of prophets and saints, and of all the slain upon the earth".
J.T. All this dates back to the French Revolution and the elements of world domination that were promoted, then in Germany and now passed on to Russia. We should know how to compose ourselves in the presence of them and how to keep ourselves, and this great city called Babylon is just what is found in Europe and its outgoings and the great answer to it is the truth of the assembly, and it is to be revived and God is going on with it until we are taken up to heaven. "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them". We should expect it at any moment and we should be ready for it and we should be with God about these things.
S.McC. What you are saying is extremely interesting in relation to that to which you now draw attention. You then view communism as having a definite place in the protracted scale.
J.T. And Germany has taken it on and now Russia. You are rightly referring to the book of Mr. Darby's on Revelation involving all that we have said about Babylon.
S.McC. And according to what you are saying communism has a definite place in the protracted scale in relation to the assembly.
{350}
J.T. So we see in these comments what we have to deal with, we who seek to keep the truth of the assembly, and maintain the principles of the assembly.
A.D.S. In verse 20 the language is very significant, "for God has judged your judgment upon her". So that at the present moment we should have a judgment.
J.T. Very good.
R.W.S. All this bears upon the relative weakness of the meetings in Europe. It is only in comparatively recent years that the brethren on the Continent are moving in the current of the truth generally, the brethren in France and Germany. What would you say about that?
J.T. I think Satan has wrought in both doubtless, but God is working in the brethren in relation to the truth. These meetings are a great help. They come frequently, there are thirty, as I recall, of these meetings, and God is in them in a most remarkable way.
S.McC. You made a statement at the beginning of World War II that I think was prophetic, that no dictator which arises in the Spirit's day shall survive. Should that not be a comfort to us in the great matter of communism?
J.T. "God has judged your judgment upon her", your judgment, our judgment. Today God is doing it. He is doing it constantly.
A.H. Is that what we have here. Elijah had his judgment as has been seen in chapter 18, which was really God's judgment, but the system is overawing him now?
J.T. He had a judgment when he was slaying the prophets.
L.E.S. Do you think in the book of Zechariah you have reference to all this? In chapter 5 it says, "And the angel that talked with me went forth, and
{351}
said unto me, Lift up now thine eyes, and see what is this that goeth forth. And I said, What is it? And he said, This is the ephah that goeth forth. And he said, This is their resemblance in all the land. And behold, there was lifted up a round plate of lead; and this is a woman that sitteth in the midst ..."
J.T. Look at it, a woman!
L.E.S. "... of the ephah. And he said, This is Wickedness; and he cast her into the midst of the ephah".
J.T. "This is Wickedness", think of it! Proceed please.
L.E.S. "... and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof. And I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and behold there came out two women, and the wind was in their wings; and they had wings like the wings of a stork; and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and the heavens. And I said to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these carry the ephah? And he said unto me, To build it a house in the land of Shinar; and it shall be established, and set there upon its own base".
J.T. Very good -- on its own base. I think if you can help us further it would be good.
L.E.S. What I had in mind was the chapter we have read in @Revelation 18 and what you referred to yesterday. Romanism and communism -- not only one woman, but two women, filling out the idea of Babylon.
J.T. I am thankful for your saying that. You are accustomed to those prophetic scriptures and what we need is a knowledge of prophetic scriptures at the present time. I am speaking generally; if you unfold it among the brethren you will do good service. It is a question of what opportunity the Lord will give the brethren who will open up the truth and there are those among us who are able to do it and they should get opportunity to do it.
{352}
J.McK. Would you not say there is great need for us to become more conversant with the Scriptures relative to these things? I would like to read a verse in @Romans 8: 31, "What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who against us? He who, yea, has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him grant us all things?". Then in verse 35, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword? According as it is written, For thy sake we are put to death all the day long; we have been reckoned as sheep for slaughter. But in all these things we more than conquer through him that has loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord".
J.T. Thank you very much, that bears on what we have been saying. I want to again appeal to the brethren to read the Scriptures themselves carefully and prayerfully and read with them the Collected Writings, so as to get the full meaning from all that is available to us.
S.McC. Referring to @1 Kings 18, there should be no thought entertained in the mind of a servant whom God is honouring of stepping aside to make room for another.
J.T. I think it is important what you have said as to the thought of resigning. There should be no such thought in anyone's mind. You sometimes hear, He should give up and make way for others. If he is able to do the work he should do it. God would say, 'Go on, go on', and I want the brethren to think of it, to go on faithfully and patiently to the end.
{353}
C.C.T. Finish my course, that would be the idea.
J.T. Finish the course.
V.L. The authority of the truth is peculiarly needed to offset the spurious authority. Anyone that serves should do so in full authority as coming from the presence of God, so that the spurious authority of Rome is offset.
J.T. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world".
R.W.S. Was not that the point in Revelation, "she who calls herself prophetess, and she teaches and leads astray my servants", designed to lead astray the servants?
J.T. How many have been led astray! Look at christendom! One does not want to give names. Think of the apostasy that began making way for evil by men who ought to be doing good. We thank God for one; we all quote Mr. Darby. How faithfully he went on and went on in the truth and lived to be eighty-two years old, an example for all, old and young.
S.McC. He did not resign; he went on.
J.T. Just so. He kept his job. Many have resigned and gone into other things.
S.McC. It is not only the servant, but all the saints should have it in mind each to keep his job.
J.L.F. Do you think the apostle Paul had this in mind when he said, "*I* therefore thus run, as not uncertainly; so I combat, as not beating the air"?
J.T. Just so, I am glad you read that, it is plainly on the point we are dealing with. Please read some more.
J.L.F. "Know ye not that they who run in the race-course run all, but one receives the prize? Thus run in order they ye may obtain. But every one that contends for a prize is temperate in all things, *they* then indeed that they may receive a corruptible crown, but *we* an incorruptible. *I* therefore thus
{354}
run, as not uncertainly; so I combat, as not beating the air. But I buffet my body, and lead it captive, lest after having preached to others I should be myself rejected". I thought the apostle accepted the responsibility through exercise of keeping in accord with the position.
J.T. Very good.
R.W.S. I wanted assurance as to communism now. Are you assured that communism will be contained as long as the Spirit and the church are here below?
J.T. It is a question of apostasy. If you will read in @2 Thessalonians 2, because it deals directly with it.
W.C. "Now we beg you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together to him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as if it were by us, as that the day of the Lord is present. Let not any one deceive you in any manner, because it will not be unless the apostasy have first come, and the man of sin have been revealed, the son of perdition; who opposes and exalts himself on high against all called God, or object of veneration; so that he himself sits down in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. Do ye not remember that, being yet with you, I said these things to you? And now ye know that which restrains, that he should be revealed in his own time. For the mystery of lawlessness already works; only there is he who restrains now until he be gone, and then the lawless one shall be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and shall annul by the appearing of his coming; whose coming is according to the working of Satan in all power and signs and wonders of falsehood, and in all deceit of unrighteousness to them that perish, because they have not received the love
{355}
of the truth that they might be saved. And for this reason God sends to them a working of error".
J.T. Look at that!
W.C. "... that they should believe what is false, that all might be judged who have not believed the truth, but have found pleasure in unrighteousness. But we ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, that God has chosen you from the beginning to salvation in sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth, whereto he has called you by our glad tidings, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. So then, brethren, stand firm, and hold fast the instructions which ye have been taught, whether by word or by our letter. But our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father, who has loved us, and given us eternal consolation and good hope by grace, encourage your hearts, and establish you in every good work and word".
J.T. I might venture to say here, I have been looking for an opportunity to call attention to the prophetic word; it is for the brethren to take it on and look into it and be ready for the Lord's coming. It is imminent and He is looking for us to be ready, and He is keeping us constantly on the thought of the assembly, the full idea of the assembly.
A.H. Linking on with @Zechariah 4.
J.T. You might read that, added to what we have already had.
W.C. "And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep. And he said unto me, What seest thou? And I said, I see, and behold, a lamp-stand all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and its seven lamps thereon, seven lamps and seven pipes to the lamps, which are upon the top thereof; and two olive-trees beside it, one on the right of the bowl, and the other on the left of it. And I answered and
{356}
spoke to the angel that talked with me, saying, what are these, my lord? And the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me, Knowest thou not what these are? And I said, No, my lord. And he answered and spoke unto me, saying, This is the word of Jehovah unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts ...".
J.T. That is the word of Jehovah.
W.C. "Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou dost become a plain; and he shall bring forth the headstone with shoutings: Grace, grace unto it! And the word of Jehovah came unto me, saying, The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; and his hands shall finish it, and thou shalt know that Jehovah of hosts hath sent me unto you. For who hath despised the day of small things? Yea, they shall rejoice -- even those seven -- and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel: these are the eyes of Jehovah, which run to and fro in the whole earth. And I answered and said unto him, What are these two olive-trees on the right of the lamp-stand and on its left? And I answered the second time and said unto him, What are the two olive-branches which are beside the two golden tubes that empty the gold out of themselves? And he spoke to me, saying, Knowest thou not what these are? And I said, No, my lord. And he said, These are the two sons of oil, that stand before the Lord of the whole earth".
J.T. The Spirit of God is the point, and I think that we might proceed with our subject the remainder of the time.
A.D.S. In relation to the apostasy, you spoke of two features. Is the one political and the other religious? You have been speaking of communism, where does the religious side come in?
{357}
J.T. It is centred in Rome. It has always been there. It came out during the Reformation. Germany gave way and Great Britain and now it is extended to the west. That is the position, and that is what we are dealing with just now at this meeting. Communism is extending out to the satellites in the East. They are all there and Russia, four hundred million people; we have to be ready to contend with all that.
S.McC. In your mind do you regard the thought of communism as being held from breaking forth into universal dominion as long as the church is here?
J.T. I think Russia has to give way. This country is against her, thank God for that, and Britain is. It is a question of what God may allow and permit. We have got the principles handed down.
S.McC. And what the assembly is, and in itself it is magnified in the general line of your ministry to today and yesterday.
J.T. It would challenge us in that simple way, What doest thou here? What are we doing here? We are here in the Lord's service, and how many are not in it and yet they are christians? It is a challenge to us. God had his reserve man who could take the place of Elijah, and God kept on with Elijah, too, but He also took on Elisha.
R.H. What is the point of the food provided by Jehovah for Elijah? Verse 5, "An angel touched him, and said to him, Arise, eat! And he looked, and behold, at his head was a cake, baked on hot stones, and a cruse of water. And he ate and drank, and lay down again. And the angel of Jehovah came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise, eat; for the journey is too great for thee. And he arose, and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb the mount of God".
{358}
J.T. God has provided enough, bread and water, that would enable a man to live. God is doing that. Man will not die on that. God is faithful, and He will do what is needed in the way of food. We may not get all that we might wish. God gives enough to keep us alive, I think that is the idea, enough to keep a man alive in God's service.
C.C.T. Is that why we need the instruction in these verses? We are told to hold fast the instruction. Could that be the thought, we are receiving instruction as to these matters before us as to Russia and other matters?
J.T. Just so.
R.H. I was thinking about the continuance of the service. We cannot live on service, we need food.
J.T. We have the food here, bread and water. Elijah lives on that forty days and forty nights and came to Horeb. And he proposed to Jehovah that he might die. He can live, God is ready to make him live. And so it says, "Ye shall live". Dry bones can be made to live according to @Ezekiel 37.
E.J.M. Elijah having been supplied with this food it says he went in the strength of the food.
J.T. Very good. It strengthened him, even though a very poor fare, but enough to live on to carry on the work of the Lord.
E.J.M. I was wondering if the passage in @2 Thessalonians 3: 5, "the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patience of the Christ", would help.
J.T. What provision!
E.J.M. Not exactly the power of God, but the love of God, who never allows us to go into anything contrary to his love.
J.T. Quite so.
A.D.S. This is a very touching matter, this matter of the Lord taking account of his failing servant and giving him food, I am connecting it with @John 21,
{359}
where Peter says, "I go to fish", and culminating in the matter of the Lord being made known to them, and Jesus says to them, "Come and dine".
J.T. I was just waiting for that, "Come and dine". Not a pittance, but a dinner, a first-rate dinner.
A.D.S. But none dared inquire of Him, Who art Thou, for they knew it was Jesus.
J.T. He provided a dinner for them, a full fare, a first-rate dinner, "Come and dine", He says. The Lord did that.
{360}
THE SERVICE OF ELIJAH (4)
@1 Kings 20: 1 - 43
J.T. I think we noted this morning that Elisha had come on the scene; the service of God required a man other than Elijah. God, however, would not reject Elijah. He would take him on and use him later, but at the Same time Elisha came on the scene and thus the work of God was carried on as needed. What we have spoken of already this morning ought to be further noted, that is the idea of faithfulness in the service of God, and that God will take on anyone who is faithful, not so much for his ability, but for his faithfulness. It says God is faithful. There is no doubt that the Scriptures are written not only to convey fully things that we should know but to fit us for service, fit us to do things rightly and to do them well. So that we have much enlargement at times to bring out thoughts, and to bring them into the experience of the servants of God, those who would serve Him. So that a thing should be done and done well.
A.S.B. Is that seen in relation to Paul in regard to faithfulness? In @1 Corinthians 4, it says, "Let a man so account of us as servants of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. Here, further, it is sought in stewards, that a man be found faithful".
J.T. Very good. I was somewhat slighting the idea of faithfulness at first, but I can see that that is the main thought in all of this, in fact we see constantly that things flow out from God Himself, or from the Lord Jesus, or from the Holy Spirit. So that God is faithful.
C.C.T. Would what Paul says to Timothy in his second epistle in regard to entrusting the truth to faithful men be on that line?
J.T. Just so.
{361}
E.J.M. Is that why Elijah went to mount Horeb where the faithfulness of God would come before him?
J.T. I think the faithfulness of God would come out in Beer-sheba too. Beer-sheba would be illustrative of the faithfulness of God. That came in earlier, in Genesis especially. At mount Horeb, of course, as we said this morning, he resigned his commission, and God took up another to take his place. God will not be taken without resource; He will have His men in due time.
V.C.L. Is not one mark of the faithfulness of God seen in the kind of servants whom He puts in the assembly to serve it? Paul speaks of serving in Ephesus for three years night and day with tears. Is that not a practical evidence of God's faithfulness through a servant?
J.T. And then this city. What is said about one of the thoughts in the passage that we are dealing with. And God Himself is faithful and the number of persons that He had: "I have much people in this city".
S.McC. Is it not interesting that in the transitional epistle, Colossians, Paul alludes to two faithful ministers? Epaphras a faithful minister at the beginning and Tychicus a faithful minister at the end. That is important, is it not?
J.T. Faithful ministers, yes.
R.H. In a time of recovery, in @Nehemiah 7, it says, "I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the citadel, charge over Jerusalem; for he was a faithful man and feared God above many".
J.T. Yes, that was a testimony that was sent out from Belfast regarding the death of our beloved brother Mr. J.G. It was borne witness to him, that he was a faithful man above many, the brother who called attention to it quoting this scripture. So that the Spirit of God makes comparisons.
{362}
A.H. Is this matter of faithfulness seen in this matter of Elisha? In the end of the previous chapter, he is making up the number twelve, he has nothing less than the whole idea before him, and then he boils the flesh as if he is consecrating himself definitely to the service.
J.T. He was with the twelfth, just so. The full number whatever it was in the sense of administration was there. He was with the twelfth.
A.H. Have you any thought as to why he boils the flesh? Does it link up with @Leviticus 8, that he is really consecrating himself irrevocably in the service?
J.T. Very good. Boiling is not like frying or roasting, it is a question of what the word means in the cooking of food, how food is to be cooked. Have you any thought about that?
A.H. I was linking it in my mind -- I hope you will put me right if I am wrong -- with @Leviticus 8: the thought of the consecration of the priest, persons in faithfulness devoting themselves to divine interests; they are going to serve God.
J.T. But what about the thought of cooking, how food is to be cooked, whether things are boiled, or roasted or fried? I am only raising the question as to how the brethren can help each other in this respect as to cooking food.
S.McC. Ezekiel makes a lot of the boiling houses, as if the indirect action of the fire is stressed.
J.T. That is the word, indirect action of the fire in the service of cooking. That is just the idea, and, of course, that must be used in regard of spiritual food. How much must be used in cooking food, because we have to consider what the saints need and what we are to give them to eat. The indirect action as you say is quite instructive because it leads to the care that is used for the food that is cooked and given to the saints. Have you anything more to
{363}
say. Mr. McC., because I think it is most important that we might have the idea of food and how to cook it properly?
S.McC. I just thought it was instructive that in @Ezekiel 46 there were the four courts in the four corners of the system, having boiling places, that is there is uniformity in the system as to this matter of the provision of food.
J.T. That is very good.
A.H. Does it refer to some peculiar application of the death of Christ, that is not the judicial side of His suffering under the hand of God for sin, but rather His suffering in love that the service of God might go on?
J.T. Just so. We have to learn everything either from Christ or from God. Everything must begin there, and even as to cooking. We must learn how to do it. God has everything in His hand, whether it be God the Father or Christ the Son, or the Spirit the Paraclete. It is a question of divine Persons, and it is a question of our learning who They are and how to speak of Them, how to address Them, and how to bring Them into the service of God, each one of Them.
J.L.F. Is boiling an extended exercise?
J.T. It takes longer, I suppose, to boil. The pan or roasting would be quicker, I suppose, but it is certainly a prolonged idea.
J.L.F. I was wondering if it would fit in with the thought of bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus.
J.T. Bearing it about in the body, just so, I would say there is something in that for us to learn.
R.H. Boiling would require the additional use of water, as against fire alone as with roasting, would it not?
J.T. Quite so. The roasting or frying is the rapid use of heat for cooking. As I was saying, we have to
{364}
learn everything from divine Persons themselves, whether it be God or Christ. And we have to learn the old as well as the new because the Old Testament extends things. Things are much more extended necessarily than they are in the New.
S.McC. The Lord's supper affords the suggestion as to food, the result of the indirect action of the fire, to sustain us in relation to the service of God in a general way.
J.T. The Lord's supper is the very beginning of the idea of food. There is not much in it in the way of quantity, but it is there to indicate how divine Persons do things, and at the Lord's supper we have to enter into things in detail, and there is much that comes in for each one to do. It cannot be done for you, you have to do it yourself. The Lord's supper is something that we have to partake of ourselves, but as to the actual cooking and preparation for food it has to be understood how it is to be done, and we have to learn from divine Persons.
Ques. The passover was brought in in chapter 5 of 1 Corinthians, "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast". What would you say about that?
J.T. Very good, there is a good thought in that, "with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth". So these are words that have to be noted.
Ques. The passover in Exodus was the direct action of the fire. You said chapter 11 was the indirect action, what is the difference between those two?
J.T. Let us come to Corinthians, if you will be kind enough to mention where the food is in mind, the action of fire in cooking the food. Tell us what you have in mind in allusion to the Lord's supper.
Rem. I was thinking first of chapter 5, "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed", that was roast with fire; then our brother mentioned chapter
{365}
11, and suggested it was more the indirect action, what we can appropriate as the result of the death of Christ. It is not the judicial side, is it? The Lord's supper would be the privilege side.
J.T. That is right, the privilege side.
J.L.F. Would this matter of his taking time to cut up the oxen and boil them indicate that he was not prepared to rush into the service? He is taking his time, deliberately and thoughtfully, according to verse 21 of chapter 19.
J.T. He "took the yoke of oxen, and killed them, and boiled their flesh with the implements of the oxen, and gave to the people, and they ate". Now that is something that is well worth thinking over, what Elisha did, because as we were saying at the beginning of the reading, Elisha comes into evidence here as replacing Elijah. What he does must bear on his future service, and instead of Elijah now we have Elisha to consider, but still Elijah is not thrown aside altogether. He still comes into view and will be used as we shall see in the next book. What Elisha does is well worth thinking of. "He returned back from him, and took the yoke of oxen, and killed them, and boiled their flesh with the implements of the oxen". That is to say, we have already alluded to the difference between boiling and frying and the like. We have to see what this may mean for us, what Elisha does in the sense of preparing food for others, and what it may mean for us. It clearly means that we should go slow, so to speak. He had been using the oxen in the field and now it says he took the yoke of oxen and killed them. He had been using them for other purposes, but now he takes them and kills them for food; he boiled their flesh with the implements of the oxen and gave it to the people. That is to say, he has now changed his thought as to what he would do with the oxen, and uses them for food.
{366}
S.McC. Would it be right to think that following on the ministry of Elijah as emphasising the authority of God and the maintenance of His rights, Elisha is bringing in what grace would supply to meet conditions?
J.T. Very good, what grace would supply. I would think there is something in that. I wish you would enlarge on that -- what grace would supply.
S.McC. I thought what you said threw light on his future service, that he is marked at the beginning by supplying things, and in 2 Kings he is bringing in the answer to all the need that exists.
J.T. Yes.
C.C.T. Is the thought with those who may be serving, that the people are also in mind? It says here that he killed the oxen and boiled their flesh with the implements of the oxen and gave to the people and they ate.
J.T. The people are in mind in both chapters. The people are used to slay the prophets of Baal. The idea evidently is that God will restore His people, and keep them in restoration that they might be used, and I think that is the thing for us. We must proceed to chapter 20. It says the "king of Syria assembled all his host; and there were thirty-two kings with him, and horses and chariots; and he went up and besieged Samaria, and fought against it. And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, and said to him, Thus says Ben-hadad: Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives also and thy children, the goodliest, are mine. And the king of Israel answered and said, My lord, O king, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have". Now that is an abject surrender on the part of the king of Israel. We want to see how that works out and how Ahab is disposed of according to God. So the passage goes on to say, "My lord, O king, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I
{367}
have". That is an abject surrender. That has to be understood in its application, its present application and then we have to begin to think over it and understand it. It says, "The Lord will give thee understanding in all things". So it goes on to say, "Thou shalt deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children; but tomorrow about this time I will send my servants to thee, and they shall search thy house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thy sight, they shall put in their hand and take away. And the king of Israel called all the elders of the land and said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeks mischief". Now the king of Israel is beginning to assert himself and God is taking him on, but then we shall have to proceed further to perceive the ultimate end of the king of Israel in all of this. That is to say, the enemy is attacking unreasonably and the king of Israel is giving up, but at the same time God is not giving him over altogether. He is still taking him on, and so it says, "the king of Israel called all the elders of the land and said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeks mischief; for he sent to me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and for my gold; and I denied him not. And all the elders and all the people said to him, Hearken not, nor consent. And he said to the messengers of Ben-hadad, Tell my lord the king, All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I will do; but this thing I cannot do. And the messengers departed, and brought him word again. And Ben-hadad sent to him and said, The gods do so to me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me!". That is to say, the enemy is boasting of what he has got, the number of persons. "And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell him, Let not him that girdeth on boast himself as he that putteth off! And it came
{368}
to pass when he heard this word, as he was drinking ..." Notice the enemy's wretched defeat of himself, the condition he was in as drinking, giving room to the devil more and more, but still he is against the people of God, and now the question is how God is going to deal with this whole matter, because the chapter is long, but very, very interesting and we are to see the ultimate results. What is principally in mind now is to find out what is going to happen to the king of Israel. And so it says, "as he was drinking, he and the kings in the tents, that he said to his servants, Set yourselves. And they set themselves against the city". Will you kindly read from verse 13 just to get to the end of this subject?
W.C. [Verses 13 to 30 read].
J.T. Well now, I think we ought to come back to what we have read and see the full result of this great victory that God has given to His people, because we have to transfer the thing to our own times whether we can connect what we are dealing with at a reading like this and make it fit in with what God is doing in our very midst. A great multitude on the enemy's side but then what God is doing is with a few, seven thousand men. God is saying to them that He is on their side and He is going to give them victory. And so we want to consider how it applies to us at the present time, how God will give us victory over a great multitude. I would just ask the brethren to name the passages of scripture that would fit in to what we are dealing with. A great multitude against the people of God and only a few on the side of the people of God, but victory nevertheless on their side through the mercy and grace of God to His people. God is merciful to His people to be with us and give us victory.
S.McC. We have the idea of five chasing a hundred, and a hundred putting ten thousand to flight (@Leviticus 26: 8). That fits in?
{369}
J.T. The proportion increases.
A.H. Would @Matthew 18 link on with this -- two or three gathered together unto His name, and there in that position you have the Lord building His assembly as over against the gates of hades?
J.T. @Matthew 16 and @Matthew 18 certainly come into what we are dealing with, on the one hand a great number against the truth; on the other very few outwardly in favour of it. But nevertheless God is with His people.
R.H. Is it important to arrive at what the king arrived at, what we cannot do? "This thing I cannot do". The servants in the Acts when they were told not to preach said they could not refrain from preaching.
J.T. Quite so.
R.W.S. It is a question of the kingdom of Israel, Ahab and Samaria; it is not Judah is it? Would it allude to mixed conditions and how God comes in?
J.T. Just so. I think it is just like christendom. You cannot ignore christendom. The words 'christian' and 'christendom' have some force, but then we have to count on God nevertheless. The battle must be in the hands of God, the victory must come from God.
H.B. The word in @Luke 12 is, "Fear not, little flock, for it has been the good pleasure of your Father to give you the kingdom".
J.T. Very good.
R.W.S. Would it bear then upon what God might do in the public body as well as among ourselves?
J.T. That is what I was thinking, that we cannot wholly ignore what christendom is, but as soon as the apostasy sets in then it is all over. You might say the apostasy will be the finish.
R.W.S. Of course, Elijah and Elisha do not appear in this chapter. It is "a prophet" and "the
{370}
prophet" and "sons of the prophets" as if it is less distinguished persons.
J.T. Quite so. I thought of that, it is not Ahab and Elijah so much as inferior persons, the sons of the prophets, less important people. But nevertheless God is on the side of the right, what He has committed Himself to. I was speaking of christendom, but it is very poor, it is a mixed condition. The word 'christian' refers to believers, real christians, but christendom is a mixed condition -- it may be nothing or it may be something in the sense of being for God.
S.McC. So that we can see the principle of abject surrender on the one hand, but then the thought of the reasserting of things in relation to the revival, do we not?
J.T. I think that is right, there is something there that God can approve, but which is at the same time very unreliable. I think christendom is a most unreliable thing, and yet we cannot say that it is just heathendom, it is not just what is in China, for instance. Christendom is not real, but at the same time there is something in it that is real, but when the apostasy comes the unreality will come into evidence and the whole dispensation will be finished, and God will begin another.
A.H. Does @Amos 3 help in working out this matter? It has been remarked as to the faithful ones that they would be centred in the prophets, would they not? Amos tells us, "The Lord Jehovah will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets". This victory seems to be secured through the service of these faithful men.
J.T. That is the way I look at it.
-- .S. I was thinking on the line of what Mr. H. was saying. Would this unnamed prophet continue the thought of faithfulness in the midst of general departure? I was wondering if there might be some
{371}
correspondence with the faithful men in 2 Timothy days.
J.T. You are bound to recognise this prophet. He is not named but he has the character of a prophet and God is evidently supporting him.
H.A.G. I was thinking of @Judges 7; God seems to be showing His power in the few -- three hundred were chosen and the rest of the ten thousand put aside.
J.T. Just so, say a little more about the three hundred.
H.A.G. I was thinking there seemed to be a great many available, but those who were selected were the three hundred.
J.T. Just so. The smaller number relatively, but God can identify Himself with it.
J.W.D. I was wondering whether this conflict would enter into our prayer meetings. We should discriminate between our attitude towards Jezebel, and the support of this kind of conflict that is connected with Ahab and the overthrow of the Syrians.
J.T. There is not very much to say in favour of either. Take Rome and take Germany, what Protestantism has become, and there is not much to be said in favour of either; that is to say, the king of Syria is the open enemy, but then Ahab is not much either. He is not to be relied upon. Presently God will deal with him too. There is not much between Rome and Protestantism, because in between you have Russia, that is, you have communism. There is not much to decide in favour of between those elements. There is actual christianity and we have to go on with that wherever we find it, and we are going on with it, and that is what these meetings mean that God is giving us something by which we can accomplish something for Him.
J.W.D. You suggested that there was a real victory gained in this setting for the people of God, did you not?
{372}
J.T. Yes, that is right, but then we make allowance for Elisha coming in to take God's side of the whole matter. And we can always count on that.
J.McK. Does what Abijah says in relation to Jehovah in @2 Chronicles 13 apply? "We have God with us at our head, and his priests, and the loud-sounding trumpets to sound an alarm". He was facing overwhelming odds against Jeroboam, and God gave him the victory.
J.T. Just so, a very good example of what we are speaking of.
E.J.M. What is the import of the prophet's answer to Ahab in verse 14, "By whom? And he said, Thus saith Jehovah: By the servants of the princes of the provinces"?
J.T. Who is to lead in the actual conflict, and it is to be Ahab.
E.J.M. Yes, he is to lead, but it says, "I will deliver it into thy hand this day; and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah. And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith Jehovah: By the servants of the princes of the provinces. Then he said, Who shall begin the battle? And he said, Thou". I was wondering what the significance is.
J.T. I think God is putting the matter where it should be. He is giving Ahab credit for being the leader of Israel up to that time, but God is really not very free about it. He was ready to use Ahab if he was equal to it; Jehovah said, Thou. He is to lead in the conflict. God is not casting him off altogether, He is just giving him the place that Israel ought to have. I think God is still respecting Israel in spite of the weakness that is existent. I think there is much at the present time that God is respecting that is not really of Him, and we can go on with that so long as the right principles are allowed in any measure.
{373}
E.J.M. I wondered if that was why he said, "By the servants of the princes of the provinces", not much respected, but there is the power lying there.
J.T. Just so.
A.S.B. In relation to @Judges 7, there were actually three companies, the original thirty-two thousand, twenty-two thousand of whom were timid and went back, and then ten thousand and in the final reduction three hundred. I wondered if there was something in our chapter that would apply in that way in relation to the great profession and then what has come to light recently in regard to Rome; it has been opposed by certain heads in so-called churches, which we would recognise as the ten thousand possibly, but then the three hundred would be connected with our chapter in relation to the prophet.
J.T. I think there is a good deal in that, because what Rome is asserting is repudiated by the Church of England, and we would say we are glad they are going so far at least. The Church of England is not much, but at the same time if it is saying what is right so far we just leave it at that and thank God for it. We would rather that they would be doing that than becoming apostate.
A.S.B. That is exactly what I had in mind.
H.A.P. There is something positive even in Sardis: it says, "Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, which are about to die".
J.T. Just so, there are some names even in Sardis, a few names.
Rem. There are a few names in Sardis who have not defiled their garments.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord recognises that; what He can He recognises, until the apostasy comes; then the matter is over. It has not come yet, but it is in principle around us.
L.E.S. The seven thousand who had not bowed the knee to Baal would be in all this, would they not?
{374}
J.T. I would regard them as real ones whom we can approve, whom God approves, and I believe that, is just what exists at the present time. There are those we can go with so far, take men like Moody and Sankey and people that really get converts, that is to say those who go on with the truth in any measure, God approves them. So God approved the seven thousand, He says to Elijah, "Yet I have left myself seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed unto Baal". They have not done it, they are genuine persons. But when the apostasy comes in we cannot own anything, the whole matter is rejected. That is a most solemn thing to consider, that when the apostasy comes that is the finish, there is nothing left. I think we ought to read that again to have it clearly in our mind; just read again the part that refers to the apostasy.
W.C. @2 Thessalonians 2, verse 3, "Let not any one deceive you in any manner, because it will not be unless the apostasy ..."
J.T. Now that is the thing, just stop there for the moment, we can enlarge on that; "unless the apostasy", let us rest on the idea of the word 'apostasy'. I thought we might see clearly what the apostasy is going to be. It is going to be the finish of this dispensation, that God is going to reject it finally. That is most solemn to think of.
J.McK. Would you say a little more on how that apostasy will develop. I think it would be helpful for us.
J.T. Well, it is going to be gradual as far as I see. It has been gradual since the Reformation, going on ever since and getting worse and worse.
S.McC. Would you look at the apostasy as not only developing in christendom in relation to christendom itself, but the governments also giving up things?
{375}
J.T. Just so. What has occurred in France has now occurred in Germany and now in Russia. Russia was nominally christian at one time too, not very long since either, but it is going entirely against the truth, although there are some real christians yet in Russia. But the apostasy has been going on since the Reformation, all the time, but God is mercifully coming in in the revival, as we speak of it, through Mr. Darby and this same work has been going on in which we are now this very day. It is a wonderful thing that we are able to speak of it in that way. The real thing God is still supporting and we might say together we are with that.
V.C.L. Has the development of the truth in the last hundred and fifty years, tended to retard the apostasy while the completing of the assembly takes place?
J.T. I think so. So that until He be taken out of the way, that which hinders will hinder. That is the Spirit of God. That is the right thought of christianity; it is hindering the apostasy. The apostasy is only gradual and is not any very great outward thing. I do not think we are going to have anything like that. It will be somewhat of a private nature, not recognised in the world at all. We just have to accept that.
V.C.L. I was thinking of the necessity, if we have come within the range of the truth, to manifest the spirit of grace that continues to this very day, so that those in what is apostate around us might be saved if possible.
J.T. Just so. But it will not be saved because God is not going to save it. He is giving it up, He is gradually giving it up.
R.W.S. I believe you have suggested that what has come under the range of the truth in Mr. Darby's day, and departed from it in the various divisions, will become part of the apostate system.
{376}
J.T. Quite so, I am sure it will. What has been false to the revival, open brethrenism (I do not like to use the word), is really not the truth at all.
A.H. The apostle Paul in @1 Timothy 4 says, "But the Spirit speaks expressly, that in latter times some shall apostatise from the faith, giving their mind to deceiving spirits and teachings of demons speaking lies in hypocrisy, cauterised as to their own conscience ..."
J.T. Apostasy has therefore set in. But it is slow, it is not a great or outward thing, it has set in and we have to notice it. But at the same time carry on with what is right according to God, what we believe is actually right and go on with that, and we are doing it, thank God. God is helping us, and He has helped us in England in the last two or three months. God is greatly helping the brethren and He is doing it here in America at the same time. It is just as well to be simple and say what is true.
P.W. As to our prayers, are we to continue praying for these men in authority and kings?
J.T. The truth in that sense stands, the truth of Scripture stands.
P.W. I was thinking about Europe, can we pray for those men too in authority there?
J.T. We are enjoined to do that.
P.W. I mean the Russians.
J.T. Oh, but we are not thinking of Russia when we say Europe. Russia it by itself, it goes beyond Europe.
H.B. In the scripture in @Matthew 13 the Lord speaks of the kingdom of the heavens being like leaven which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal until it had all been leavened.
J.T. God is very patient. We can count on that. He is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
{377}
R.H. I was wondering as to this subsequent section where Ahab is tolerant with Ben-hadad and calls him "my brother", whether that would be something like Bethesda, which we must resist.
J.T. That is just the sort of thing Bethesda is. It cannot be relied upon; it is a thorough mixture, although there are some real christians in it, of course. Mr. Darby repudiated it from the very start.
S.McC. It seems interesting that John's ministry deals with what is antichrist, whereas Paul seems to deal with what is anti-God. Is there something in that?
J.T. I think there is.
S.McC. In Thessalonians the person who is viewed there as being manifested, the man of sin, sets himself up as God, and takes the place of God. In John's references to the antichrist he mentions those who did not confess Jesus Christ come in flesh.
J.T. Christ, come in flesh, just so. But I would like to hear a little more about what is anti-God, as it is in your mind, Mr. McC.
S.McC. I thought it linked with the first beast in @Revelation 13, the one who really is in the place of being God and how the revelation of *God* is opposed in that way in this great matter of the apostasy.
J.T. What is anti-God is probably what has come in in christendom, not Protestantism, but something in the East that is taking the place of christianity. I am trying to show what we have to deal with in the last days. Mohammedanism is not open heathendom but it is contrary to christianity and contrary to the truth of the assembly.
S.McC. Mr. Darby points out in the 'protracted' interpretation of the Revelation the place that the Saracen hordes had in invading Europe; this was really a forerunner of what is to come in the way of being anti-God. It was really the forerunner of what will ultimately come in as a terrible scourge.
{378}
J.T. Just so, really the apostasy, that is what that is.
A.D.S. In regard to apostasy would you make it a little clearer what is actually apostasy? There are apostate systems, and there are believers in whom there may be a work of God linked with them, and we have to recognise the true character of that with which they are identified, and yet we know the Lord knows those that are His.
J.T. The mohammedan element is not an entire denial of christianity; there is some pretence to recognise something of Christ or christianity or judaism. Something of that kind is retained in it. That is the character of apostasy that we have to deal with. It is a Saracen element which is recognised in the East largely, and Russia has espoused it, but that does not mean that Russia has wholly given up everything that is of God because there are many real christians in Russia still and in all eastern Asia. At the same time Russia is very near mohammedanism, but Russia is still by itself; it has always had a peculiar distinctiveness by itself. The British a hundred years ago were greatly afraid of Russia coming down from the north, like the king of the north in Daniel. That would ultimately culminate in Russia's attack on India and on the whole British Commonwealth. That would be in accord with what God is doing, what He is finding in the British Commonwealth all over the world, because there is always an open door in the British Commonwealth for something of God. And I am sure God recognises it governmentally. But the time will come when it will be wholly cast off, as of no more value than heathendom.
{379}
THE SERVICE OF ELIJAH (5)
@2 Kings 1: 1 - 18; @2 Kings 2: 1 - 25
J.T. No doubt the brethren wild discern what is in mind at this time in pursuing the subject into the second book of Kings. Of a truth what is mainly in view is to look at the ascension of Elijah. We have in chapter 1 one person who falls down through the lattice, and in chapter 2 another who goes up, that is, Elijah goes up. No doubt there is something for us to learn as to current events in the world, that is one falling down, a great personage falling down and another ascending, the latter pointing to the coming of the Lord, "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them ... and thus we shall be always with the Lord". So that I thought it would be wise to stress the ascension of Elijah at this time as well as what we have had in the first book of Kings, because there is much that the devil is bringing forward at the present time as to certain persons ascending to heaven. Terribly blasphemous things are being said, especially by the Roman Catholic Church, as to the virgin Mary -- a terrible thing. We should be aware of it and be with God about it, because it only points to the last times, for we are in the last times.
R.W.S. Earlier we have Elijah's resignation and the Lord's acceptance of it. How does this fit in now with that?
J.T. I think it shows that God is wonderfully gracious with His servants, especially men like Elijah. He is wonderfully gracious. And so Elijah is allowed to go on in the service even in the second book of Kings. He is allowed to continue. That ought to encourage each one of us who are serving, that God
{380}
is wonderfully gracious to us and if any of us are of any real importance at all in His service, it is particularly so. We can count on God being gracious.
R.W.S. Is he fully restored then?
J.T. I think so.
A.H. What is the significance of this man falling down like this in his house?
J.T. Falling down something like what we see in the book of Revelation where such things happen. This was a man that was officially king of Israel, but he fell down. It is the government of God in relation to persons who are nominally in relation to God's people and God's things.
A.H. Would you in any way link it with @Deuteronomy 22: 8? "When thou buildest a new house, thou shalt make a parapet for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thy house, if any one should in any wise fall from it". I wondered whether this disaster indicated that there was not proper guarding of himself in his own house.
J.T. It was governmental, I would think. He fell in principle really to his death. His death immediately followed. It was severe governmental action.
V.C.L. Why is Elijah used in the matter of judgment so drastically, judgment on Ahaziah and judgment on these captains and their fifties just before his going up?
J.T. I think there will be a good deal of that, there is a good deal of that in view today in what is current -- so much wickedness abroad. And God is going to dead with it summarily.
V.C.L. So that is going on now in some way.
J.T. Quite so. The epistle to the Thessalonians deals with this sort of thing. Why should not God have the right to deal with these things that are opposing Him? Why should He not have those rights, and why should anybody question it? God is right and He will do right.
{381}
R.W.S. Does not the moral judgment now amongst the saints precede the actual judgment which is imminent?
J.T. The actual judgment will be what we have in the book of Revelation. In the meantime there are current things, governmental things. So it says He writes to the seven churches which are in Asia. He writes to each one of them beginning with Ephesus. But then immediately following the addresses to the assemblies we have the terrible judgments of the later chapters in the book of Revelation.
Ques. According to Thessalonians it says "wrath has come upon them to the uttermost". That is not future, it has already begun there.
J.T. Quite so, it has come upon them. Governmental things are happening.
C.C.T. It says in regard to Elijah that the angel said to him, "Arise, go up to meet". Would that be the thought for us as to our judgment of things in the world? We would arise and meet these matters now and know something about them.
J.T. Quite so. Elijah is still in function. He is still in employment under God. He is not thrown over at all. Elisha is there too, but Elijah is there also. So we may be reminded that God is gracious and merciful especially to His servants. So that let no one say anything against the servants of God. He will see to that, if there are any who do.
W.McK. Would Peter's word in chapter 4 of his first epistle, "For the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come", apply?
J.T. That has a direct application to what we are speaking of, "But if first from us, what shall be the end of those who obey not the glad tidings of God? And if the righteous is difficultly saved, where shall the impious and the sinner appear?". God is gracious to us and His servants as well, but He has also at the same time in hand to use judgment if necessary
{382}
and where it is necessary. And we know it will be necessary and is necessary. We have to learn from these prophets God's way of doing things because the prophecy is mitigation. God is mitigating, He is patient, and so at the present time God is not willing that any should perish. He is, not willing, He is patient. So we ought to reckon on the patience of God. He has a right to be patient. We must not question it.
R.W.S. Each of these paragraphs read begins with 'and', all the way through and so on through the third, fourth and fifth. Does that mean that things are just proceeding sequentially, going forward?
J.T. You might begin earlier. The 'and' begins earlier, in Genesis, and running right through, showing that God has a great deal to say, and the 'and', refers to that. Do you see what I mean? Almost every book has it. God is so gracious and merciful in the extension of His thoughts of grace and consideration of His people and for His servants particularly.
S.McC. So that as the chapter proceeds the moral greatness of His servant has to be recognised. The last captain gets on his knees and speaks of himself and those with him as Elijah's servants. He has to recognise moral greatness.
J.T. See how God recognises submission in that last captain. Notice how he behaves himself. He does not act like the others. He does not say, 'Come down' to the prophet. Perhaps you will touch on that. Mr. McC.
S.McC. Verse 13, "And again he sent the captain of a third fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before Elijah, and besought him and said to him, Man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight.
{383}
Behold, there came down fire from the heavens, and consumed the two captains of the former fifties with their fifties ..."
J.T. He takes notice of what happened to the two first ones and he is hoping it will not happen to him, and it does not. Please read further, Mr. McC.
S.McC. "... but now, let my life be precious in thy sight. And the angel of Jehovah said to Elijah, Go down with him ..."
J.T. Now see that. See how grace comes in at once. "Go down with him". But he had not gone down with the others, the other two captains were destroyed. So God has His own rights, and we must count on them, and act upon them. I think we ought all to remember that we are living in times when it is a time of mercy although it is a time of judgment, but at the same time God is not willing that any should perish -- not willing, minded otherwise.
S.McC. The last word in the book that relates awful judgments is, "He that will, let him take the water of life freely".
J.T. Very good.
J.L.F. So the scripture says, "a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise". Even if we do not deserve the mercy and goodness of God, if we approach in this way we will be heard.
J.T. Just so. You can count on that. We can count on this being a time of grace; it still remains. God is still gracious, not willing that any should perish. God is not willing that the worst man on earth should perish, but that all should come to repentance; that gives great encouragement to evangelisation, which we should be always ready to use.
A.H. Is that enlarged upon in @Acts 5 where you have in principle the fire of God coming in on Ananias and Sapphira? But then it says, "And great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who
{384}
heard these things. And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders done among the people".
J.T. They began to fear God. God was exercising judgment when it was needed and people began to fear God. Although judgment was meted out to both Ananias and Sapphira I believe that they were christians, believers, I believe they were really believers and God had mercy on them. So that is another thing that we must count on. If a person is really a believer, God makes full allowance for it.
A.H. It results in great addition to the brethren, "And believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women".
J.T. Even the shadow of Peter was recognised as an element of salvation.
W.C. How do you mean they were believers, did they not die?
J.T. Even though they did, that does not mean that believers do not die under the government of God. They may come under the government of God and be dealt with accordingly.
J.McK. Would @1 Corinthians 11 support what you are saying, "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep"?
J.T. They are really believers.
H.B. Do you think the disciples in @Luke 9 had not got on to the third captain? They were bringing in the thought of Elias bringing down fire from heaven when there were those who would not receive the Lord.
J.T. Just so. God is ready in His mercy to recognise any overture that anyone makes toward him. It is a time of mercy, and God acts in mercy. We do well to accept that because God loves it. So He is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
{385}
L.E.S. The doxology of @Romans 11 would come into this, would it not, where we have, "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable his judgments, and untraceable his ways! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counsellor? or who has first given to him, and it shall be rendered to him? For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen"?
J.T. Just so. So in that epistle, all Israel shall be saved -- all Israel. They are under judgment outwardly now, under reproach, but they all come into salvation. That is what those three wonderful chapters in the book of Romans, the chapters including the promises made to the fathers, teach us. God has not forgotten them. He has them all ready to apply the promises in time. So that when the time comes Israel's time will come in and all Israel shall be saved. That is a wonderful thing; I think for us to have in mind, I am sure you would think so. Mr. S.
L.E.S. I do.
J.T. You have taken it on earlier than the others. You have taken it on already, and that ought to be a testimony to others. We have two dear sisters in New York, who are like yourself, and have come to the truth and are thoroughly converted, and in the assembly, with their brethren.
L.E.S. As those born out of due time.
J.T. Just so. Like Paul himself.
S.McC. It is interesting that in verse 15 we get the angel of Jehovah coming into the matter. It says, in relation to the third captain, "The angel of Jehovah said to Elijah, Go down with him". It reminds you of the angel in Acts, and God helping in matters, does it not?
J.T. The angel put Elijah into good company. He did not expect it, but the angel put him there, "Go down with him". Do you go with that?
{386}
S.McC. Yes, indeed. It reminds you of heaven's interest wherever there is an attitude like this.
J.T. Just so. Where there is acceptance of grace, the acceptance of the divine overtures. God is ready to approach and to act in mercy. So that it became a wonderful time. "Go down with him", says the angel. And of course, he did go down with him, "Be not afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with him to the king". God has pleasure in all that. Elijah went down with the man to the king. So it is a wonderful testimony there, in the presence of the king, that Elijah went down in conjunction with that act of mercy.
A.H. I was going to ask you if you would say something as to the place the angel of Jehovah has in this chapter. In verse 3 he comes in. Hitherto we have had "the word of Jehovah came to him", but now it is "the angel of Jehovah". Do you think it indicates that heaven now is greatly interested in matters?
J.T. Quite so. Heaven retains its rights and we can always count on them. We have such things in the government of God as heaven being shut up, but at the same time God reserves His rights and God is in heaven.
P.W. Do we see something of this spirit in our dispensation with Stephen when he said, "Lay not this sin to their charge"?
J.T. Just so. Stephen said that. The Lord Jesus in principle had already said it. He said, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do". So that Stephen follows the first great Martyr, in that way.
C.C.T. Does God show His love toward Elijah in what was read in verse 15, "Go down with him", and then "be not afraid of him"? I was thinking that God said to Joshua, "I will not leave thee". Would
{387}
this be the same thought here, the Lord standing beside him?
J.T. Quite so, how many have found that, God standing beside them. Paul said that an angel of God stood beside him that night. That is what happened in the Mediterranean.
E.J.M. In verse 16 Elijah says to the king, "Forasmuch as thou hast sent messengers to inquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron, is it because there is no God in Israel to inquire of his word? therefore thou shalt not come down from the bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt certainly die". With that kind of opposition to the truth of God, there was no mercy shown there, was there?
J.T. Quite so, no mercy shown there.
-- .S. I was going to inquire whether alongside this matter of governmental judgment on apostasy, God was bringing forward again His pleasure in His servant before the beginning of chapter 2, in which He said He would take up Elijah, bringing him forward to demonstrate His pleasure in him.
J.T. The time had come and it was already imminent that He was going to take up Elijah. So the word is, "And it came to pass when Jehovah would take up Elijah". It was a great matter that God had in His mind. He has great pleasure in what He does for His servants. He was going to take him into heaven, one of the very rare persons that is taken into heaven. I think it is well that we have it before us now because of the blasphemous things that are being said in a certain system, that the virgin Mary has been taken up into heaven -- a terrible thing. I think we might as well have it before us and see the persistency of this system in error, in wickedness; God is going to deal with that effectually. If we read in the book of Revelation, we shall see how Jezebel is to be dealt with.
{388}
E.J.M. Do you understand that Elisha was with Elijah all this time, after he had killed the oxen?
J.T. I think so. He is on the scene as a man of God's provision to meet the situation, to fill the gap, because Elijah was to be taken. It was in God's mind to take him, but He had Elisha to take his place. You may be sure God is never at a loss, He has always got His man to do His work.
E.J.M. I wondered if Elisha was in the school of instruction, in the school of God, to understand that while He might bring in grace, He would not ignore when judgment was necessary.
J.T. He does bring in grace, it controls Elisha. God is always ready to exercise grace when the opportunity offers itself.
J.L.F. In the meantime would you say Elisha is in the position in verse 11 of chapter 3 of pouring water on the hands of Elijah?
J.T. Elisha is a simple man ready to do what he can for a superior. He regarded Elijah as superior, which he was. Elijah has a greater place than Elisha. God has His own measures and He is ready to assert them. But God has His eye on Elisha, he is a gracious man, and God uses him. He fitted him for that work.
E.J.M. Is there a similarity in the history of Paul and Timothy? When Paul sends him out he says, "Thou knowest my manner of life and my doctrine". Timothy then would carry on from there what Paul had already set forth.
J.T. Quite so. There were Timotheus and faithful men, persons who would be ready to teach the saints, and then it says "others also".
J.K. Is the greatness of Elijah set forth in that Elisha desired a double portion of his spirit to be upon him?
J.T. I would reserve that for the moment. We will come back to it. Elisha wants to be with Elijah,
{389}
he never wants to go away from him, and so it is that in due time Elijah says, You will get your request, but you must be sure that you see me when I go up. We will have to come back to that.
C.C.T. So he was able to address Elijah as "My father", showing that he gave Elijah a greater place than he held himself. Would that also bring out the thought of instruction coming from the father?
J.T. He functions as a father.
V.C.L. Is that not like the way we have been exhorted the last hundred years to cleave to Paul? Would that be a key word?
J.T. Do not forget John, though. Mr. Darby said, do not forget John, but cleave to Paul, showing that he is the latter-day man. Paul is a reliable man throughout. The Lord took him up late, but he was a reliable man.
V.C.L. I was just thinking that Elisha apparently was like those who went to the school of Tyrannus, he will not miss a minute, so that he may be prepared for the great things of God.
J.T. We have Elisha in more modern times. The Spirit of Elisha really is J.N.D.¬s line, he is of that character, the spirit of grace. That is characteristic of the later times, the great revival that we are having part in now, and we want to retain it, the spirit of grace.
A.H. Have you in mind to say anything about this journey that is made, that is Gilgal, Bethel, Jordan and the wilderness.
J.T. Quite so, we will have to come to that and we must not be too slow about the ascension of Elijah because it is the great point for the moment, the ascension not simply of one saint like Elijah, but the principle of the ascension. So the Lord says to Mary, "I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your
{390}
God". The point in the message was largely the question of the ascension, and it enters into our, own times, these times that we have come into. In the spirit of grace, ascension is the great point. The Lord Jesus is coming, it is a thing to be consciously in our minds, that He is coming for us, and we do not need to die, we do not expect to die. We expect the Lord to come because He has promised to come. "The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first". So that is the thing to look for instead of looking for death. The thing is to look for the Lord's coming and to be ready for it.
J.McK. Do you think that the present ministry is helping us in view of the suggestion in the first verse, "And it came to pass when Jehovah would take up Elijah into the heavens"? The present ministry is preparing the saints for this time that will come to pass.
J.T. It is 'would'. It is a positive thing, that He would do it. He has it in His mind and what He has in His mind He will do; it is a certainty. At the same time He is not willing that any should perish. And if we are right with God we fully acknowledge that He has those rights. We have to recognise these two things; namely, the coming of the Lord, the certainty of it, and at the same time the divine unwillingness that is manifest in the perishing of any.
A.H. As to the ascension that you are stressing, does Elisha arrive at it morally in contrast to the sons of the prophets, who seem only to have an objective acquaintance with it?
J.T. The sons of the prophets do not know much; they are unreliable. We shall see that as we go on to the end. They deceived even Elisha; they would induce him to believe that Elijah had not gone into heaven at all. That is the kind of thing you get with
{391}
the sons of the prophets. The following generation is not always reliable, we should not make too much of it.
R.H. Does ascension enter into the service of God spiritually now?
J.T. I think so, we go up. I always feel that, on the first day of the week, to go up is the idea. After the breaking of bread, to go up is the idea. It is a going up time. The Lord's service implies going up. And we do not go up by the same door we came in by, either. That is another thing to think of because God may change things at any moment, and going up may happen. We may be transferred at any moment. He is entitled to do that.
C.C.T. A twinkling of an eye.
J.T. Just so, good.
S.McC. Is not the distinction of the saints of the assembly linked with ascension in contrast to the platform of Israel's blessing in relation to resurrection? And the enemy is attacking that side of the truth. I was thinking that the platform of the blessing of the saints of the assembly is not resurrection: the full thought is ascension. Our place is heavenly, we belong to heaven.
J.T. Very good. A very great point to make, I am certain.
W.C. You have said before that we do not go out the same way we come in, referring to @Ezekiel 46, I wondered if you would say something more about that, I have often wondered what you had in mind.
J.T. When we go in to the Lord's supper on the Lord's day morning we go in from our houses. We leave our houses and go in to partake of the Lord's supper and we consider one another and we greet one another. Well, we do not do that when we go out. When we go out we may be transferred; it may be ascension. The spirit of ascension may come into our hearts before we leave the meeting room. We
{392}
do not go out as we came in. We came in greeting the brethren and counting on them to have part in the Lord's supper. But now the Lord's supper has passed, and the ascension comes into view, and it may happen any time, because God has a perfect right to take us to heaven at any time. He has perfect right to do it. Do you follow that?
W.C. Yes, I do. Thank you, from glory to glory.
J.T. Just so, very good, from glory to glory. That enters fully into the Lord's supper and the service of God begins with the Lord's supper and it develops into the ascension, into the glory scene.
J.L.F. A distinction would be made, would it not, between the saints being taken up and the Lord ascending Himself?
J.T. I think the idea of ascension attaches to both, the Lord Himself and then to the saints. The assembly will ascend too, the whole assembly will be taken up. We look for that.
J.L.F. I just thought the Lord could Himself ascend or descend, but in order for the saints to go up, they are taken up, as Elijah was.
J.T. It is in the time of ascension. The descending would, of course, be for the purpose of taking us up. The Lord Himself will descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel and the trump of God. That descending is for the purpose of taking us up. We are going up with Him.
W.McK. I was wondering if the anticipative truth of the early part of Ephesians is to help us to take in the thought of ascension. It says, "has quickened us with the Christ, ... and has raised us up together".
J.T. Quite so, that is what we have in the Lord's supper. I mean to say the resurrection applied to the second of Ephesians. That is a matter that enters into the service of God developing out of the Lord's supper, that we are already ascended. He "has
{393}
raised us up together, and made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". Not only to be caught up but to sit down together. That is our present privilege and enters into the service of God.
A.P. I thought it might be likened to what the Queen of Sheba saw with Solomon, the order of his house and all that, but at last it says she saw the ascent by which he went up.
J.T. Quite so.
R.H. Has the Holy Spirit some part in the matter of ascension now spiritually in the service?
J.T. The Spirit never takes us up. He has never promised to take us up. He has come down to be with us.
R.H. I was thinking of the hymn,
<blockquote>E'en now we taste the love, <br>And know the mighty power, <br>By which we'll rise to realms above <br>When waiting time is o'er. (`225:4)</blockquote>
J.T. Quite so. We know the love, and the power too. Of course we do, because the Spirit is the power, and the love is in the Spirit. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us". The love and the power are already existent. But then that is not a question of ascension.
R.H. I was wondering about reaching the thing in power now in the service of God, whether that would require the service of the Spirit, the power working in us.
J.T. Of course it is there. It is in the Holy Spirit, I would say. But it is not implied that the Spirit takes us up at all or that He has to do with the ascension. The Lord Himself will take us up, the Lord Himself.
J.K. So that @Ephesians 3 speaks of being strengthened with power by His Spirit in the inner man. That is the Father's Spirit, is it not?
{394}
J.T. The Father's Spirit is really the Holy Spirit, because the Spirit of God is the Holy Spirit, and He is the Spirit that acts for the Father too. I would say that He is as much the Spirit of the Father as the Spirit of God.
R.W.S. What was said is not clear to me as to the Holy Spirit. I am a little confused as to what we are speaking of as to ascending in a spiritual way and ascending corporeally. I understand the Spirit has nothing to do with the corporeal ascent, because the Lord does that, but what about the service of God? It says we have access by one Spirit to the Father. Is that the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Quite so. But I do not see that that interferes with what is being said. The Spirit has been sent down from heaven, and He is here now with us; even this very minute He is here with us as sent down. He has not come down to go up; He was sent down to be with us while we are here, not to take us up anywhere, but just while we are here. He is here for that purpose.
J.K. Have you not said elsewhere, in this connection, that the Spirit quickens?
J.T. So He does. But that is not taking us up.
J.K. No, that is what I was wondering.
J.T. That is @Romans 8: 11. It says that the Spirit quickens. That is another thing that many do not notice, that it is not Christ that quickens or the Father that quickens at the present time, because the word there is quickening our mortal bodies, not our dead bodies, but our mortal bodies; that is what is said of the Spirit. I think it is important for us to have that in mind, the function of the Holy Spirit here on earth. He is down here in relation to the saints to look after them, but He is not going to take us to heaven. The Lord is going to do that. We have to learn what divine Persons are doing, what They do characteristically. The Spirit of God has
{395}
been sent by the Lord Jesus Himself, and He is sent here to look after the assembly, and He is with us and in us too.
J.K. I think now we see a little of what in these meetings you have been stressing as to the Spirit sent down.
J.T. Quite so. That has been very much before the brethren for a good while, both here and in Europe.
E.J.M. The thought of the Spirit quickening our mortal bodies does not interfere with the Lord taking us to heaven, does it?
J.T. The Lord does not quicken us, as far as I see.
E.J.M. Does that fit in with "we which are alive and remain"?
J.T. Just so. Those who are alive and remain are mortal, they are not dead bodies. And the Spirit of God acts on the mortal bodies; that is as we are here today. The Spirit of God has power to act upon us.
J.McK. So that as you have been speaking of the Holy Spirit sent down, according to @Ephesians 4, it says in speaking of Christ, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things". That is what He does Himself.
J.T. That is the Lord Jesus, Himself.
J.McK. Yes, that is what I had in mind in contrast to the Spirit being sent down.
J.T. Just so.
S.McC. As to @Romans 8: 11, that you helped us on so much of late, there are many that have a difficulty about that, thinking that it is mediatorial, but you regard it as the Spirit's action entering into the matter of the quickening.
J.T. Surely, it is the actual action of the Spirit.
S.McC. I have had those who have challenged me as to it, saying it is the Spirit of Him who has raised
{396}
up Jesus from the dead, that it is a mediatorial thought more.
J.T. The 'Him' there is God. How does that particular passage read?
S.McC. It reads, "But if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you".
J.T. That is God Himself. That is what I see there. The Spirit of Him that raised up Christ. It is God Himself.
S.McC. And the Spirit is God.
J.T. Quite so.
-- .S. Does @Ephesians 1: 14 bear on the thought of the Spirit bringing us now into our inheritance spiritually? He "is the earnest of our inheritance to the redemption of the acquired possession to the praise of his glory".
J.T. The Spirit is, quite so. Have you a different thought?
-- .S. I was just thinking of Dr. S.¬s question earlier, as to our entering into our heavenly portion now in contrast to actual ascension. I wondered if this reference to the Spirit being the earnest of our inheritance bore on the matter.
J.T. We have to go by steps, you know. I believe we ought to get the truth of all these things this very day before we leave.
-- .S. I would like some help too, as to our present entering into our heavenly portion on the line of ascension. You spoke of ascension in relation to the morning meeting, as flowing out of the Supper, and then the question of actual ascension in which you were saying the Holy Spirit does not have part, but the Lord Himself comes for us. I thought this passage, @Ephesians 1: 14, would have a bearing on
{397}
our entering now into our heavenly portion in the latter part of the morning meeting.
J.T. There is just this to be said at once, that God has a right to speak of things anticipatively. They will happen, but it is not said that they are now happening. For instance, as in @Ephesians 2, "and has raised us up together, and made us sit down together". That is what will happen literally, and God is entitled to the liberty of speaking of things anticipatively, things that be not as if they were.
-- .S. Does the Holy Spirit bring us into things anticipatively?
J.T. I do not think so, that is not His function. He is sent down here, and He is here today. It is no question of ascension, it is a question of what He is for us here on earth. When I say earth, as we have often said, I mean He is here in the assembly to help us, not to take us up, but to help us, to carry us on and support us, so He adds His help to our weaknesses.
A.H. I think the brethren would now be very glad if you would come to verse 9, and say a word for us on verse 9 to the end of verse 14.
J.T. I suppose you are right in saying we have got as far as verse 9, but we want to get it clearly in our minds, especially recent things that have been said as to the Spirit; that He is here in the assembly, and in relation to the assembly and in relation to us as of the assembly, and in relation to the service of God here on earth, not to go up, but as here on earth. He will go up presently, but He never takes us up. He is never said to take us up. The Lord Himself takes us up.
S.McC. On Lord's day morning in the service of God, is it that we are under the hand of Christ as Head, and we go up in ascension while the Spirit's power enters into the matter? The Lord as Head is taking us into things spiritually.
{398}
J.T. If He does do it, but it may be anticipatively. What we deal with is anticipative, take @Ephesians 1: 23.
S.McC. "According to the working of the might of his strength, in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead, and he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all".
J.T. That is the passage that I wanted to get clearly before us -- what the assembly is to Christ. The assembly has part in the headship, which perhaps brethren do not see much. God has made the assembly part of the headship. Perhaps you would say what you think yourself.
S.McC. I think what you are saying is important, and we want to get more as to this matter. How do you view the last verse of `74:5, J.N.D.¬s hymn,
<blockquote>And see! the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heavenly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour <br>When toil shall all be o'er?</blockquote>
J.T. 'Brought us to the favoured hour', that is all. He has brought us to it, but it does not assert that the Spirit takes us up at all; that would not be in keeping with the truth. We have to go by the truth of Scripture. And the truth of Scripture is that the Spirit of God has been sent down from heaven, and He is here still and looking after the assembly and the things of God until the Lord comes.
E.J.M. Is it important to see in @Ephesians 1: 14 that the Holy Spirit of promise is the earnest of our
{399}
inheritance to the redemption, not to take up to heaven, but to that point?
J.T. Very good. Not to take it up to heaven, but just to the redemption of the acquired possession. He is here for us in that sense.
J.L.F. You said earlier, I think in London, that the Spirit was here in view of augmenting what the Lord was doing. Is that the thought?
J.T. I think that is true. He augments what the Lord is doing, but there are things the Lord does that He does not do. So in the book of Revelation the Lord does certain things. He writes to the assemblies, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". That is to say the Spirit augments what the Lord is doing, as our brother says.
R.W.S. You said earlier, after the breaking of bread, it is a going up time. Now I am not just clear as to who is the Person that takes us up if it is a going up time.
J.T. Well, it is a question of the purpose of God, what we can reckon on according to @Ephesians 2, "He has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies". That is anticipative, the time has not come for that. The actual transfer into heaven is by the Lord's own power, the power of God taking us up. It has not happened yet; we have to wait for it. What is going on now is the operations of God in the assembly on earth. That is where the service of God is carried on too, here on earth.
J.L.F. God is bringing many sons to glory, is that in your mind?
J.T. That is what God is doing; that is God's own province. Many sons are being brought to glory, and that includes the sisters as well as the brothers, because sonship takes in all the sisters as well as the brothers.
{400}
A.D.S. I was thinking I might refer to that hymn,
<blockquote> 'God and the Lamb shall there <br>The light and temple be, <br>And radiant hosts for ever share <br>The unveiled mystery!' (`74:7)</blockquote>
Does not the Spirit bring us into the light and joy of that now?
J.T. Quite so, but that is not literality, that is purpose. Of course, remember, in spite of our perfect confidence in Mr. Darby, he is yet Mr. Darby. These hymns are Mr. Darby's hymns, they are not exactly God's hymns. We have to go by facts and make much of them, and not be carried away by anything else, but facts.
A.D.S. I was only thinking that we are impressed that the power of the blessed Holy Spirit is needed to bring us into the light and joy of what we actually will be in.
J.T. Just so, 'And see! the Spirit's power has ope'd the heavenly door, has brought us to that favoured hour ...'. He has brought us there, but He has not taken us into heaven. We will go up together, the Lord will take us up. The translation will be by the Lord Himself, when the literality of it comes.
S.McC. I think what you are saying is very important and helps in the service of God. You have in mind that as long as we are in flesh and blood, we never really leave the scene here, the sanctuary.
J.T. Never; Paul said he was caught up into the third heaven, but he did not know whether he was in the body or out of it. We cannot make literality out of it.
S.McC. So Colossians stresses faith, risen by faith of the operation of God.
J.T. That is a faith state, which is not literality at all.
{401}
S.McC. I think what you have said is most helpful as to Lord's day morning, showing how the Spirit is linked with the position down here and how we enter in His power into the good and gain anticipatively of all that the Lord will bring us into literally in ascension.
J.T. Just so, the assembly is never other than down here, until she is translated.
A.B. @Ephesians 3, already referred to, says, "to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love".
J.T. Very good, I hope all will take that in, what faith is. It is the faith dispensation we are in, and the assembly is in that dispensation.
A.B. We are never really outside the scope of faith while we are here but are just privileged to touch the eternal conditions.
J.L.F. We are sons of God by faith.
J.T. We are all sons of God by faith. That is the point the apostle makes. We are all the sons of God, and every sister can take account of that as a believer. She is a son. We are all sons of God by faith and because of that He "has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father".
W.C. What does John mean when he says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day"?
J.T. Just what he says, literal fact, I would say. We constantly refer to that state of things existing in the book of Revelation, a change comes about in John's own actual state, and the Lord Himself is changed on that same principle.
Rem. So we are valuing the Spirit more than ever, because we are finding everything in Him.
J.T. Quite so, that is right, finding everything in Him. It greatly strengthens your heart that you find the Lord is with us. He is here with us today in this hall.
{402}
S.McC. I think what has been drawn attention to and what you have been saying is very good. I can say for myself that I have had a touch as to the Spirit this afternoon that I have never quite got before, as to the greatness of His presence in the assembly.
J.T. Quite so, because God is insisting on that. That is where things lie. The reality of the assembly lies in the presence of the Holy Spirit down here, not in heaven, but in the assembly. I think we should call attention to verse 9. Please read that. It is the firstborn's portion, and we have the word in Hebrews, "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven". That implies the gift of the Spirit, the double portion of Elijah's spirit.
S.McC. It brings out the fulness of what we are linked with, does it not?
J.T. The Old Testament Scriptures furnish typical teaching for us. They anticipate certain things in christianity. This particular thing refers to the Holy Spirit, "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?". And that giving implies the double portion.
S.McC. I think we have been getting a touch of the double portion in a very distinctive way this afternoon. I thought we might get that point and then read on a little more.
W.C. "And it came to pass when they had gone over, that Elijah said to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I am taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me. And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee; but if not, it shall not be so. And it came to pass as they went on, and talked, that behold, a chariot of fire and horses of fire; and they parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into the heavens. And Elisha saw it,
{403}
and he cried, My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof! And he saw him no more. Then he took hold of his own garments and rent them in two pieces. And he took up the mantle of Elijah which fell from him, and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan; and he took the mantle of Elijah which had fallen from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is Jehovah, the God of Elijah? He also smote the waters, and they parted hither and thither, and Elisha went over".
J.T. It was by the power of God that Elijah was taken up into heaven, and the power of God was with Elisha too. We have to understand how the Spirit of God is operating. He remains here in the assembly.
A.H. So that the next verse emphasises what you are saying, "The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha". You quoted from @Luke 11, the Lord saying, "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?". Elisha really encounters the opposition of Satan.
J.T. Quite so.
A.H. And this that you are bringing before us is to preserve us from all that, is it?
J.T. All this Romish teaching that has been brought forward, which is so dreadful, that the brethren ought to be steeled against it to resist it, not openly, of course. We do not want to go to war with Rome, but be right in our own minds as to all this blasphemy that is circulated. They say the Pope is going to promulgate it formally on the first of November.
R.W.S. The final testimony in verse 15 is to the Spirit's power down here, "The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha".
J.T. Very good.
A.B. J.B.S. makes a remark in regard to this section, the acquiring of power. He remarks in
{404}
relation to the end of verse 12, "Then he took hold of his own garments and rent them in two pieces", that is the beginning of power, in dealing with it in relation to ourselves.
J.B. I wanted to ask a question in regard to the matter of ascension, whether it was necessary for us to undertake the three stages to understand the great matter of the Jordan, the third stage of Elijah's journey, if we are to enter upon the great thought of ascension.
J.T. It is the power that worketh in us according to Colossians, we are risen "through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead". It is a question of faith, the faith of the operation of God. I think Jordan represents that, and we have power to go through it. The power of Elijah is here in Elisha. The continuation of the power that was in Elijah is in Elisha. The service of God therefore is fully equipped. It can go on in the person of Elisha. I think that is the thing that we can see in this whole passage, that Jordan is the figure of death, but the figure of death as realised in the Spirit now by the believer, something that we have enabling us to go through it in the power of God. So it says we are raised by faith of the working of God who raised Christ from the dead. It is a question of faith. But then we must also remember that the Spirit of God is here and is operating in us to that end.
J.L.F. Besides Elisha having the Spirit of Elijah, he also had the power of Elijah, and so had John the baptist. He came in the spirit and power of Elias.
J.T. The word is, "if ye will receive it, this is Elias". That is to say, Elijah represents the mystical state of things represented in other persons, not only in himself. That is another thing to keep in mind as to Elijah.
